Available online at www.sciencedirect.com

ScienceDirect
Procedia Computer Science 108C (2017) 1327–1333

International Conference on Computational Science, ICCS 2017, 12-14 June 2017,
Zurich, Switzerland

Identification of failing banks using Clustering with
self-organising
neural
networks
Identification
of failing banks
using
Clustering with
self-organising
neural networks
Michael Negnevitsky
School of Engineering and ICT, University of Tasmania, Australia
Michael Negnevitsky
Michael.Negnevitsky@utas.edu.au
School of Engineering and ICT, University of Tasmania, Australia
Michael.Negnevitsky@utas.edu.au

Abstract
This paper presents experimental results of cluster analysis using self organising neural networks for
identifying
Abstract failing banks. The paper first describes major reasons and likelihoods of bank failures.
This paper
presents experimental
results
cluster analysisneural
usingnetwork
self organising
neural results
networks
for
Then
it demonstrates
an application
of aofself-organising
and presents
of the
identifying
failing
The
paper firstthat
describes
major reasons
andnetwork
likelihoods
of bank failures.
study. Findings
of banks.
the paper
demonstrate
a self-organising
neural
is a powerful
tool for
identifying
potentially an
failing
banks. ofFinally,
the paper discusses
some of
thepresents
limitations
of cluster
Then
it demonstrates
application
a self-organising
neural network
and
results
of the
analysisFindings
related toofunderstanding
of the exact
of each cluster.
study.
the paper demonstrate
thatmeaning
a self-organising
neural network is a powerful tool for
identifying potentially failing banks. Finally, the paper discusses some of the limitations of cluster
©Keywords:
2017 The Cluster
Authors.analysis,
Published
by Elsevier B.V.
Self-organising
neuralmeaning
network, Kohonen
layer
analysis related
to understanding
of the exact
of each cluster.
Peer-review under responsibility of the scientific committee of the International Conference on Computational Science
Keywords: Cluster analysis, Self-organising neural network, Kohonen layer

1 Introduction
2008, a series of bank failures triggered a financial crisis.
1 InIntroduction

By any historical standard, this crisis
was the worst since the Great Depression of the 1930s. The immediate cause of the crisis was the
bursting
of the
United
housingtriggered
bubble. This,
in turn,
caused
of securities
real
In 2008,
a series
ofStates
bank failures
a financial
crisis.
Bythe
anyvalues
historical
standard,tied
thistocrisis
estate
pricing
nose-dive,
damaging
financial
institutions
worldwide.
Bank
insolvencies
andwas
lackthe
of
was the
worsttosince
the Great
Depression
of the
1930s. The
immediate
cause
of the crisis
burstingreduced
of the United
States confidence
housing bubble.
This,
in turn,
values
of securitiesIntied
to real
credits
the investor
and, as
a result,
thecaused
stock the
market
plummeted.
2009,
the
estate pricing
to contracted
nose-dive, by
damaging
financial
institutions
worldwide.
Bank insolvencies
and lack
of
global
economy
1.1%, while
in advanced
countries,
the contraction
reached 3.4%.
After
credits reduced
the investor
and, asofa an
result,
the stock market
plummeted.
In 2009,
the
intervention
by central
banksconfidence
and governments
unprecedented
scale, the
global economy
began
to
recover.
However,
the global
financial
remainscountries,
at risk. the contraction reached 3.4%. After
global
economy
contracted
by 1.1%,
whilesystem
in advanced
The danger
of cascading
failures
of majorofbanks
would be reduced
significantly
if we began
could
intervention
by central
banks and
governments
an unprecedented
scale, the
global economy
to
recover.
However,
the global
financial
system
at risk. and liquidity crises. There are many
identify
banks
with potential
problems
before
theyremains
face solvency
The for
danger
cascading
failures
of major
banks would
be reduced
significantly
if we could
reasons
bankoffailures.
These
include
high risk-taking,
interest
rate volatility,
poor management
identify
with potential
problems
before theyand
faceincreased
solvency and
liquidity crises.
are many
practices,banks
inadequate
accounting
standards,
competition
from There
non-depository
reasons for bank
high
risk-taking,
interest rate
volatility,
management
institutions.
Sincefailures.
the crisis,These
bank include
regulators
have
been increasingly
concerned
withpoor
reducing
the size
of
deposit insurance
It hasstandards,
even beenand
suggested
that the
best regulatory
is to close
practices,
inadequateliabilities.
accounting
increased
competition
frompolicy
non-depository
banks
before Since
they become
undercapitalised.
Therefore,
identifying potentially
failing
banks as
institutions.
the crisis,
bank regulators have
been increasingly
concerned with
reducing
theearly
size
of possible
deposit insurance
It has
evenmajor
been suggested
that the best regulatory policy is to close
as
is essentialliabilities.
for avoiding
another
financial crisis.
banks before they become undercapitalised. Therefore, identifying potentially failing banks as early
as possible is essential for avoiding another major financial crisis.
1877-0509 © 2017 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V.
Peer-review under responsibility of the scientific committee of the International Conference on Computational Science
10.1016/j.procs.2017.05.125

1328	

Michael Negnevitsky et al. / Procedia Computer Science 108C (2017) 1327–1333

Over the last thirty years many tools have been developed to identify problem banks. While early
models mostly relied on statistical techniques (Abrams & Huang, 1987; Booth et al., 1989; Espahbodi,
1991), most recent developments are based on fuzzy logic and neural networks (Zhang et al., 1999;
Alam et.al., 2000; Ozkan-Gunay & Ozkan, 2007). Most of these models use a dichotomous
classification – bankruptcy versus non-bankruptcy. In real world, however, banks are ranked in terms
of their likelihood of bankruptcy. What regulators really need is an early warning system that can
“flag” potentially failing banks. Once such banks are identified, different preventive programs
tailored to each bank’s specific needs can be put in place, thereby avoiding a major banking failure.
In this paper, we “flag” potentially failing banks using cluster analysis.

2 Cluster Analysis
Cluster analysis is an exploratory data analysis technique that divides different objects into groups,
called clusters, in such a way that the degree of association between two objects is maximised if they
belong to the same cluster and minimised otherwise.
The term “cluster analysis” was first introduced over 70 years ago by Robert Tryon (1939). Since
then, cluster analysis has been successfully applied in many fields including medicine, archeology,
astronomy, etc. In clustering, there are no predefined classes – objects are grouped together only on
the basis of their similarity. For this reason, clustering is often referred to as unsupervised
classification. There is no distinction between independent and dependent variables, and when
clusters are found the user needs to interpret their meaning.
We can identify three major methods used in cluster analysis. These are based on statistics, fuzzy
logic and neural networks. In this case study, we will apply a self-organising neural network.
In this paper, we “flag” potentially failing banks using cluster analysis.

3 Bank Rating System
Our goal is to cluster banks using their financial data. The data can be obtained from annual
reports of the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC). The FDIC is an independent agency
created by the Congress of the United States. It insures deposits, examines and supervises financial
institutions, and manages receiverships. To assess the overall financial state of a bank, regulators use
the CAMELS (Capital adequacy, Asset, Management, Earnings, Liquidity, and Sensitivity to market
risk) rating system. The CAMELS ratings have been applied to 8,500 banks in the U.S. It was also
used by the United States government in selecting banks for the capitalisation program of 2008.
For our case study, we select 100 banks and obtain their financial data from the FDIC annual
report for the last year. We adapt the following five ratings based on the CAMELS system:
1. NITA – Net Income divided by Total Assets. NITA represents return on assets. Failing banks
have very low or even negative values of NITA.
2. NLLAA – Net Loan Losses divided by Adjusted Assets. Adjusted assets are calculated by
subtracting the total loans from the total assets. Failing banks usually have higher NLLAA values
than healthy banks.
3. NPLTA – Non-Performing Loans divided by Total Assets. Non-performing loans consist of loans
that have past their due dates by 90 days and non-accrual loans. Failing banks usually have higher
values of NPLTA than healthy banks.

	

Michael Negnevitsky et al. / Procedia Computer Science 108C (2017) 1327–1333

4. NLLTL – Net Loan Losses divided by Total Loans. Failing banks have higher loan losses as they
often make loans to high-risk borrowers. Thus, failing banks usually have higher values of
NLLTL than healthy banks.
5. NLLPLLNI – Sum of Net Loan Losses and Provision for Loan Losses divided by Net Income. The
higher the NLLPLLNI value, the poorer the bank performance.
Preliminary investigations of the statistical data can reveal that a number of banks may experience
some financial difficulties. Clustering should help us to identify groups of banks with similar
problems.

4 Self-Organising Map
Figure 1 shows a self-organising map (SOM) with a 5-by-5 array of 25 neurons in the Kohonen
layer. Note that neurons in the Kohonen layer are arranged in a hexagonal pattern.

Figure 1: The SOM structure

The input data are normalised to be between 0 and 1. The network is trained for 10,000 iterations
with a learning rate of 0.1. After training is complete, the SOM forms a semantic map where similar
input vectors are mapped close together while dissimilar apart. In other words, similar input vectors
tend to excite either the same neuron or neurons closely located to each other in the Kohonen layer.
This SOM property can be visualised using the weight distance matrix, also known as the U-matrix.
Figure 2 shows the U-matrix and the SOM sample hit plot for the bank financial data. In the Umatrix, the hexagons represent the neurons in the Kohonen layer. The colours in the regions between
neighbouring neurons indicate the distances between them – the darker the colour the greater the
distance. The SOM sample hit plot reveals how many input vectors are attracted by each neuron of
the Kohonen layer.
Typically, a SOM identifies fewer clusters than the number of neurons in the Kohonen layer, and
thus several input vectors attracted by close neighbouring neurons may, in fact, represent the same
cluster. For instance, in Figure 2(a), we can observe that distances between neurons 3 – 8, 7 – 8, 7 –
12, 7 – 13, 8 – 9, 8 – 13, 8 – 14, 9 – 14, 11 – 12, 12 – 13, 12 – 16, 12 – 17, 13 – 14, 13 – 17, 13 – 18,
14 – 19, 16 – 17, 17 – 18, 17 – 22, 17 – 23, 18 – 19, 18 – 23, 21 – 22 and 22 – 23 are relatively short
(the colours in the regions between neighbouring neurons are lighter, so the distances are shorter).

1329

Michael Negnevitsky et al. / Procedia Computer Science 108C (2017) 1327–1333

1330	

Thus, we can reasonably assume that neurons 3, 7, 8, 9, 11, 12, 13, 14, 16, 17, 18, 19, 21, 22 and 23
form a single cluster. At the same time, we should also notice that the distance between neurons 3 and
7 is much greater than the distances between neurons 3 and 8, and 7 and 8. Therefore, it might be
useful to examine what makes the input vectors associated with neuron 3 so different from these
attracted by neuron 7. Table 1 shows results of clustering. Interpreting the meaning of each cluster is
often a difficult task. Unlike classification where the number of classes is decided beforehand, in
SOM-based clustering the number of clusters is unknown, and assigning a label or interpretation to
each cluster requires some prior knowledge and domain expertise.
21

22

16

11

17

12

6

1

23

18

13

7

2

24

19

14

8

3

(a)

25

20

1

5

2

8

2
2

1

9

7

1

1
5

10

2

10

6

5

7

15

9

4

6

4
1

1
7

3
3

5
1

(b)

Figure 2: The 5-by 5 SOM after training: (a) the U-matrix; (b) the sample hit plot

For a start, we need a way to compare different clusters. As we discussed in Case Study 6, the
centre of a cluster often reveals features that separate one cluster from another. Therefore, determining
the average member of a cluster should enable us to interpret the meaning of the entire cluster. In
Table 1, the last column “Financial profile of the cluster” contains mean, median and standard
deviation (STD) values of the CAMELS ratings utilised in this study. Using these values an expert
can identify groups of banks that exhibit similar patterns of behaviour or experience similar problems.
Let us begin out analysis by identifying problem banks with negative returns on their assets. As
can be seen in Table 1, three clusters, E, F and G, have negative values of NITA. For example, banks
included in Cluster E have mean net losses of 0.06% of their total assets. On the other hand, healthy
banks usually report a positive return on their assets. Thus, banks included in Cluster A, which has the
highest value of NITA, could be considered healthy.
highest mean value, followed by Cluster E. Note that although banks in Cluster E are problem
banks, their NLLAA values are at least 12 times lower than these of Cluster D (a 3.63% mean against
44.48%). This could be a clear indication that the three banks associated with Cluster D experience
severe difficulties with their loans (even though they still have a positive return on their assets).
Banks in Clusters A, B and C show negative NLLAA values, which is normal for healthy banks.
The value of NPLTA is highest for Cluster B, followed by the problem banks in Clusters E, F and
G. This may indicate that the bank in Cluster B (Cluster B is a solitary cluster) experiences difficulties
in recovering its loans. In fact, the situation with this particular bank could be even worse than with
the problem banks associated with Clusters E, F and G.
Finally, the values of NLLTL and NLLPLLNI are highest for the two banks in Cluster H, followed
by the problem banks. Because higher values of NLLTL indicate higher loan losses, we may find that
banks in Cluster H are involved in providing loans to high-risk borrowers. High risk-taking also
contributed to the poor performance of these banks, reflected by the high NLLPLLNI values.

	

Michael Negnevitsky et al. / Procedia Computer Science 108C (2017) 1327–1333

An important part of cluster analysis is to identify outliers, objects that do not naturally fall into
any larger cluster. As can be seen in Table 1, there are three banks that are viewed as solitary clusters
– Cluster B, Cluster F and Cluster G. These banks are outliers, and each of them has a unique
financial profile. While conventional clustering algorithms, such as K-means clustering, do not handle
outliers well, a SOM can easily identify them.
It is difficult, however, to determine the number of clusters in a multidimensional data set. In fact,
when a clustering algorithm attempts to create larger clusters, outliers are often forced into these
clusters. This may result not only in poorer clustering but, even worse, in failing to distinguish unique
objects.
As an example, let us cluster the same set of banks using a 2-by-2 SOM. The SOM is trained for
1,000 iterations. Figure 3 shows the U-matrix and the SOM sample hit plot. Obviously, now we have
only four clusters. Further investigation reveals that based on their average values, banks associated
with neurons 1, 2 and 3 can be classified as healthy, while 13 banks attracted by neuron 4 as failing.
Two failing banks and two banks with unusually high values of NLLPLLNI, previously identified by
the 5-by-5 SOM, are now absorbed by the “healthy” cluster.

3

1

(a)

2

13

32

4

25

30

(b)

Figure 3: The 2-by 2 SOM after training: (a) the U-matrix; (b) the sample hit plot

5 SOM Testing
In order to test a neural network, including a SOM, we need a test set. From the FDIC Annual
Report we can obtain a list of failed banks, and collect appropriate financial statement data. Several
studies of bank failures suggest that failed banks could be detected between six and 12 months before
the call date, and in some cases as early as four years before a bank fails (Alam et al., 2000;
Eichengreen, 2002). Although solvency and liquidity are the most important predictors of failure
close to the call date, asset quality, earnings and management practices become increasingly
significant as the time before failure increases. To test the SOM performance, we select 10 banks that
failed last year, and collect their one-year-prior financial statement data. Table 2 contains mean,
median and standard deviation (STD) values of their CAMELS ratings. Now we can apply 10 input
vectors to see the SOM response.
As expected, in the 2-by-2 SOM, all 10 input vectors are attracted by neuron 4. In the 5-by-5
SOM, the situation is more complicated. Six input vectors are attracted by neuron 5, two by neuron
10, one by neuron 20 and two by neuron 24. Thus, in both cases, failing banks are clustered correctly.
Finally, a word of caution. Although a SOM is a powerful clustering tool, the exact meaning of
each cluster is not always clear, and a domain expert is usually needed to interpret the results. Also a
SOM is a neural network, and any neural network is only as good as the data that goes into it. In this
case study, we have used only five financial variables. However, to identify problem banks well in
advance of their failure, we might need many more variables that hold additional information about
bank performance (researchers in the industry use up 29 financial variables based on the CAMELS
rating system).

1331

Michael Negnevitsky et al. / Procedia Computer Science 108C (2017) 1327–1333

1332	

A good example of challenges associated with clustering is given in Berry & Linoff (2004). A
large bank decided to increase its market share in home equity loans. It gathered data on 5,000
customers who had home equity loans and 5,000 customers who did not have them. The data included
appraised value of a house, amount of credit available, amount of credit granted, customer age, marital
status, number of children and household income. The data was then used to train a SOM. It
identified five clusters. One of the clusters was particularly interesting. It contained customers who
took home equity loans. These customers were in their forties, married with children in their late
teens. The bank assumed that they were taking loans to pay college tuition fees for their children.
Thus, the bank organised a marketing campaign to offer home equity loans as a means to pay for
college education. However, results of the campaign were disappointing.
Further investigation revealed that the problem was in the interpretation of the clusters identified
by the SOM. Consequently, the bank decided to include more information about its customers such as
type of accounts, deposit system, credit card system, etc. After retraining the SOM, it was discovered
that customers who took home equity loans in addition to being in their forties with college-age
children often also had business accounts. So, the bank concluded that when children left home to go
to college, parents took out home equity loans to start new businesses. The bank organised a new
marketing campaign targeting this group of potential customers, and this time the campaign was
successful.

6 Conclusions
A very large number of bank failures in 2008 triggered a financial crisis. Although unprecedented
intervention of central banks and governments helped economies to recover, the global financial
systems remains at risk. As a result, identifying failing banks as early as possible is essential. This
paper has clearly demonstrated a great potential of a self-organising neural network as a tool for
performing this task. The results show that self-organising maps can successfully carry out bank
clustering tasks and identify banks that require immediate attention from the regulatory bodies.

References
Abrams B. A. and Huang, C. J., 1987. Predicting bank failures: the role of structure in affecting
recent failure experiences in the USA, Applied Economics, 19, 1291–1302.
Alam, P., Booth, D., Lee K. and Thordarson, T., 2000. The use of fuzzy clustering algorithm and
self-organizing neural networks for identifying potentially failing banks: an experimental study,
Expert Systems with Applications, 18(3), 185–199.
Berry, M. and Linoff, G., 2004. Data Mining Techniques For Marketing, Sales, and Customer
Relationship Management, 2nd edn., John Wiley & Sons, New York.
Booth D. E., Alam, P., Ahkam, S. N. and Osyk, B., 1989. A robust multivariate procedure for the
identification of problem savings and loan institutions, Decision Sciences, 20, 320–333.
Eichengreen, B., 2002. Financial Crises and What to Do About Them, Oxford University Press.
Espahbodi, P.,1991. “Identification of problem banks and binary choice models”, Journal of
Banking and Finance, 15(1), 53–71.
Ozkan-Gunay, E. N. and Ozkan, M., 2007. Prediction of bank failures in emerging financial
markets: an ANN approach, Journal of Risk Finance, 8(5), 465–480.
Tryon, R. C., 1939. Cluster Analysis, McGraw-Hill, New York, NY.
Zhang, G., Hu, M. Y., Patuwo, B. E. and Indro, D. C., 1999. Artificial neural networks in
bankruptcy prediction: general framework and cross-validation analysis, European Journal of
Operation Research, 116, 16–32.

Table 2: Financial profile of the failing banks

Table 1: Clustering results of the 5-by-5 SOM

	
Michael Negnevitsky et al. / Procedia Computer Science 108C (2017) 1327–1333
1333

