Available online at www.sciencedirect.com

ScienceDirect
Procedia Computer Science 108 (2017) iii–xviii

Table of Contents
The Art of Computational Science, Bridging Gaps – Forming Alloys. Preface for ICCS 2017
Petros Koumoutsakos, Eleni Chatzi, Valeria V. Krzhizhanovskaya, Michael Lees, Jack Dongarra, and
Peter M.A. Sloot 	

1

Analysis of Computational Science Papers from ICCS 2001-2016 using Topic Modeling and
Graph Theory
Tesfamariam M. Abuhay, Sergey V. Kovalchuk, Klavdiya O. Bochenina, George Kampis,
Valeria V. Krzhizhanovskaya, and Michael H. Lees 	

7

Identifying Urban Inconsistencies via Street Networks
Gabriel Spadon, Gabriel Gimenes, and Jose F. Rodrigues-Jr 	

18

Impact of Neighbors on the Privacy of Individuals in Online Social Networks
Livio Bioglio, and Ruggero G. Pensa 	

28

Mining Host Behavior Patterns From Massive Network and Security Logs
Jing Ya, Tingwen Liu, Quangang Li, Jinqiao Shi, Haoliang Zhang, Pin Lv, and Li Guo 	

38

Resolving Entity Morphs based on Character-Word Embedding
Ying Sha, Zhenhui Shi, Rui Li, Qi Liang, and Bin Wang 	

48

Efficient Community Re-creation in Multilayer Networks Using Boolean Operations
Abhishek Santra, Sanjukta Bhowmick, and Sharma Chakravarthy 	

58

Graph Ranking Guarantees for Numerical Approximations to Katz Centrality
Eisha Nathan, Geoffrey Sanders, James Fairbanks, Van Emden Henson, and David A. Bader 	

68

Simulating a Search Engine Service focusing on Network Performance
Joe Carrión, Daniel Franco Puntes, and Emilio Luque 	

79

Fully-Dynamic Graph Algorithms with Sublinear Time Inspired by Distributed Computing
Leonid Barenboim, and Tzalik Maimon 	

89

Anomaly Detection in Clinical Data of Patients Undergoing Heart Surgery
Alva Presbitero, Rick Quax, Valeria Krzhizhanovskaya, and Peter Sloot 	

99

Virtual Clinical Trials: A tool for the Study of Transmission of Nosocomial Infections
Cecilia Jaramillo, Dolores Rexachs, Francisco Epelde, and Emilio Luque 	

109

Spectral Modes of Network Dynamics Reveal Increased Informational Complexity Near Criticality
Xerxes D. Arsiwalla, Pedro A.M. Mediano, and Paul F.M.J. Verschure 	

119

Sampling and Digital Filtering Effects When Recognizing Postural Control with Statistical Tools and
the Decision Tree Classifier
Luiz H.F. Giovanini, Simone M. Silva, Elisangela F. Manffra, and Julio C. Nievola 	

129

Simulation of regulatory strategies in a morphogen based model of Arabidopsis leaf growth.
Elise Kuylen, Gerrit T.S. Beemster, Jan Broeckhove, and Dirk De Vos 	

139

Support managing population aging stress of emergency departments in a computational way
Zhengchun Liu, Dolores Rexachs, Francisco Epelde, and Emilio Luque 	

149

iv	

Contents

Hemocell: a high-performance microscopic cellular library
Gábor Zavodszky, Britt van Rooij, Victor Azizi, Saad Alowayyed, and Alfons Hoekstra 	

159

Brownian dynamics simulations to explore experimental microsphere diffusion with optical tweezers
Manuel Pancorbo, Miguel A. Rubio, and P. Domínguez-García 	

166

Numerical simulation of a compound capsule in a constricted microchannel
John Gounley, Erik W. Draeger, and Amanda Randles 	

175

Models of Pedestrian Adaptive Behaviour in Hot Outdoor Public Spaces
Valentin Melnikov, Valeria V. Krzhizhanovskaya, and Peter M.A. Sloot 	

185

Crowd Dynamics and Control in High-Volume Metro Rail Stations
Briane Paul V. Samson, Crisanto R. Aldanese IV, Deanne Moree C. Chan, Jona Joyce S. San Pascual,
and Ma. Victoria Angelica P. Sido 	

195

A Serious Video Game To Support Decision Making On Refugee Aid Deployment Policy
Luis Eduardo Perez Estrada, Derek Groen, and Jose Emmanuel Ramirez-Marquez 	

205

The study of the influence of obstacles on crowd dynamics
Oksana Severiukhina, Daniil Voloshin, M.H. Lees, and Vladislav Karbovskii 	

215

Development of a new urban heat island modeling tool: Kent Vale case study
Ming Xu, Marcel Bruelisauer, and Matthias Berger 	

225

Fast Motion of Heaving Airfoils
Siddhartha Verma, Guido Novati, Flavio Noca, and Petros Koumoutsakos 	

235

Using Temporary Explicit Meshes for Direct Flux Calculation on Implicit Surfaces
Paul Manstetten, Josef Weinbub, Andreas Hössinger, and Siegfried Selberherr 	

245

Assessing the Performance of the SRR Loop Scheduler with Irregular Workloads
Pedro H. Penna, Eduardo C. Inacio, Márcio Castro, Patrícia Plentz, Henrique C. Freitas,
François Broquedis, and Jean-François Méhaut 	

255

Molecular dynamics simulations of entangled polymers: The effect of small molecules on the glass
transition temperature
Elias Mahmoudinezhad, Axel Marquardt, Gunther Eggeler, and Fathollah Varnik 	

265

Efficient Simulation of Financial Stress Testing Scenarios with Suppes-Bayes Causal Networks
Gelin Gao, Bud Mishra, and Daniele Ramazzotti 	

272

Learning Robust Low-Rank Approximation for Crowdsourcing on Riemannian Manifold
Qian Li, Zhichao Wang, Gang Li, Yanan Cao, Gang Xiong, and Li Guo 	

285

Simultaneous Prediction of Wind Speed and Direction by Evolutionary Fuzzy Rule Forest
Pavel Krömer, and Jan Platoš 	

295

Performance Improvement of Stencil Computations for Multi-core Architectures based on
Machine Learning
Víctor Martínez, Fabrice Dupros, Márcio Castro, and Philippe Navaux 	

305

Distributed training strategies for a computer vision deep learning algorithm on a distributed GPU cluster
Víctor Campos, Francesc Sastre, Maurici Yagües, Míriam Bellver, Xavier Giró-i-Nieto, and Jordi Torres 	

315

Semi-Supervised Clustering Algorithms for Grouping Scientific Articles
Diego Vallejo-Huanga, Paulina Morillo, and Cèsar Ferri 	

325

Parallel Learning Portfolio-based solvers
Tarek Menouer, and Souheib Baarir 	

335

Learning Entity and Relation Embeddings for Knowledge Resolution
Hailun Lin, Yong Liu, Weiping Wang, Yinliang Yue, and Zheng Lin 	

345

	Contents v

3D High-quality Textile Reconstruction with Synthesized Texture
Pengpeng Hu, Taku Komura, Duan Li, Ge Wu, and Yueqi Zhong 	

355

A Proactive Cloud Scaling Model Based on Fuzzy Time Series and SLA Awareness
Dang Tran, Nhuan Tran, Giang Nguyen, and Binh Minh Nguyen 	

365

An Ensemble of Kernel Ridge Regression for Multi-class Classification
Katuwal Rakesh, and P.N. Suganthan 	

375

Dynamic Profiles Using Sentiment Analysis for VAA’s Recommendation Design
Luis Terán, and Jose Mancera 	

384

Discriminative Learning from Selective Recommendation and Its Application in AdaBoost
Xiao-Yu Zhang, Shupeng Wang, Chao Li, Shiming Ge, Yong Wang, and Binbin Li 	

394

Distributed Automatic Differentiation for Ptychography
Youssef S.G. Nashed, Tom Peterka, Junjing Deng, and Chris Jacobsen 	

404

Automatic Segmentation of Chinese Characters as Wire-Frame Models
Antoine Bossard 	

415

Erosion-Inspired Simulation of Aging for Deformation-Based Head Modeling
Vĕra Skorkovská, Martin Prantl, Petr Martínek, and Ivana Kolingerová 	

425

Extending Perfect Spatial Hashing to Index Tuple-based Graphs Representing Super Carbon Nanotubes
Michael Burger, Giang Nam Nguyen, and Christian Bischof 	

435

Effective and Scalable Data Access Control in Onedata Large Scale Distributed Virtual File System
Michaƚ Wrzeszcz, Łukasz Opioƚa, Konrad Zemek, Bartosz Kryza, Łukasz Dutka, Renata Sƚota, and
Jacek Kitowski 	

445

Devising a computational model based on data mining techniques to predict concrete compressive
strength
Daniel Alencar, Darlinton Carvalho, Eduardus Koenders, Fernando Mourão, and Leonardo Rocha 	

455

ParaView + Alya + D8tree: Integrating High Performance Computing and High Performance Data
Analytics
Antoni Artigues, Cesare Cugnasco, Yolanda Becerra, Fernando Cucchietti, Guillaume Houzeaux,
Mariano Vazquez, Jordi Torres, Eduard Ayguadé, and Jesus Labarta 	

465

StoreRush: An Application-Level Approach to Harvesting Idle Storage in a Best Effort Environment
Qing Liu, Norbert Podhorszki, Jong Choi, Jeremy Logan, Matt Wolf, Scott Klasky, Tahsin Kurc, and
Xubin He 	

475

Fast Parallel Construction of Correlation Similarity Matrices for Gene Co-Expression Networks on
Multicore Clusters
Jorge González-Domínguez, and María J. Martín 	

485

The Design and Performance of Batched BLAS on Modern High-Performance Computing Systems
Jack Dongarra, Sven Hammarling, Nicholas J. Higham, Samuel D. Relton, Pedro Valero-Lara, and
Mawussi Zounon 	

495

OUTRIDER: Optimizing the mUtation Testing pRocess In Distributed EnviRonments
Pablo C. Cañizares, Alberto Núñez, and Juan de Lara 	

505

Topology-aware Job Allocation in 3D Torus-based HPC Systems with Hard Job Priority Constraints
Kangkang Li, Maciej Malawski, and Jarek Nabrzyski 	

515

Parallel Parity Games: a Multicore Attractor for the Zielonka Recursive Algorithm
Rossella Arcucci, Umberto Marotta, Aniello Murano, and Loredana Sorrentino 	

525

vi	

Contents

Replicated Synchronization for Imperative BSP Programs
Arvid Jakobsson, Frédéric Dabrowski, Wadoud Bousdira, Frédéric Loulergue, and Gaetan Hains 	

535

Efficient Implicit Parallel Patterns for Geographic Information System
Kevin Bourgeois, Sophie Robert, Sébastien Limet, and Victor Essayan 	

545

Taking Lessons Learned from a Proxy Application to a Full Application for SNAP and PARTISN
Geoff Womeldorff, Joshua Payne, and Ben Bergen 	

555

cuHinesBatch: Solving Multiple Hines systems on GPUs Human Brain Project
Pedro Valero-Lara, Ivan Martínez-Perez, Antonio J. Peña, Xavier Martorell, Raül Sirvent, and
Jesús Labarta 	

566

Exploiting Hybrid Parallelism in the Kinematic Analysis of Multibody Systems Based on Group
Equations
Gregorio Bernabé, José-Carlos Cano, Javier Cuenca, Antonio Flores, Domingo Giménez,
Mariano Saura-Sánchez, and Pablo Segado-Cabezos 	

576

On the Use of a GPU-Accelerated Mobile Device Processor for Sound Source Localization
Jose A. Belloch, Jose M. Badia, Francisco D. Igual, Maximo Cobos, and Enrique S. Quintana-Ortí 	

586

Fast Genome-Wide Third-order SNP Interaction Tests with Information Gain on a Low-cost
Heterogeneous Parallel FPGA-GPU Computing Architecture
Lars Wienbrandt, Jan Christian Kassens, Matthias Hübenthal, and David Ellinghaus 	

596

Factorization and Inversion of a Million Matrices using GPUs: Challenges and Countermeasures
Ahmad Abdelfattah, Azzam Haidar, Stanimire Tomov, and Jack Dongarra 	

606

A Multithreaded Algorithm for Sparse Cholesky Factorization on Hybrid Multicore Architectures
Meng Tang, Mohamed Gadou, and Sanjay Ranka 	

616

Utilizing Intel Advanced Vector Extensions for Monte Carlo Simulation based Value at Risk Computation
D.N.S.S. Liyanage, G.V.M.P.A. Fernando, D.D.M.M. Arachchi, R.D.D.T. Karunathilaka, and
A.S. Perera 	

626

Sparse Locally Linear Embedding
Lori Ziegelmeier, Michael Kirby, and Chris Peterson 	

635

Efficient iterative methods for multi-frequency wave propagation problems: A comparison study
Manuel Baumann, and Martin B. van Gijzen 	

645

Efficient Lyapunov Function computation for systems with multiple exponentially stable equilibria
Jòhann Björnsson, and Sigurdur F. Hafstein 	

655

Asynchronous Decentralized Framework for Unit Commitment in Power Systems
Paritosh Ramanan, Murat Yildirim, Edmond Chow, and Nagi Gebraeel 	

665

An Advanced Software Tool to Simulate Service Restoration Problems: a case study on Power
Distribution Systems
Richardson Ribeiro, Fabrício Enembreck, Douglas M. Guisi, Dalcimar Casanova, Marcelo Teixeira,
Fausto A. de Souza, and André P. Borges 	

675

Disaggregated Computing. An Evaluation of Current Trends for Datacentres
Hugo Meyer, José Carlos Sancho, Josue V. Quiroga, Ferad Zyulkyarov, Damián Roca, and
Mario Nemirovsky 	

685

Using Power Demand and Residual Load Imbalance in the Load Balancing to Save Energy of
Parallel Systems
Edson Luiz Padoin, Víctor Martínez, Philippe O.A. Navaux, and Jean-François Méhaut 	

695

Facilitating the Reproducibility of Scientific Workflows with Execution Environment Specifications
Haiyan Meng, and Douglas Thain 	

705

	Contentsvii

Data Mining Approach for Feature Based Parameter Tunning for Mixed-Integer Programming Solvers
Matheus G. Vilas Boas, Haroldo G. Santos, Rafael de S.O. Martins, and Luiz H.C. Merschmann 	

715

A Spectral Collocation Method for Systems of Singularly Perturbed Boundary Value Problems
N. Sharp, and Manfred Trummer 	

725

Exploring an Ensemble-Based Approach to Atmospheric Climate Modeling and Testing at Scale
Salil Mahajan, Abigail L. Gaddis, Katherine J. Evans, and Matthew R. Norman 	

735

Study of Algorithms for Fast Computation of Crack Expansion Problem
Farid sma¨ı, and Hideo Aochi 	

745

TNT-NN: A Fast Active Set Method for Solving Large Non-Negative Least Squares Problems
J.M. Myre, E. Frahm, D.J. Lilja, and M.O. Saar 	

755

Fast Finite Element Analysis Method Using Multiple GPUs for Crustal Deformation and its Application
to Stochastic Inversion Analysis with Geometry Uncertainty
Takuma Yamaguchi, Kohei Fujita, Tsuyoshi Ichimura, Takane Hori, Muneo Hori, and Lalith Wijerathne 	

765

Optimizing domain decomposition in an ocean model: the case of NEMO
Oriol Tint, Mario Acosta, Miguel Castrillo, Ana Cortés, Alícia Sanchez, Kim Serradell, and
Francisco J. Doblas-Reyes 	

776

Data Management and Volcano Plume Simulation with Parallel SPH Method and Dynamic Halo Domains
Zhixuan Cao, Abani Patra, and Matthew Jones 	

786

ICCS 2017 Workshop on Agent-Based Simulations, Adaptive Algorithms and Solvers
A. Byrski, M. Paszyński, R. Schaefer, V. Calo, and D. Pardo 	

796

Quadrature blending for isogeometric analysis
Victor Calo, Quanling Deng, and Vladimir Puzyrev 	

798

Optimally refined isogeometric analysis
Daniel Garcia, Michael Bartoň, and David Pardo 	

808

Higher-Order Finite Element Electromagnetics Code for HPC environments
Daniel Garcia-Donoro, Adrian Amor-Martin, and Luis E. Garcia-Castillo 	

818

Coupled isogeometric Finite Element Method and Hierarchical Genetic Strategy with balanced accuracy
for solving optimization inverse problem
Barbara Barabasz, Marcin Łoś, Maciej Woźniak, Leszek Siwik, and Stephen Barrett 	

818

A wrapper around parallel MUMPS solver to reduce its memory usage and execution time for finite
element method computations
Maciej Paszyński, and Antônio Tadeu Azevedo Gomes 	

838

Goal-Oriented p-Adaptivity using Unconventional Error Representations for a 1D Steady State
Convection-Diffusion Problem
Vincent Darrigrand, Ángel Rodríguez-Rozas, David Pardo, and Ignacio Muga 	

848

Algorithms for construction of Element Partition Trees for Direct Solver executed over h refined grids
with B-splines and C0 separators
Bartosz Janota, and Maciej Paszyński 	

857

Memetic approach for irremediable ill-conditioned parametric inverse problems
Marcin Łoś, Jakub Sawicki, Maciej Smołka, and Robert Schaefer 	

867

Toward hybrid platform for evolutionary computations of hard discrete problems
Dominik Żurek, Kamil Piętak, Marcin Pietroń, and Marek Kisiel-Dorohinicki 	

877

The versatility of an entropy inequality for the robust computation of convection dominated problems
Balaji Srinivasan, and Vivek Kumar 	

887

viii	

Contents

Agent-based Decision Support System for Technology Recommendation
Grzegorz Legien, Bartlomiej Sniezynski, Dorota Wilk-Kolodziejczyk, Stanisawa Kluska-Nawarecka,
Edward Nawarecki, and Krzysztof Jaśkowiec 	

897

Agent-based Evolutionary and Memetic Black-box Discrete Optimization
Michal Kowol, Kamil Pietak, Marek Kisiel-Dorohinicki, and Aleksander Byrski 	

907

Multi-agent large-scale parallel crowd simulation
Artur Malinowski, Paweƚ Czarnul, Krzysztof Czuryƚo, Maciej Maciejewski, and Paweƚ Skowron 	

917

A case based reasoning based multi-agent system for the reactive container stacking in seaport terminals
Ines Rekik, Sabeur Elkosantini, and Habib Chabchoub 	

927

On the performance and scalability of an HPC enhanced Multi Agent System based evacuation simulator
Leonel Aguilar, Maddegedara Lalith, Tsuyoshi Ichimura, and Muneo Hori 	

937

Lightweight Volunteer Computing Platform using Web Workers
Pawel Chorazyk, Mateusz Godzik, Kamil Pietak, Wojciech Turek, Marek Kisiel-Dorohinicki, and
Aleksander Byrski 	

948

Declarative Representation and Solution of Vehicle Routing with Pickup and Delivery Problem
Amelia Bădică, Costin Bădică, Florin Leon, and Lucian Luncean 	

958

A multi-world agent-based model working at several spatial and temporal scales for simulating complex
geographic systems
Pape Adama Mboup, Karim Konaté, and Jean Le Fur 	

968

Role of Behavioral Heterogeneity in Aggregate Financial Market Behavior: An Agent-Based Approach
Yasaman Kamyab Hessary, and Mirsad Hadzikadic 	

978

Clustering Mixed-Attribute Data using Random Walk
Andrew Skabar 	

988

Regularized Computation of Oscillatory Integrals with Stationary Points
Konstantin Lovetskiy, Leonid Sevastianov, and Nikolai Nikolaev 	

998

Optimizing the SVD Bidiagonalization Process for a Batch of Small Matrices
Tingxing Dong, Azzam Haidar, Stanimire Tomov, and Jack Dongarra 	

1008

Separable Covariance Matrices and Kronecker Approximation
Raja Velu, and Kris Herman 	

1019

Distributed Bayesian Probabilistic Matrix Factorization
Tom Vander Aa, Imen Chakroun, and Tom Haber 	

1030

Finding the Winner of a Hypothesis Test via Sample Allocation Optimization
Kourosh Modarresi, and Khashayar Khosravi 	

1040

Efficient Hybrid Algorithms for Computing Clusters Overlap
Pradeep Javangula, Kourosh Modarre, Paresh Shenoy, Yi Liu, and Aran Nayebi 	

1050

EfficientPMM: Finite Automata Based Efficient Pattern Matching Machine
Ramanpreet Singh, and Ali A. Ghorbani 	

1060

Architecture, Languages, Compilation and Hardware support for Emerging ManYcore systems
(ALCHEMY): Preface
Johanna Sepúlveda, Vania Marangozova-Martin, and Jeronimo Castrillon 	

1071

An OpenMP backend for the ΣC streaming language
Stéphane Louise 	

1073

A Multi-level Optimization Strategy to Improve the Performance of Stencil Computation
Gauthier Sornet, Fabrice Dupros, and Sylvain Jubertie 	

1083

	Contentsix

A Distributed Shared Memory Model and C++ Templated Meta-Programming Interface for the Epiphany
RISC Array Processor
David Richie, James Ross, and Jamie Infantolino 	

1093

Towards Protected MPSoC Communication for Information Protection against a Malicious NoC
Johanna Sepúlveda, Andreas Zankl, Daniel Flórez, and Georg Sigl 	

1103

10 Workshop on Biomedical and Bioinformatics Challenges for Computer Science – BBC2017
Giuseppe Agapito, Mario Cannataro, Mauro Castelli, Riccardo Dondi, and Italo Zoppis 	

1113

Orthology Correction for Gene Tree Reconstruction: Theoretical and Experimental Results
Riccardo Dondi, Giancarlo Mauri, and Italo Zoppis 	

1115

Rank miRNA: a web tool for identifying polymorphisms altering miRNA target sites
Stefano Beretta, Carlo Maj, and Ivan Merelli 	

1125

Higher accuracy protein multiple sequence alignments by genetic algorithm
Narayan Behera, Jeevitesh. M.S, Justin Jose, Krishna Kant, Alpana Dey and Javed Mazher 	

1135

Machine learning models in error and variant detection in high-variation high-throughput sequencing
datasets
Milko Krachunov, Maria Nisheva, and Dimitar Vassilev 	

1145

Using Multi Network Alignment for Analysis of Connectomes
Marianna Milano, Pietro Hiram Guzzi, and Mario Cannataro 	

1155

Investigation of the visual attention role in clinical bioethics decision-making using machine learning
algorithms
Daniel L. Fernandes, Rodrigo Siqueira-Batista, Andréia P. Gomes, Camila R. Souza, Israel T. da Costa,
Felippe da S.L. Cardoso, João V. de Assis, Gustavo H.L. Caetano, and Fabio R. Cerqueira 	

1165

Emotion recognition using facial expressions
Paweł Tarnowski, Marcin Kołodziej, Andrzej Majkowski, and Remigiusz J. Rak 	

1175

Accelerating the Diffusion-Weighted Imaging Biomarker in the clinical practice: comparative study
Ferran Borreguero Torro, J. Damian Segrelles Quilis, Ignacio Blanquer Espert, Angel Alberich Bayarri,
and Luis Martí Bonmatí 	

1185

Combining Grid Computing and Docker Containers for the Study and Parametrization of CT Image
Reconstruction Methods
Mónica Chillarón, Vicente Vidal, Damián Segrelles, Ignacio Blanquer, and Gumersindo Verdú 	

1195

Vocal signal analysis in patients affected by Multiple Sclerosis
Patrizia Vizza, Domenico Mirarchi, Giuseppe Tradigo, Maria Redavide, Roberto Bruno Bossio, and
Pierangelo Veltri 	

1205

Monte Carlo Study of the Crystalline and Amorphous NaK Alloy
Doug Reitz, and Estela Blaisten-Barojas 	

1215

Towards a better understanding of on and off target effects of the lymphocyte-specific kinase LCK for the
development of novel and safer pharmaceuticals
Xiaofei Zhang, Amir Kucharski, Wibe A. de Jong, and sally R. Ellingson 	

1222

MiW: A domain specific modeling environment for complex molecular systems
Tengyu Ma, and Janos Sallai 	

1232

Molecular Dynamics of Di-palmitoyl-phosphatidyl-choline Biomembranes in Ionic Solution: Adsorption
of the Precursor Neurotransmitter Tryptophan
Jordi Marti, and Huixia Lu 	

1242

Improved New Word Detection Method Used in Tourism Field
Wei Li, Kun Guo, Yong Shi, Luyao Zhu, and Yuanchun Zheng 	

1251

th

x	

Contents

Large-scale Nonparallel Support Vector Ordinal Regression Solver
Huadong Wang, Jianyu Miao, Seyed Mojtaba Hosseini Bamakan, Lingfeng Niu, and Yong Shi 	

1261

Relationship between Capital Operation and Market Value Management of Listed Companies Based on
Random Forest Algorithm
Wen Long, Linqiu Song, and Lingxiao Cui 	

1271

A Hash Based Method for Large Scale Nonparallel Support Vector Machines Prediction
Xuchan Ju, and Tianhe Wang 	

1281

Alternating Direction Method of Multipliers for L1- and L2-norm Best Fitting Hyperplane Classifier
Chen Wang, Chun-Na Li, Hua-Xin Pei, Yan-Ru Guo, and Yuan-Hai Shao 	

1292

Pension Fund Asset Allocation: A Mean-Variance Model with CVaR Constraints
Yibing Chen, Xiaolei Sun, and Jianping Li 	

1302

Short-term Electricity Price Forecasting with Empirical Mode Decomposition based Ensemble Kernel
Machines
Xueheng Qiu, P.N. Suganthan, and Gehan A.J. Amaratunga 	

1308

Russian Interbank Network Reconstruction via Metaheuristic Algorithm
Valentina Y. Guleva, Vyacheslav V. Povazhnyuk, Klavdiya O. Bochenina, and
Alexander V. Boukhanovsky 	

1318

Identification of failing banks using Clustering with self-organising neural networks
Michael Negnevitsky 	

1327

Clustering algorithms for Risk-Adjusted Portfolio Construction
Diego León, Arbey Aragón, Javier Sandoval, Germán Hernández, Andrés Arévalo, and Jaime Nin͂ o 	

1334

Study of the periodicity in Euro-US Dollar exchange rates using local alignment and random matrixes
Eugene Korotkov, and Maria Korotkova 	

1344

Global Convergence Analysis of the Flower Pollination Algorithm: A Discrete-Time Markov Chain
Approach
Xingshi He, Xin-She Yang, Mehmet Karamanoglu, and Yuxin Zhao 	

1354

Memetic Simulated Annealing for Data Approximation with Local-Support Curves
Carlos Loucera, Andrés Iglesias, and Akemi Gálvez 	

1364

A Matheuristic Approach for Solving the Dynamic Facility Layout Problem
Sadan Kulturel-Konak 	

1374

Blood Perfusion Parameter Estimation in Tumors by means of a Genetic Algorithm
Ana Roberta Melo, Michelli Marlane Silva Loureiro, and Felipe Loureiro 	

1384

Job-flow Anticipation Scheduling in Grid
Victor Toporkov, Dmitry Yemelyanov, and Alexander Bobchenkov 	

1394

A Hybrid Heuristic in GPU-CPU Based on Scatter Search for the Generalized Assignment Problem
Danilo S. Souza, Haroldo G. Santos, and Igor M. Coelho 	

1404

An Exact Resolution for the Probabilistic Traveling Salesman Problem under the A Priori Strategy
Mohamed Abdellahi Amar, Walid Khaznaji, and Monia Bellalouna 	

1414

Matrix Approach to DC Railway Electrification Verification
Eugenio Roanes-Lozano, and Rubén González-Martín 	

1424

A Multi-Objective Approach to the Competitive Facility Location Problem
Abdullah Konak, Sadan Kulturel-Konak, and Lawrence Snyder 	

1434

	Contentsxi

Multi-objective optimisation in scientific workflow
Hoang Anh Nguyen, Zane van Iperen, Sreekanth Raghunath, David Abramson, Timoleon Kipouros,
and Sandeep Somasekharan 	

1443

Pareto Ranking Bisection Algorithm for EM-Driven Multi-Objective Design of Antennas in
Highly-Dimensional Parameter Spaces
Adrian Bekasiewicz, Slawomir Koziel, Leifur Leifsson, and Xiaosong Du 	

1453

Accelerating Parallel Multicriterial Optimization Methods Based on Intensive Using of Search
Information
V.P. Gergel, and E.A. Kozinov 	

1463

A Surrogate Model Based On Mixtures Of Taylor Expansions For Trust Region Based Methods
Elias D. Nino-Ruiz, Carlos J. Ardila, Alfonso Mancilla, and Jesus Estrada 	

1473

Expedite Design of Variable-Topology Broadband Hybrid Couplers for Size Reduction Using
Surrogate-Based Optimization and Co-Simulation Coarse Models
Piotr Kurgan, Slawomir Koziel, Leifur Leifsson, and Xiaosong Du 	

1483

Airfoil Design Under Uncertainty Using Non-Intrusive Polynomial Chaos Theory and Utility Functions
Xiaosong Du, Leifur Leifsson, Slawomir Koziel, and Adrian Bekasiewicz 	

1493

Improving HPLC Analysis of Vitamin A and E: Use of Statistical Experimental Design
Lorinc Garai 	

1500

A model for optimal fleet composition of vessels for offshore wind farm maintenance
Alejandro Gutierrez-Alcoba, Gloria Ortega, Eligius M.T. Hendrix, Elin E. Halvorsen-Weare, and
Dag Haugland 	

1512

Prostate cancer focal brachytherapy: Improving treatment plan robustness using a convolved dose rate
model
John M. Betts, Christopher Mears, Hayley M. Reynolds, Martin A. Ebert, and Annette Haworth 	

1522

Implementation and Use of Coarse-grained Parallel Branch-and-bound in Everest Distributed
Environment
Vladimir Voloshinov, Sergey Smirnov, and Oleg Sukhoroslov 	

1532

Model-Driven Choice of Numerical Methods for the Solution of the Linear Advection Equation
Andrea Arteaga, Oliver Fuhrer, Torsten Hoefler, and Thomas Schulthess 	

1542

3D Drape Reconstruction and Parameterization Based on Smartphone Video and Elliptical Fourier
Analysis
Ge Wu, Zhicai Yu, Azmat Hussain, and Yueqi Zhong 	

1552

Data resolution effects on a coupled data driven system for forest fire propagation prediction
À. Farguell, A. Cortés, T. Margalef, J.R. Miro, and J. Mercader 	

1562

Data Assimilation of Wildfires with Fuel Adjustment Factors in farsite using Ensemble Kalman Filtering
Thayjes Srivas, Raymond A. de Callafon, Daniel Crawl, and Ilkay Altintas 	

1572

Feature Based Grid Event Classification from Synchrophasor Data
Sai Akhil R. Konakalla, and Raymond A. de Callafon 	

1582

A Framework for Provenance Analysis and Visualization
Weiner Oliveira, Lenitta M. Ambrósio, Regina Braga, Victor Ströele, José Maria David, and
Fernanda Campos 	

1592

Human Identification and Localization by Robots in Collaborative Environments
Craig C. Douglas, and Robert A. Lodder 	

1602

Data-Driven Design of an Ebola Therapeutic
Robert A. Lodder 	

1612

xii	

Contents

Transforming a Local Medical Image Analysis for Running on a Hadoop Cluster
Marco Strutz, Hermann Heßling, and Achim streit 	

1622

Decentralized Dynamic Data-Driven Monitoring of Dispersion Processes on Partitioned Domains
Tobias Ritter, Stefan Ulbrich, and Oskar von Stryk 	

1632

A Framework for Direct and Transparent Data Exchange of Filter-stream Applications in Multi-GPUs
Architectures
Gabriel Ramos, Guilherme Andrade, Rafael Sachetto, Daniel Madeira, Renan Carvalho, Renato Ferreira,
Fernando Mourão, and Leonardo Rocha 	

1642

Multiscale and Multiresolution methods for Sparse representation of Large datasets
Prashant Shekhar, Abani Patra, and Beata M. Csatho 	

1652

From Extraction to Generation of Design Information -Paradigm Shift in Data Mining via Evolutionary
Learning Classifier System
Kazuhisa Chiba, and Masaya Nakata 	

1662

Case study on: Scalability of preprocessing procedure of remote sensing in Hadoop
Sukanta Roy, Sanchit Gupta, and S.N. Omkar 	

1672

Collaborative Support Vector Machine for Malware Detection
Kai Zhang, Chao Li, Yong Wang, Xiaobin Zhu, and Haiping Wang 	

1682

Improving Performance of Multiclass Classification by Inducing Class Hierarchies
Daniel Silva-Palacios, Cèsar Ferri, and María José Ramírez-Quintana 	

1692

The Impact of Large-Data Transfers in Shared Wide-Area Networks: An Empirical Study
Hamidreza Anvari and Paul Lu 	

1702

A High Performance Computing Framework for Continental-Scale Forest Fire Spread Prediction
C. Brun, T. Artes, A. Cencerrado, T. Margalef, and A. Cortés 	

1712

The Processing Procedure for the Interpretation of Microseismic Signal Acquired from a Surface Array
During Hydraulic Fracturing in Pomerania Region in Poland.
Michał Antoszkiewicz, Mateusz Kmieć, Paweł Szewczuk, Marek Szkodo and Robert Jankowski 	

1722

A Web-based Visual Analytic Framework for Understanding Large-scale Environmental Models:
A Use Case for The Community Land Model
Yang Xu, Dali Wang, Tomislav Janjusic, Wei Wu, Yu Pei, and Zhuo Yao 	

1731

Workshop on Large-Scale Computational Physics LSCP 2017
Elise de Doncker, and Fukuko Yuasa 	

1741

Solution of Few-Body Coulomb Problems with Latent Matrices on Multicore Processors
Luis Biedma, Flavio Colavecchia, and Enrique S. Quintana-Ortí 	

1743

Parallel Acoustic Field Simulation with Respect to Scattering of Sound on Local Inhomogeneities
Andrey A. Chusov, Lubov G. Statsenko, Alexsey P. Lysenko, Sergey N. Kuligin, Nina A. Cherkassova,
Petr P. Unru, and Maya V. Bernavskaya 	

1753

Large Scale Simulation of Cloud Cavitation Collapse
U. Rasthofer, F. Wermelinger, P. Hadijdoukas, and P. Koumoutsakos 	

1763

Feynman loop numerical integral expansions for 3-loop vertex diagrams
E de Doncker, and F Yuasa 	

1773

Variable-Size Batched Gauss-Huard for Block-Jacobi Preconditioning
Hartwig Anzt, Jack Dongarra, Goran Flegar, Enrique S. Quintana-Ortí, and Andrés E. Tomás 	

1783

Parallel Modularity Clustering
Alexandre Fender, Nahid Emad, Serge Petiton, and Maxim Naumov 	

1793

	Contents
xiii

Parallel Monte Carlo on Intel MIC Architecture
Emanouil Atanassov, Todor Gurov, Sofiya Ivanovska, and Aneta Karaivanova 	

1803

Multiscale Modelling and Simulation, 14th International Workshop
Derek Groen, Bartosz Bosak, Valeria Krzhizhanovskaya, Alfons Hoekstra, and Petros Koumoutsakos 	

1811

Dynamic load balancing for CAFE multiscale modelling methods for heterogeneous hardware
infrastructure
Lukasz Rauch, and Daniel Bachniak 	

1813

Multiscale Approach to Parabolic Equations Derivation: Beyond the Linear Theory
Pavel S. Petrov, Matthias Ehrhardt, and Denis V. Makarov 	

1823

A concept of a prognostic system for personalized anti-tumor therapy based on supermodeling
Witold Dzwinel, Adrian Kłusek, and Maciej Paszyński 	

1832

Linking Gene Dynamics to Intimal Hyperplasia – A Predictive Model of Vein Graft Adaptation
Stefano Casarin, Scott A. Berceli, and Marc Garbey 	

1842

On the numerical evaluation of local curvature for diffuse interface models of microstructure evolution
Samad Vakili, Ingo Steinbach, and Fathollah Varnik 	

1852

Multiscale Modeling of Surgical Flow in a Large Operating Room Suite: Understanding the Mechanism
of Accumulation of Delays in Clinical Practice
Marc Garbey, Guillaume Joerger, Juliette Rambourg, Brian Dunkin, and Barbara Bass 	

1863

Reduced Fracture Finite Element Model Analysis of an Efficient Two-Scale Hybrid Embedded
Fracture Model
Sahar Z. Amir, Huangxin Chen, Shuyu Sun 	

1873

Numerical Simulation of Rotation of Intermeshing Rotors using Added and Eliminated Mesh Method
Masashi Yamakawa, Naoya Mitsunari, and Shinichi Asao 	

1883

Extension of a Regularization Based Time-adaptive Numerical Method for a Degenerate DiffusionReaction Biofilm Growth Model to Systems Involving Quorum Sensing
Maryam Ghasemi, and Hermann J. Eberl 	

1893

The THex Algorithm and a Simple Darcy Solver on Hexahedral Meshes
Graham Harper, Jiangguo Liu, and Bin Zheng 	

1903

Mixed Finite Element Analysis for an Elliptic/Mixed Elliptic Interface Problem with Jump Coefficients
Rihui Lan, Pengtao Sun, and Mo Mu 	

1913

Stabilized Finite Element Methods for Flux
Huoyuan Duan, and Sha Li 	

1923

Comparison of Handling Pressure in Poisson Solver for Immersed Boundary Method Considering
Pressure Condition
Kyohei Tajiri, Hidetoshi Nishida, and Mitsuru Tanaka 	

1933

An observable regularization of compressible two-phase flow
Bahman Aboulhasanzadeh, and Kamran Mohseni 	

1943

A Fast Algorithm to Simulate Droplet Motions in Oil/Water Two Phase Flow
Tao Zhang, Shuyu Sun, and Bo Yu 	

1953

Application of the Path Tubes Method to the Navier-Stokes Equations
Fábio Ferreira, Mauricio Kischinhevsky, and Nélio Henderson 	

1963

Similarity Conversion of Centrifugal Natural Gas Compressors Based on Predictor-Corrector
Liyan Wang, Peng Wang, Zhizhu Cao, Bo Yu, and Wang Li 	

1973

xiv	

Contents

GPU Acceleration of CFD Algorithm: HSMAC and SIMPLE
Yue Xiang, Bo Yu, Qing Yuan, and Dongliang Sun 	

1982

Numerical Modeling of Polydisperse Bubbly Flows by the OpenMP Parallel Algorithm
Alexander Chernyshev, Alexander Schmidt, and Leonid Kurochkin 	

1990

Applications of an hybrid particle-grid penalization method for the DNS and passive control of
bluff-body flows
Chloé Mimeau, Iraj Mortazavi, and Georges-Henri Cottet 	

1998

DNS of the wall effect on the motion of bubble swarms
Néstor Balcázar, Jesús Castro, Joaquim Rigola, and Assensi Oliva 	

2008

A comparative study of evolutionary statistical methods for uncertainty reduction in forest fire
propagation prediction
María Laura Tardivo, Paola Caymes-Scutari, Germán Bianchini, Miguel Méndez-Garabetti,
Andrés Cencerrado, and Ana Cortés 	

2018

Statistical Estimation of Brown Bears (Ursus arctos L.) Population in the Rhodope Mountains
T. Gurov, E. Atanassov, A. Karaivanova, R. Serbezov, and N. Spassov 	

2028

Methodology of estimation of achieving regional goals of sustainable development on the basis of
program and goal oriented approach
Sergey A. Mityagin, Olga B. Tikhonova, and Aleksandr I. Repkin 	

2038

A Posterior Ensemble Kalman Filter Based On A Modified Cholesky Decomposition
Elias D. Nino-Ruiz, Alfonso Mancilla, and Juan C. Calabria 	

2049

An ontological approach to dynamic fine-grained Urban Indicators
Salvatore F. Pileggi, and Jane Hunter 	

2059

Recommendation of Short-Term Activity Sequences During Distributed Events
Diana Nurbakova, Léa Laporte, Sylvie Calabretto, and Jérôme Gensel 	

2069

Optimal pricing model based on reduction dimension: A case of study for convenience stores
Laura Hervert-Escobar, Oscar A. Esquivel-Flores, and Raul V. Ramirez-Velarde 	

2079

High-Level Toolset For Comprehensive Visual Data Analysis and Model Validation
Konstantin Ryabinin, and Svetlana Chuprina 	

2090

Identification of Quasi-Stationary Dynamic Objects with the Use of Derivative Disproportion Functions
Vyacheslav V. Kalashnikov, Viktor V. Avramenko, Nikolay Yu. Slipushko, Nataliya I. Kalashnykova,
and Anton E. Konoplyanchenko 	

2100

Symbol and Bit Error Probability for Coded TQAM in AWGN Channel
Hristo Kostadinov, and Nikolai L. Manev 	

2110

The Art of Teaching Computational Science
Alfredo Tirado-Ramos, and Angela B. Shiflet 	

2119

Using Cognitive Computing for Learning Parallel Programming: An IBM Watson Solution
Adrián Calvo Chozas, Suejb Memeti, and Sabri Pllana 	

2121

Building a Community of Practice to Prepare the HPC Workforce
Katharine J. Cahill, Scott Lathrop, and Steven Gordon 	

2131

Learning Outcomes Based Evaluation of HPC Professional Training
Nia Alexandrov and Maria-Ribera Sancho 	

2141

Towards Data Science Literacy
Christo Dichev, and Darina Dicheva 	

2151

	Contentsxv

A Way How to Impart Data Science Skills to Computer Science Students Exemplified by OBDA-Systems
Development
Svetlana Chuprina, Igor Postanogov, and Taisya Kostareva 	

2161

Performance Analysis of Parallel Python Applications
Michael Wagner, Germán Llort, Estanislao Mercadal, Judit Giménez, and Jesús Labarta 	

2171

Scaling Score-P to the next level
Daniel Lorenz, and Christian Feld 	

2180

Design Evaluation of a Performance Analysis Trace Repository
Richard Grunzke, Maximilian Neumann, Thomas Ilsche, Volker Hartmann, Thomas Jejkal,
Rainer Stotzka, Andreas Knüpfer, and Wolfgang E. Nagel 	

2190

Software Framework for Parallel BEM Analyses with H-matrices Using MPI and OpenMP
Takeshi Iwashita, Akihiro Ida, Takeshi Mifune, and Yasuhito Takahashi 	

2200

Simulation of emergency care for patients with ACS in Saint Petersburg for ambulance decision making
Ivan Derevitskiy, Evgeniy Krotov, Daniil Voloshin, Alexey Yakovlev, Sergey V. Kovalchuk, and
Vladislav Karbovskii 	

2210

Smart levee monitoring and flood decision support system: reference architecture and urgent computing
management
Bartosz Balis, Tomasz Bartynski, Marian Bubak, Daniel Harezlak, Marek Kasztelnik, Maciej Malawski,
Piotr Nowakowski, Maciej Pawlik, and Bartosz Wilk 	

2220

Firemap: A Dynamic Data-Driven Predictive Wildfire Modeling and Visualization Environment
Daniel Crawl, Jessica Block, Kai Lin, and Ilkay Altintas 	

2230

Performance-aware scheduling of streaming applications using genetic algorithm
Pavel Smirnov, Mikhail Melnik, and Denis Nasonov 	

2240

Towards an operational database for real-time environmental monitoring and early warning systems
Bartosz Balis, Marian Bubak, Daniel Harezlak, Piotr Nowakowski, Maciej Pawlik, and Bartosz Wilk 	

2250

Numerical Simulation of Magnetic Nanoparticles Injection into Two–phase Flow in a Porous Medium
Mohamed F. El-Amin, Ahmed M. Saad, Shuyu Sun, and Amgad Salama 	

2260

Dual-mixed finite elements for the three-field Stokes model as a finite volume method on staggered grids
Jisheng Kou, and Shuyu Sun 	

2265

A multicomponent QM study of H2 dissociation on small aluminum cluster
Taro Udagawa, Kimichi Suzuki, and Masanori Tachikawa 	

2275

Column-wise Guided Data Imputation
Alessio Petrozziello, and Ivan Jordanov 	

2282

Recognizing Compound Entity Phrases in Hybrid Academic Domains in View of Community Division
Yang Yan, Tingwen Liu, Quangang Li, Jinqiao Shi, Li Guo, and Yubin Wang 	

2287

Optimization of DBN using Regularization Methods Applied for Recognizing Arabic Handwritten Script
Mohamed Elleuch, Najiba Tagougui, and Monji Kherallah 	

2292

On Patterns of Multi-domain Interaction for Scientific Software Development focused on Separation of
Concerns
Ileana Ober, and Iulian Ober 	

2298

MCM: A new MPI Communication Management for Cloud Environments
Laura Espínola, Daniel Franco, and Emilio Luque 	

2303

Lost in Translation: The Fundamental Flaws in Star Coordinate Visualizations
Swee Chuan Tan, and Jeksen Tan 	

2308

xvi	

Contents

Performance and Scalability Study of FMM Kernels on Novel Multi- and Many-core Architectures
Antón Rey, Francisco D. Igual, Manuel Prieto-Matías, and Jan F. Prins 	

2313

SW-SGD: The Sliding Window Stochastic Gradient Descent Algorithm
Imen Chakroun, Tom Haber, and Thomas J. Ashby 	

2318

Curvature-Based Feature Detection for Head Modeling
Martin Prantl, Věra Skorkovská, Petr Martínek, and Ivana Kolingerová 	

2323

Stability Analysis of the Modified IMPES Scheme for Two–Phase Flow in Porous Media Including
Dynamic Capillary Pressure
Mohamed F. El-Amin 	

2328

Enabling efficient stencil code generation in OpenACC
Alyson D. Pereira, Rodrigo C.O. Rocha, Márcio Castro, Luís F.W. Góes, and Mario A.R. Dantas 	

2333

Path Planning for Groups on Graphs
Jakub Szkandera, Ivana Kolingerová, and Martin Maňák 	

2338

par2hier: towards vector representations for hierarchical content
Tommaso Teofili 	

2343

Improving Operational Intensity in Data Bound Markov Chain Monte Carlo
Balazs Nemeth, Tom Haber, Thomas J. Ashby, and Wim Lamotte 	

2348

Efficient OpenCL-based concurrent tasks offloading on accelerators
A.J. Lázaro-Muñoz, J.M. González-Linares, J. Gómez-Luna, and N. Guil 	

2353

Non-Destructive Prediction of Concrete Compressive Strength Using Neural Networks
Adnan Khashman, and Pinar Akpinar 	

2358

Influenza peaks forecasting in Russia: assessing the applicability of statistical methods
Vasiliy N. Leonenko, Klavdiya O. Bochenina, and Sergey A. Kesarev 	

2363

Imperative BSPlib-style Communications in BSML
Frédéric Loulergue 	

2368

Classification of Critical Points Using a Second Order Derivative
Michal smolik, and Vaclav Skala 	

2373

Detection of tourists attraction points using Instagram profiles
Ksenia D. Mukhina, Stepan V. Rakitin, and Alexander A. Visheratin 	

2378

Phenomena of Nonlinear Diffusion in Complex 3D Media
Yuri N. Skiba, and Denis M. Filatov 	

2383

Feasibility Study of Social Network Analysis on Loosely Structured Communication Networks
Jan William Johnsen, and Katrin Franke 	

2388

A Statistical Analysis of the Performance Variability of Read/Write Operations on Parallel File Systems
Eduardo C. Inacio, Pedro A. Barbetta, and Mario A.R. Dantas 	

2393

Heterogeneous Personal Computing: A Case study in Materials Science
Nuno Oliveira, and Pedro D. Medeiros 	

2398

High Performance and Enhanced Scalability for Parallel Applications using MPI-3’s non-blocking
Collectives
Surendra Varma Pericherla, and Sathish Vadhiyar 	

2403

Domain Watcher: Detecting Malicious Domains Based on Local and Global Textual Features
Panpan Zhang, Tingwen Liu, Yang Zhang, Jing Ya, Jinqiao Shi, and Yubin Wang 	

2408

	Contents
xvii

Effective Learning with 2-Dimensional Active Selection on Feature and Instance
Xiao-Yu Zhang, Shupeng Wang, Lei Zhang, Chao Li, Yang Chen, Yong Wang, and Binbin Li 	

2413

Compiler technologies for understanding legacy scientific code: A case study on an ACME land module
Dali Wang, Yu Pei, Oscar Hernandez, Wei Wu, Zhou Yao, Youngsung Kim, Michael Wolfe, and
Ryan Kitchen 	

2418

Selection of Random Walkers that Optimizes the Global Mean First-Passage Time for Search in
Complex Networks
Mu Cong Ding, and Kwok Yip Szeto 	

2423

GPU-Accelerated Real-Time Path Planning and the Predictable Execution Model
Björn Forsberg, Daniele Palossi, Andrea Marongiu, and Luca Benini 	

2428

RBF Interpolation with CSRBF of Large Data Sets
Vaclav Skala 	

2433

Social Contact Patterns in an Individual-based Simulator for the Transmission of Infectious Diseases
(Stride)
Elise Kuylen, Sean Stijven, Jan Broeckhove, and Lander Willem 	

2438

Cognitive Agents Success in Learning to Cross a CA Based Highway Comparison for Two Decision
Formulas
Anna T. Lawniczak and Fei Yu 	

2443

Algorithm for simultaneous adaptation and time step iterations for the electromagnetic waves propagation
and heating of the human head induced by cell phone
Luis Garcia-Castillo, Ignacio Gomez-Revuelto, Adrian Amor-Martin, Marcin Łoś, and Maciej
Paszyński 	

2448

Crowd Evacuation Modeling and Simulation Using Care HPS
Mohammed J. Alghazzawi, Ghazal Tashakor, Francisco Borges, and Remo Suppi 	

2453

Video face recognition through multi-scale and optimization of margin distributions
Gaopeng Gou, Zhen Li, Gang Xiong, Yangyang Guan, and Junzheng Shi 	

2458

Modeling and Simulation for Exploring Power/Time Trade-off of Parallel Deep Neural Network Training
Paweł Rościszewski 	

2463

Modeling perfusion by fractal tree and stochastic dynamics
Katarzyna Jesionek, Dominik Szczerba, and Jaroslaw Wasilewski 	

2468

Parallel Post-Processing of the Earth Climate Model Output
Gijs van den Oord, and Rena Bakhshi 	

2473

Clustering of comorbidities based on conditional probabilities of diseases in hypertensive patients
Nikita Bukhanov, Marina Balakhontceva, Alexey Krikunov, Arthur Sabirov, Anna Semakova,
Nadezhda Zvartau, and Aleksandra Konradi 	

2478

Gabor Filter and Texture based Features for Palmprint Recognition
Ali Younesi, and Mehdi Chehel Amirani 	

2488

A Self-Enforcing Network as a Tool for Clustering and Analyzing Complex Data
Christina Klüver 	

2496

Body Mass Index Estimation by Using an Adaptive Neuro Fuzzy Inference System
Nuriye Sancar, and Sahar S. Tabrizi 	

2501

Building hybrid Scientific similarity networks using research papers and social networks
Gali-Ketema Mbogo, and Alexander A. Visheratin 	

2507

xviii	

Contents

Formal Approach to Control Design of Complex and Dynamical Systems
Hela Kadri, Samir Ben Ahmed, and Simon Collart-Dutilleul 	

2512

Impacts of Building Geometries and Radiation Properties on Urban Thermal Environment
Ming Xu 	

2517

Towards a Fuzzy Cognitive Map for Opinion Mining
Jose Aguilar, Oswaldo Téran, Hebert Sánchez, José Gutiérrez de Mesa, Jorge Cordero, and
Danilo Chávez 	

2522

Application of Block-structured Adaptive Mesh Refinement to Particle Simulation
Hideyuki Usui, Saki Kito, Masanori Nunami, and Masaharu Matsumoto 	

2527

Behavioral Characterization of Criminality Spread in Cities
Gabriel Spadon, Lucas C. Scabora, Paulo H. Oliveira, Marcus V.S. Araujo, Bruno B. Machado,
Elaine P.M. Sousa, Caetano Traina-Jr, and Jose F. Rodrigues-Jr 	

2537

#RighttoBreathe why not? Social Media Analysis of the Local in the Capital City of India
Nitin Upadhyay, and Shalini Upadhyay 	

2542

