Available online at www.sciencedirect.com

ScienceDirect
Procedia Computer Science 108C (2017) 215–224

International Conference on Computational Science, ICCS 2017, 12-14 June 2017,
Zurich, Switzerland

The study of the influence of obstacles on crowd
dynamics
The study of the influence
of obstacles on crowd
dynamics
1
1
Oksana Severiukhina , Daniil Voloshin ,
M.H. Lees1,2,3, Vladislav
Karbovskii1 1
1
Oksana
Severiukhina
,
Daniil
Voloshin ,
1
ITMO University, Saint Petersburg, Russia
1,2,3
2
M.H.
Leesof Amsterdam,
, Vladislav
Karbovskii1
University
the Netherlands
3 1 ITMO

SaintUniversity,
Petersburg,
Russia
NanyangUniversity,
Technological
Singapore
2
University of Amsterdam,achoched@gmail.com,
the Netherlands
oseveryukhina@gmail.com,
3
Nanyang Technological
University, Singapore
M.H.Lees@uva.nl,
vladislav.k.work@gmail.com
oseveryukhina@gmail.com, achoched@gmail.com,
M.H.Lees@uva.nl, vladislav.k.work@gmail.com

Abstract
This paper presents the research on the influence of obstacles on crowd dynamics. We have performed
Abstract
experiments
for four base scenarios of interaction in crowd: unidirectional flow, bidirectional flow,
This paper
presents
research on
the influence
of obstacleshas
on crowd
dynamics.
We have
performed
merging
flows
and the
intersection.
Movement
of pedestrians
been studied
in simple
shape
areas:
experiments
for four
base scenarios
of interaction
in crowd:and
unidirectional
flow,ofbidirectional
flow,
straight corridor,
T-junction
and intersection.
The volumes
basic directions
pedestrian flows
merging
flows and
of pedestrians
been studied
in simple
shape
areas:
were determined
forintersection.
each of theMovement
areas. Layout
of physicalhas
obstacles
has been
built from
different
straight
corridor,
T-junction
intersection.
volumes
and basic directions
of pedestrian
combinations
of columns
andand
barriers.
In orderThe
to acquire
characteristics
of the crowd
dynamicsflows
a set
were
determined
each of the
areas.
Layout
of physical
obstaclesInhas
from managed
different
of simulations
wasforconducted
using
PULSE
simulation
environment.
the been
result,built
we have
combinations
of columns
and between
barriers. layout
In order
acquire and
characteristics
of thewere
crowd
dynamics a set
to obtain several
dependences
of to
obstacles
crowd dynamics
obtained.
of simulations was conducted using PULSE simulation environment. In the result, we have managed
© 2017 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V.
to obtain several
dependences
between
layoutlayout;
of obstacles
and crowd
dynamics were obtained.
Keywords:
pedestrian
crowd dynamics;
obstacles
agent-based
modeling
Peer-review under responsibility of the scientific committee of the International Conference on Computational Science
Keywords: pedestrian crowd dynamics; obstacles layout; agent-based modeling

1 Introduction
MassIntroduction
gatherings are an essential part of our lives. Public events are held more often, moreover, the
1

scope of events and the number of participants increase. There are several types of activities that may
Mass gatherings
are an
part of our
lives.(Olympic
Public events
areworld
held more
often, moreover,
the
bring
large numbers
of essential
people together:
sports
Games,
championships),
religious
scope
of events
and the
number
of participants
increase.
There
several events
types of
activities
that may
(Kumbh
Mela, The
Hajj),
cultural
(concerts and
festivals)
andare
political
(mass
meetings
and
bring
large
numbers
people
together: sportsbehavior
(Olympic
world
championships),
religious
strikes).
Each
type hasof its
own characteristics:
andGames,
purposes
of the
participants, place
and
(Kumbh
Mela, The Hajj), cultural (concerts and festivals) and political events (mass meetings and
time.
strikes).
Each
type has
its own
characteristics:
behavior
and purposes
thesecure
participants,
place and
Crowd
managers
should
consider
a lot of details
to organize
a safeofand
event. Soomaroo
time.Murray [1] have analyzed previous cases of disasters for the period between 1971 and 2011.
and
Crowd managers
should
consider
lot of details
a safe
secure event.
Soomaroo
Overcrowding
and crowd
control
wereadefined
as one to
of organize
the key areas
forand
preparation
of mass
events.
and
Murray
[1]
have
analyzed
previous
cases
of
disasters
for
the
period
between
1971
and
2011.
There are several potential hazards related to crowd movement: suffocation, crushing, trampling.
Overcrowding and crowd control were defined as one of the key areas for preparation of mass events.
There are several potential hazards related to crowd movement: suffocation, crushing, trampling.
1877-0509 © 2017 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V.
Peer-review under responsibility of the scientific committee of the International Conference on Computational Science
10.1016/j.procs.2017.05.162

216	

Oksana Severiukhina et al. / Procedia Computer Science 108C (2017) 215–224

These can lead to a large number of casualties. In recent years, there have been several dangerous
accidents during mass gatherings. One of the biggest stampede occurred during the annual Hajj
pilgrimage in Mina (Mecca, Saudi Arabia) in 2015: more than 2000 pilgrims died and more than 900
pilgrims were injured. The stampede occurred when two large groups of pilgrims with different
directions of motion collided faced at the crossroad. Another deadly stampede occurred in Cambodia
in 2010 during the Khmer Water Festival. 347 people were killed and 755 people were injured. The
crush occurred on a narrow passage of the bridge: some people were trampled, some people drowned
in river. In stampede people lose their balance, fall down and may turn into obstacles for others
pedestrian because pushing crowd is not controllable.
Installment of physical obstacles to navigate pedestrian flows is a common crowd control and
management tool. Such obstacles include crowd control barricades, barriers, line management
systems, temporary fencing, and entry control systems [2]. It is widely accepted that temporary
obstacles coupled with permanent architectural design solutions and can increase the safety of mass
events. The aim of this paper is to identify dependences between various types of obstacles and the
main characteristics of the crowd’s movement in various types of interaction between flows. It can
provide considerations when planning for future events in terms of security and crowd control.
In this work, we describe the method and first results of the study of obstacles influence on the
crowd dynamics. Some background information and related works are presented in section 2. Section
3 contains description of selected scenarios and scheme of our approach. In section 4, we present the
data obtained from the simulation. Section 5 presents conclusions and a discussion of further research.

2 Related works
The study of dynamics of the crowd movement and influence of different layouts and forms of
obstacles have an interdisciplinary nature. On the one hand, one should take into account the
experience of crowd managers of mass gatherings, on the other, relevant developments (methods and
tools) from the field of crowd movement modeling.
Scientific and practice-oriented organizations worldwide study features of mass gatherings and
investigate the causes of dangerous incidents [3]. This becomes the basis for the publication of
standards and regulations of safety during mass events. For instance, the British “Health and Safety
Executive” organization [4] identifies two types of hazard factors: crowd and venue-related. In the
first group hazards may be caused by crushing, aggressive and dangerous behavior, such as climbing
on barricades or buildings. Hazards associated with a venue are the following: collapse of structures,
such as a fences or barriers, which may crush people, moving vehicles sharing the same route as
pedestrians, failure of equipment, such as turnstiles and so on. Therefore, pedestrians face a variety of
permanent and temporary obstacles, which can interfere with their movement. From another
perspective, temporary structures like barriers are one of the ways to control pedestrians' behavior.
According to the guide [5], there are several main purposes of barriers: pedestrian flow control, flow
direction management, blocking, and area delineation (separation of groups, boundaries marking etc.).
Crowd consists of separate groups of pedestrians or flows gathered together by a common interest
or activity. These groups or flows have different characteristics of movement. Duives describes the
taxonomy of base cases of crowd movement and distinguishes two types of flows [6]: unidirectional
and multidirectional. Unidirectional flows can be straight, rounding corners or entering, exiting. Multidirectional flows can be parallel or crossing with focal point or random. This taxonomy helps to define
base scenario of flow’s interaction for investigating crowd motion.
There are two main methods to study the dynamics of the crowd: the experiment with people and
crowd simulation. Lots of experiments have been devoted on objects of various shapes with the help
of volunteers. For example, Helbing [7] conducted experiments for corridors with single or two
opposite flows passing a short or long bottleneck. Authors [8] study various forms of ordering in

	

Oksana Severiukhina et al. / Procedia Computer Science 108C (2017) 215–224

bidirectional pedestrian stream. Case of T-junction was investigated by Zhang [9] and Shiwakoti [10].
Intersection of two flows on crossroad was investigated in [7].
It seems that the movement of the crowd is difficult to define and describe by computer model.
This is probably true then we consider new or complex situations. In such situations, the behavior has
probabilistic character. But in standard or simple situations the behavior of human is well predictable
and can be described by computer model [11]. One of the widely-used models in studies of crowd
dynamics is a social agent-based model (ABM). Cioffi-Revilla [12] defines three main components of
ABM: agents (autonomous, interacting, goal-oriented), rules and environments where agents are
simulated. Thus, agents can perceive information and make decisions. In work [13] a pattern-based
approach is proposed to simulate human-like pedestrian steering behavior of agents.
ABM provides unprecedented opportunities for investigation of behavior of people in critical
events including studies of information spread [14], analysis the effectiveness of wearable wireless
sensors in controlling density of crowd [15], evacuation scenarios [16] etc. In the latter example, the
main purpose of analysis is optimal layout of obstacles for minimization of evacuation time. Jiang [17]
uses ABM based on Social Forces [11] and genetic algorithm to obtain best designs of architectural
entities to host large crowds. More detailed approach has been proposed by Zhao [18]. He uses Social
Force model and a robust differential evolution to optimize the geometrical parameters of differently
shaped (pillar and panel) obstacles in order to achieve an optimal evacuation performance.
From the survey of the existing literature on the matter, we may conclude that different obstacles
can help control and regulate motion of pedestrians in crowds. However, there is clear lack of
systematic research on how different characteristics of obstacles shape the movement of the crowd.
The articles discussed above study the following characteristics of the motion: density, velocity, flow
and crowd pressure. For visualization of the relationship between some characteristics fundamental
diagrams [19] may be used.

3 Method
This section contains the description of the approach used in the study. In the first part, we describe
the set of experimental scenarios and their characteristics. The second part is dedicated to description
of the modeling tools used.

3.1 Description of the base cases
Mass gatherings may occur in different places. Depending on the specifics of the event it may be a
stadium or a group of sports objects, town square or another urban area, various suburban areas etc.
The territory of events and public places may be of a complex shape and can be divided into separate
zones in regard to functional, spatial and other characteristics. Thus, the space can be reversely
decomposed into units, based on the following features:





geometric shape;
number of inputs;
number of outputs;
directions of movements between inputs and outputs.

In most cases, crowd consists of unidirectional and multidirectional flows. For multidirectional
cases, there are several possible types of interaction between individual flows: movement in opposite
direction, merging, intersecting. Other forms of interaction can be obtained by their combination. For
investigation of the scenarios based on these interactions we suggest considering the cases of simple
shape: straight corridors for unidirectional and bidirectional flows, T-junctions for merging and
crossroad for intersection (Fig.1). The width of the corridor has been selected in accordance with the

217

Oksana Severiukhina et al. / Procedia Computer Science 108C (2017) 215–224

218	

rules of urban planning developed by the Ministry of Regional Development of Russia [20] for
sidewalks (in streets with adjustable movement).

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

Figure 1: The base cases and the directions of motion: (a) corridor with unidirectional flow;
(b) corridor with bidirectional flow; (c) T-junction; (d) intersection area; the arrows indicate directions
of motion; blue rectangles denote portals where agents appear or disappear.
Selection of cases was based on the work of studying the flow in simple shaped areas and
described in section 2. For the unidirectional flow, the following layouts of obstacles were chosen:
parallel, zigzag-shaped barriers and barriers which create narrow passage. In order to investigate the
influence of a narrow passage two scenarios with a column and constriction were added.
Corridor with bidirectional flow is a typical situation: these can be found in corridors in buildings,
sidewalks on the streets, approaches to events, etc. Two flows can be artificially separated by one
barrier or a series of obstacles like columns or short barriers. Second type of obstacles are permeable.
Such designs allow pedestrians to use the other side of corridor, if necessary. In addition to that, cases
for zigzag-shaped barriers and narrow passages were added.
Table 1 contains the possible scenarios of obstacle’s layout for the corridor case.
Scenarios

Straight line of barriers

Zigzag-shaped barriers

Narrow passage

Corridor with
unidirectional flow

Corridor with bidirectional flow

a.1

b.1

a.2

b.2

a.3
b.3
a.4

Columns
Table 1: Scenarios for corridor

a.5

b.4

	

Oksana Severiukhina et al. / Procedia Computer Science 108C (2017) 215–224

T-junction and intersection represent cases of merging and crossing of pedestrian flows. Columns
and lines of barriers on crowd’s way are assumed to alter the direction of crowd movement and place
of collision. These obstacles have been added to T-junction and intersection. In addition to that, the
scenario of a narrow corridor for the merging and scenario with a circular motion around the column
for interaction were added. Table 2 contains scenarios for these cases used in the experiments
conducted for this research.
Scenarios

T-junction

Intersection

Column
c.1

d.1

c.2

d.2

c.3

d.3

Barrier

Other
Table 2: Scenarios for T-junction and intersection

3.2 The method’s scheme and simulation environment
This section presents the method’s scheme and its main components (Fig. 2). First part of input data is
a set of cases (the corridor, T-junction and intersection area). For each case, different obstacles were
selected in section 3.1. In order to calculate the characteristics of the motion, we use virtual sensors.
The sensors are parts of the area where characteristics of motion are measured.
In normal situations, the desired velocity is approximately Gaussian distributed with a mean value
of 1.3 m/s and a standard deviation of around 0.3 m/s [7]. This distribution has been used for defining
desired velocity of each agent. Probability of generating agents defines in each case and it is the same
for different layouts of obstacles in each case. This determines the number of agents in the area.
For multi-agent simulation of crowd behavior in all investigated cases we use PULSE simulation
environment [21][22], which is freely available via GitHub*. PULSE uses modified HiDAC (HighDensity Autonomous Crowd) agent-based model [23], which based on a combination of psychological
and geometrical rules with a social and physical forces model. In our model, the perception area for
agent has a half ellipse. Each agent in the model is autonomous, has a desired velocity and direction of
movement. In addition, other objects may interplay with movement of virtual pedestrians: the distance
to the obstacles and distance to other agents shapes the trajectories of agents. For the sake of
reproducing uncertainty in agents’ behavior, fluctuation of parameters has been added. It can be
described as an accidental or deliberate deviation from the usual rules of motion.

*

https://github.com/vladkar/pulse-project-open

219

Oksana Severiukhina et al. / Procedia Computer Science 108C (2017) 215–224

220	

Figure 2: The method’s scheme.
Output data and results of simulations were collected using sensors which recorded required
parameters at defined part of territory. The following indicators were mesuared for discription of the
pedestrian movement: velocity (average velocity of agents), the density (number of agants in square
meter) and flow (the number of agents in sensor’s zone).
For identifying dependances between the indicators, a metric known as a fundamental diagram of
pedestrian movement was used. In this paper, we investigate the relationship between the density of
agents and average velocity.

4 Results
30 simulations were conducted for each of the scenarios with 95% confidence level. Data was
gathered for periods of 30 seconds, and total time for each simulation run is 600 seconds. The results
of experiments are presented below.
(a)
(b)

Figure 3: Fundamental diagram of pedestrian motion with unidirectional flow in corridor: (a) relation between
density and average velocity; (b) relation between density and average velocity for narrow passage.

	

Oksana Severiukhina et al. / Procedia Computer Science 108C (2017) 215–224

(a)

(b)

Figure 4: Fundamental diagram of pedestrian motion with bidirectional flow in corridor: (a) relation between
density and average velocity; (b) relation between density and average velocity for decreased flows of pedestrians.

Figures 3 and 4 illustrate the results of simulations for a unidirectional and bidirectional flows in
corridor case. Conclusion for these scenarios are presented in table 3.
Scenarios
Straight line of barriers
Zigzag-shaped barriers
Narrow passage

Columns

Corridor with unidirectional flow

Corridor with bidirectional flow
b.1: Increase of average velocity and
a.1: Insignificant decrease of the
decrease of density in the case of
density
increasing the number of agents
a.2, b.2: Significant decrease of the average velocity and increase of density
a.3, a.4: Decrease of the average
velocity and greatly increase of
b.3: Decrease of the average velocity
density, however, gradual
and increase of density
constriction reduces this affect
a.5: Increase in the average
b.4: Increase of average velocity in the
velocity and decrease of density
case of increasing the number of agents
in the case of a narrow passage

Table 3: Comparison of scenarios with obstacles and control scenario without obstacles for corridor case.

For the unidirectional flow, the following results were obtained. Parallel barriers seem to separate
pedestrians into several flows and decrease density in the crowd. Zigzag-shaped barriers and narrow
passages have another effect: pedestrians have to bend around obstacles so dropping the velocity of
their movement which leads to an increase in density. In order to increase average velocity for
overcoming narrow passage single column in front of passage or gradual constriction can be
established.
The scenarios with bidirectional flow and zigzag-shaped barriers or narrow passages produce a
similar effect to the one seen in the scenarios for unidirectional flow. For more detailed investigation
of obstacles placed in line, simulations with different numbers of agents were conducted. As a result,
line of obstacles shows greater influence on agents when their numbers grow and thus helps avoid
collision of the latter. The described effect allows to increase the average velocity of agents’
movement.

221

222	

Oksana Severiukhina et al. / Procedia Computer Science 108C (2017) 215–224

(a)

(b)

Figure 5: Fundamental diagram of pedestrian motion: relation between density and average velocity:
(a) T-junction; (b) Intersection.

Figures 5 illustrate the results of simulations for merging and intersection of flows. Conclusion for
these scenarios are presented in table 4.
Scenarios
T-junction
Intersection
c.1, c.2: Increase in average
d.1, d.2: Significant increase in
Columns and barrier
velocity and decreased density
density and increase in velocity
values
c.3: Dramatic increase in
Other
d.3: Decrease in density values
density
Table 4: Comparison scenarios with obstacles and base scenario without obstacles for T-junction and
intersection.

In scenarios of flows’ merging, the barrier or the column
between flows have same effect on velocity and density of
crowd. These obstacles reducing the angle between the
interacting flows. The width of the resulting corridor in case
of merging should be enough for pedestrians from two
another corridor, because narrow passage is a place of
gathering a large number of agents.
Intersection of flows may significantly increase density
and decrease average velocity in scenarios without
obstacles. For the increasing velocity and decreasing
density column or barrier can be installed in the center of
intersection. It’s important to note, circular motion around
column can give more stable value of movement’s
characteristics.
Figure 6: Screenshot from PULSE
Figure 6 depicts the screenshot from PULSE simulation
simulation environment
environment for the circular motion scenario (d.3) with
column in case of intersection. The triangles denote the direction of agent’s movement.

5 Conclusion and Discussion
In this paper, we describe the results of the primary study, aimed at formalizing the influence of
different layouts of obstacles like barriers and columns on pedestrian dynamics.

	

Oksana Severiukhina et al. / Procedia Computer Science 108C (2017) 215–224

Unidirectional and bidirectional flows, merging and intersection of pedestrian’s flows were
considered as basic scenarios of motion, because other interactions can be obtained by their
combination. For investigation, selected scenarios the cases of simple shape were chosen: corridor, Tjunction and intersection. During the experiment, we have investigated the several possible layouts of
obstacle on crowd’s way: single barrier, column or groups of objects. Better understanding of such a
processes could help to build better models and use them to achieve better results for different scenario
simulations [24] or [25].
In the result of experiments, we came to the following conclusions about impact of obstacles on
crowd dynamics. Barriers set in a zigzag shape decrease average velocity and decrease density in the
crowd. Narrow passages have the same effect, but it can be reduced by installing additional obstacles:
single columns or constriction. Lines of obstacles allow to separate flows in the crowd in order to
reduce density. At the same time, there are obstacles that particularly change the characteristics of the
movement, for instance, the installation of the column and the organization of circular motion in
scenario of intersection reduce density.
Control of movement on the territory of mass gathering is one of challenges for organizers. The
knowledge about the influence of different obstacles on the crowd dynamics can help to place barriers,
barricades and columns and to organize the movement of different flows of pedestrian more safely.
This is the base for the future work dedicated optimal layouts of barricades for specific situations,
which may be a problem of evacuation and minimization of time, a problem of reducing the velocity
or density of agents. Besides we plan to conduct more experiments on complex shape areas and study
the crowd’s pressure characteristic because the density and the velocity does not fully reflect the
influence of obstacles and other agents, however, asphyxia is one of the cases of death in stampede.
This paper is financially supported by The Russian Scientific Foundation, Agreement #14-2100137.

References
[1]
[2]
[3]
[4]
[5]
[6]
[7]
[8]
[9]
[10]

L. Soomaroo and V. Murray, “Disasters at Mass Gatherings: Lessons from History,” PLoS
Curr., pp. 1–7, 2012.
The Tamis Corporation, “Planning Crowd Control For Your Event.”
M. Moussaïd, D. Helbing, and G. Theraulaz, “How simple rules determine pedestrian behavior
and crowd disasters.,” Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., vol. 108, no. 17, pp. 6884–8, 2011.
HSE, “Managing crowds safely,” HSE Books, pp. 1–63, 2000.
NATIONAL DISASTER MANAGEMENT AUTHORITY (NDMA) GOVERNMENT OF
INDIA, “Managing Crowd at Events and Venues of Mass Gathering A Guide for State
Government , Local Authorities , Administrators and Organizers,” 2014.
D. C. Duives, W. Daamen, and S. P. Hoogendoorn, “State-of-the-art crowd motion simulation
models,” Transp. Res. Part C Emerg. Technol., vol. 37, pp. 193–209, 2014.
D. Helbing, L. Buzna, A. Johansson, and T. Werner, “Self-organized pedestrian crowd
dynamics: Experiments, simulations, and design solutions,” Transp. Sci., vol. 39, no. 1, pp. 1–
24, 2005.
J. Zhang, W. Klingsch, A. Schadschneider, and A. Seyfried, “Ordering in bidirectional
pedestrian flows and its influence on the fundamental diagram,” J. Stat. Mech., vol. 2002, p. 9,
2011.
J. Zhang, W. Klingsch, A. Schadschneider, and A. Seyfried, “Transitions in pedestrian
fundamental diagrams of straight corridors and T-junctions,” J. Stat. Mech., vol. 6004, p. 17,
2011.
N. Shiwakoti, X. Shi, Z. Ye, and W. Wang, “Empirical study on pedestrian crowd behaviour
in right angled junction,” no. October, p. 12p, 2015.

223

Oksana Severiukhina et al. / Procedia Computer Science 108C (2017) 215–224

224	

[11]
[12]
[13]
[14]
[15]
[16]
[17]
[18]
[19]
[20]
[21]
[22]
[23]
[24]
[25]

D. Helbing and P. Molnar, “Social force model for pedestrian dynamics,” Phys. Rev. E, vol.
51, no. 5, p. 4282, 1995.
C. Cioffi-Revilla, Introduction to Computational Social Science: Principles and Applications.
Springer Science & Business Media, 2013.
N. Hu, M. H. Lees, and S. Zhou, “A pattern-based modeling framework for simulating humanlike pedestrian steering behaviors,” Virtual Real. Softw. Technol., no. October 2013, pp. 179–
188, 2013.
A. A. Visheratin, T. B. Trofimenko, K. D. Mukhina, D. Nasonov, and A. V Boukhanovsky,
“Urgent Information Spreading Multi-layer Model for Simulation in Mobile Networks,”
Procedia Comput. Sci., vol. 80, pp. 2086–2097, 2016.
T. Y. H. Angela, V. Viswanathan, M. Lees, and W. Cai, “Analysing the effectiveness of
wearable wireless sensors in controlling crowd disasters,” Procedia Comput. Sci., vol. 29, pp.
1590–1599, 2014.
V. Viswanathan, C. E. Lee, M. H. Lees, S. A. Cheong, and P. M. A. Sloot, “Quantitative
comparison between crowd models for evacuation planning and evaluation,” Eur. Phys. J. B,
vol. 87, no. 2, p. 27, Feb. 2014.
L. Jiang et al., “Obstacle Optimization for Panic Flow - Reducing the Tangential Momentum
Increases the Escape Speed,” PLoS One, vol. 9, no. 12, p. e115463, Dec. 2014.
Y. Zhao et al., “Optimal layout design of obstacles for panic evacuation using differential
evolution,” Phys. A Stat. Mech. its Appl., vol. 465, pp. 175–194, 2017.
A. Seyfried, B. Steffen, W. Klingsch, and M. Boltes, “The fundamental diagram of pedestrian
movement revisited,” J. Stat. Mech. Theory Exp., vol. 2005, no. 10, pp. P10002–P10002,
2005.
Ministry of Regional Development of Russia, Urban planning. Planning and construction
urban and rural settlements. Set of Rules 42.13330.2011. Moscow, 2011.
V. Karbovskii, D. Voloshin, A. Karsakov, and A. Bezgodov, “Multimodel agent-based
simulation environment for mass-gatherings and pedestrian dynamics,” Futur. Gener. Comput.
Syst., 2016.
V. A. Karbovskii, D. V. Voloshin, K. A. Puzyreva, and A. S. Zagarskikh, “Personal Decision
Support Mobile Service for Extreme Situations,” Procedia Comput. Sci., vol. 29, pp. 1646–
1655, 2014.
N. Pelechano, J. Allbeck, and N. Badler, “Controlling individual agents in high-density crowd
simulation,” Proc. 2007 ACM, 2007.
N. Butakov, D. Nasonov, K. Knyazkov, V. Karbovskii, and Y. Chuprova, “The Multi-Agent
Simulation-Based Framework for Optimization of Detectors Layout in Public Crowded
Places,” Procedia - Procedia Comput. Sci., vol. 51, pp. 522–531, 2015.
V. Karbovskii, A. Karsakov, D. Rybokonenko, and D. Voloshin, “Short-term Multiagent
Simulation-based Prediction in Mass Gatherings Decision Support,” Procedia Comput. Sci.,
vol. 80, pp. 2119–2127, 2016.

