Available online at www.sciencedirect.com

ScienceDirect
Procedia Computer Science 108C (2017) 185–194

International Conference on Computational Science, ICCS 2017, 12-14 June 2017,
Zurich, Switzerland

Models of Pedestrian Adaptive Behaviour in Hot
Outdoor Adaptive
Public Spaces
Models of Pedestrian
Behaviour in Hot
Outdoor Public Spaces
Valentin Melnikov1,2, Valeria V. Krzhizhanovskaya3,4, Peter M.A. Sloot1,3
1

Nanyang Technological University, Singapore

1,2
3,4
Valentin MelnikovFuture
, Valeria
V. Krzhizhanovskaya
, Peter M.A. Sloot1,3
Cities Laboratory,
Singapore-ETH Centre
2

1 3

Nanyang
Technological
University,
Singapore
University
of Amsterdam,
the Netherlands
4
Future
Cities
Laboratory,
Centre
ITMO
University,
SaintSingapore-ETH
Petersburg, Russia
3
University
of Amsterdam, the Netherlands
v.krzhizhanovskaya@uva.nl,
p.m.a.sloot@uva.nl
mail@valmelnikov.ru,
4
ITMO University, Saint Petersburg, Russia
mail@valmelnikov.ru, v.krzhizhanovskaya@uva.nl, p.m.a.sloot@uva.nl
2

Abstract
Current studies of outdoor thermal comfort are limited to calculating thermal indices or interviewing
people. The first method does not take into account the way people use this space, whereas the second
Abstract
Current
studiestoofone
outdoor
thermal
comfort
limited to
calculating
thermal
indicesalong
or interviewing
one
is limited
particular
study
area. are
Simulating
people’s
thermal
perception
with their
people. The
method
not will
take help
into account
theand
waycity
people
use this
whereas
the second
activities
in first
public
urbandoes
spaces
architects
planners
to space,
test their
concepts
and to
one
is limited
particular
Simulating
perception
along with
their
design
smarter to
andone
more
liveablestudy
cities.area.
In this
paper, wepeople’s
proposethermal
an agent-based
modelling
approach
activities
public urban
spaces
will help
architects
cityofplanners
to test
their concepts
and to
to simulateinpeople’s
adaptive
behaviour
in space.
Twoand
levels
pedestrian
behaviour
are considered:
reactive
and proactive,
and
three types
adaptive
behaviour
pedestriansmodelling
are modelled
with
design smarter
and more
liveable
cities.ofInthermal
this paper,
we propose
an of
agent-based
approach
single-agent
scenarios:
speedbehaviour
adaptation,
thermalTwo
attraction/repulsion
andbehaviour
vision-motivated
route
to
simulate people’s
adaptive
in space.
levels of pedestrian
are considered:
reactive
andAn
proactive,
and three
types
of thermal
adaptive
of pedestrians
arethe
modelled
with
alternation.
"accumulated
heat
stress"
parameter
of thebehaviour
agent is calculated
during
simulation,
single-agent
adaptation,
thermal
attraction/repulsion
and vision-motivated
and pedestrianscenarios:
behaviourspeed
is analysed
in terms
of its ability
to reduce the accumulated
heat stress.route
This
alternation.
An "accumulated
heat"human
stress" component"
parameter ofinthe
agentmicroclimate
is calculatedsimulation
during thesystems.
simulation,
work is the first
step towards the
urban
We
and these
pedestrian
behaviour
is analysed
in terms
of its ability
to reducewhich
the accumulated
heat stress.model
This
use
simulations
to drive
the design
of real-life
experiments,
will help calibrating
parameters,
such step
as the
heat-speed
response,
thermal sensitivity
admissiblesimulation
turning angles.
work is the first
towards
the "human
component"
in urbanand
microclimate
systems. We
use these simulations to drive the design of real-life experiments, which will help calibrating model
© 2017 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V.
Keywords: outdoor
thermal
comfort, pedestrian
dynamics,
behaviour,
urban heat island angles.
parameters,
suchresponsibility
as
the heat-speed
response,
thermalofadaptive
sensitivity
and admissible
Peer-review
under
of the scientific
committee
the International
Conference turning
on Computational Science
Keywords: outdoor thermal comfort, pedestrian dynamics, adaptive behaviour, urban heat island

1 Introduction
thirds of the world population are predicted to live in urban areas by 2050, adding more than
1 Two
Introduction

2.5 billion people living in cities. 90% of this growth is projected to be in Africa and Asia with
tropical
subtropical
(hotpopulation
and humid)
[1].toOutdoor
thermal
comfort
is therefore
critically
Two and
thirds
of the world
areclimate
predicted
live in urban
areas
by 2050,
adding more
than
important
urbanliving
studies.
prolonged
to theisstressful
heat
an and
uncomfortable
2.5 billionfor
people
in A
cities.
90% ofexposure
this growth
projected
to is
benot
in just
Africa
Asia with
tropical and but
subtropical
andtohumid)
[1]. even
Outdoor
thereforeis critically
experience,
a severe(hot
threat
human climate
health and
life.thermal
One of comfort
the sad is
examples
the heat
important
for urban
studies.
A prolonged
exposure
to the deaths
stressful
is not
just an uncomfortable
wave
in Europe
in 2003,
which
caused more
than 70,000
dueheat
to the
heat-related
causes like a
experience,
buthypertension
a severe threat
human
health
and even life.
of the all
sadover
examples
is the
heat
stroke or acute
[2].toThis
makes
the governments
andOne
scientists
the world
to work
wave in Europe in 2003, which caused more than 70,000 deaths due to the heat-related causes like a
stroke or acute hypertension [2]. This makes the governments and scientists all over the world to work
1877-0509 © 2017 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V.
Peer-review under responsibility of the scientific committee of the International Conference on Computational Science
10.1016/j.procs.2017.05.006

186	

Valentin Melnikov et al. / Procedia Computer Science 108C (2017) 185–194

on mitigation of the difference in temperatures between urban and surrounding rural areas, also known
as "urban heat island" (UHI) [3]. This difference can reach 15 ºC (degree Celsius) in extreme weather
and geographical locations like Athens [4].
Singapore is a highly-urbanized city-state situated in South East Asia, with very high annual
average temperature of 27 ºC and humidity of 84% [5]. According to [6], the UHI in Singapore
reaches 7 ºC in the season of south-west monsoons. Such an enormous amount of extra heat produced
and captured by the city is a challenge in protecting people’s health and lives, as well as in sustainable
city development.
People’s thermal comfort is more vulnerable in outdoor spaces, where they are exposed to solar
and reflected radiation and have very few opportunities for cooling. Current research in Outdoor
Thermal Comfort (OTC) investigates public spaces as an interaction of two components: climate and
built environment. This is usually done by calculating the distribution of thermal comfort indices, such
as PET (Physiologically Equivalent Temperature) [7] or UTCI (Universal Thermal Comfort Index)
[8]. These indices use air temperature, humidity, wind speed and mean radiant temperature to calculate
the OTC as a "feels-like" temperature in a reference indoor environment. Software packages such as
RayMan [9] or Solweig [10] allow to perform simulations of urban spaces and calculation of these
indices. There are very few studies though that analysed the influence of anthropogenic heat and urban
design on microclimate and individual perception of thermal comfort, with the goal of developing the
guidelines for designing more thermally comfortable urban spaces.
Some projects studied thermal comfort in urban spaces in different climates, including a Nordic
city [11], hot and humid Taiwan [12], and Mediterranean [13]. Combining the measurements of
climate parameters with interviews of people, these studies gained a good insight into the factors
influencing thermal perception and behaviour. They analysed place usage and human behaviour based
on discrete choice of actions, but did not create a generic simulation framework for modelling other
places and testing different scenarios.
Several studies took into account real pedestrian flows, for example the authors of [14] proposed a
data-driven navigation application for minimization of pedestrian exposure to stressful heat. It
however does not model the climate or pedestrian behaviour in urban areas. In [15] the authors
modelled pedestrian flows in Switzerland and Singapore, and investigated the impact of pollution on
pedestrian health. However, thermal environmental parameters were not considered.
Our research is conducted within the Cooler Calmer Singapore project in ETH Future Cities
Laboratory, aimed at providing the architects and urban planners with a design-simulation tool for
assessing existing urban spaces and new urban designs in terms of outdoor thermal comfort, with the
final goal of formulating the principles of thermally comfortable urban design.
The simulation platform includes three components:
City, Climate, and People (see Figure 1). The detailed City
and Climate models [16] take into account heat exhaust from
air conditioners and vehicles to calculate precise distribution
of climatic parameters in space and time. The third critical
component, modelling people behaviour, is the topic of our
research. It will allow us to analyse urban space as a place
used, perceived and experienced by people. This modelling
component takes into account the space function (e.g. sports,
dining, or transit), travel demand, people movement, thermal
perception and thermal adaptation in space. Finally, we will
be able to formulate a measure of outdoor thermal comfort
for public spaces as perceived by people.
This paper describes the ‘human’ component of the
urban microclimate simulation platform, the models of Figure 1. Components and models of the
urban microclimate simulation platform of
pedestrian adaptive behaviour in a hot urban space, and the the Cooler Calmer Singapore project.

	

Valentin Melnikov et al. / Procedia Computer Science 108C (2017) 185–194

first simulation results in three single-agent scenarios. The paper is organized as follows: Section 2
reviews the basic principles of thermal adaptation and levels of human behaviour, Section 3 describes
our models of the thermal adaptive human behaviour, Section 4 demonstrates simulation results, and
Section 5 concludes the paper.

2 Adaptive behaviour overview
Adaptation of people to the environment is found everywhere. The most obvious is navigation in
space: obstacles and collision avoidance. Other examples of adaptive behaviour are: seeking shelter
from the rain under the trees, or going to green parks on a sunny day, or escape from dangerous areas
in case of flood [17] or other emergency situations. In this paper, we consider thermal adaptation of
people in hot and wet climate, i.e. adjustments made by the people in their normal outdoors behaviour
to reduce exposure to heat.

2.1 Thermal adaptation
People can adapt to the thermal environment in many different ways, which are usually classified
into physical adaptation (implying change in behaviour) and physiological adaptation (implying
change in physiological thermoregulation [18]). Adaptive behaviour is therefore a physical adaptation,
which can be reactive (adapting to the environment) and interactive (adaptation of the environment).
Interactive adaptation is almost absent in outdoor environments, unlike indoors, because urban
environment rarely allows modification. Clothing and physiological metabolic adaptation to heat are
not considered here, because these types of adaptation are inherent to the climate and are restricted in
variation while people perform their activities in a particular space. The remaining type of physical
adaptation is spatial variation, which therefore is the main objective of this study.
Authors of [18], [19] demonstrate that psychological adaptation of people to outdoor spaces
influences significantly their thermal perception of space and is governed by such factors as
naturalness, expectations, time of exposure and perceived control. In the studies of outdoor spaces in
Cambridge, it was found that the percentage of dissatisfied people was 7 times less than predicted by
the Predicted Mean Vote technique (13% found versus 91% predicted). That tells that psychological
factors shall be taken into account in assessing thermal comfort in outdoor environments.

2.2 Levels and models of pedestrian behaviour
Pedestrian behaviour is usually classified in 3 levels: strategic, tactical and operational [20]. In the
strategic level, pedestrians decide on their goals and activities. In the tactical level, they plan locations
and schedule activities. In the operational level, they perform the actual transition between locations.
According to this classification, our study is considering pedestrian behaviour on operational level,
assuming that the selected goals and schedules bring pedestrians into the studied urban areas.
Assessment of public spaces in terms of their thermal comfort for activities different from walking, i.e.
implementation of strategic and tactical behaviour levels is the topic of our future work.
We define two sublevels within the operational level: reactive and proactive levels, similar to those
from general classification of animal behaviour [21]. Reactive behaviour (also known as steering
behaviour [22]) responds to the movement in space, while complying with a set of rules, such as path
following, collision avoidance, cohesion, alignment, etc. The proactive level is responsible for
planning and motivated travel decisions. In this work, it is restricted to the route choice. Table 1
describes the levels of pedestrian behaviour we consider and the models traditionally used to simulate
this behaviour.

187

Valentin Melnikov et al. / Procedia Computer Science 108C (2017) 185–194

188	

Table 1. Levels of pedestrian behaviour and corresponding models.

Behaviour
level
Proactive
Reactive

Behaviour activities

Models

Route choice and dynamic update
(negotiating obstacles, cost
minimization)
Path following,
Collision avoidance

Path finding algorithms, (Dijkstra, A*) with
custom cost functions and heuristic;
Vision models
Rule based [22], [32];
Social Force Model [31];
Reciprocal Velocity Obstacles (RVO) [17], [23]

3 Models of pedestrian thermal adaptive behaviour
We model three most important ways of pedestrian thermal adaptation: speed adaptation, thermal
attraction/repulsion and vision-motivated route alternation. These models are based on general
knowledge of human behaviour and on experimentally observed effects. Here we assume that the
spatial distribution of a Physiologically Equivalent Temperature PET(x,y,time) [7] is known (measured
or calculated by a detailed CFD model).
These behavioural models are then incorporated into the agent-based simulations, where we used
the Reciprocal Velocity Obstacles (RVO) model for agent navigation and collision avoidance [23].
The RVO2 library was employed, as it allows velocity vector updates at every time step. The
behavioural model rules are therefore used to re-calculate the agent’s velocity vector, which is then
passed on to the RVO simulation engine.

3.1 Speed adaptation model
Walking speed is affected by several factors of the environment, such as crowd density, surface
slope, gender, age and even music playing in the person’s earphones [24]. According to an extensive
study of walking speed factors [25], an increase of speed was observed not only while people go down
the slope but also up the slope, which brings us to conclusion that people speed up to pass the
stressing/disrupting areas faster. This conclusion is supported by a study performed in Canada [26],
where significantly higher walking speeds were observed at -15 ºC, compared to those observed at
15 ºC (1.43 m/s versus 1.23 m/s). For temperatures above 15 ºC, the speed slightly increased again, to
1.28 m/s at 25 ºC. People walk faster at temperatures outside their comfortable range, to escape the
uncomfortable area as soon as possible. The exact values of mean and variance of walking speeds in
Singapore will be measured in the experimental studies. In this work, we assume the following values:
Vcomf =1.2 m/s (4.3 km/hour), Vmax=1.65 m/s (5.9 km/hour). The comfortable feels-like temperature
= 28 ºC.
We define an adaptive walking speed as a function of experienced PET, where the speed linearly
. In this study, only hot
grows from Vcomf to Vmax as PET exceeds the comfortable value
climate is modelled, therefore cold temperatures are not considered. To avoid unrealistically high
accelerations, the acceleration/deceleration rates are restricted to 0.1 m/s 2 per time step.
, where

otherwise

(1)

	

Valentin Melnikov et al. / Procedia Computer Science 108C (2017) 185–194

189

3.2 Reactive thermal attraction model
Perceived air temperature can vary in space with no obvious visual signals, such as shade, trees or
water bodies. It may be due to the winds, drafts or air-conditioning (both cool air and hot exhausts
from the cooling units). People sense temperature by their skin receptors and accurately estimate
spatial gradients (e.g. it is cooler to the left). This ability to perceive temperature difference is
surprisingly precise: as shown in [27], humans can sense a difference of 0.005 ºC by arm, and even
smaller difference by forehead. This perceived difference can motivate pedestrians to deviate from a
straight pathway towards a cooler area. This will result in a curved path, different from the shortest
line. The shape of this curve is governed by 4 parameters: sensitivity for thermal stimulus, current
thermal comfort, admissible deviation angle, and sensation radius (approximately a half of the
shoulder width).
To implement this reactive thermal attraction, we assume that pedestrians can sense PET by their
arms at the side of the body, or 0.4 m to the left and to the right from the agent movement direction
and
). The agent then compares it to the currently experienced PET in the centre and
(
deviates from the direct trajectory by an angle
according to a stimulus value
and
sensitivity to the thermal stimulus θ:
,

where

(2)

3.3 Proactive vision-motivated route planning model
At the proactive level, pedestrians may recalculate the cost of possible future paths based on the
new factors encountered [28]. These factors influencing the travel cost are obstacles, crowdedness or
even attractive shops [29]. From different studies [30] and from our own experience it follows that
visible thermal properties of space, such as sun/shade or greenery, are factors taken into account by
pedestrians while evaluating the path attractiveness. Parameters governing the choice of a modified
route are the current thermal comfort, expected thermal stress costs of travelling along the shortest but
hot path, and expected travel time/distance cost of a detour from the shortest path along a more
attractive route.
We model this type of behaviour as vision-based cost estimation. Given the current goal, an agent
looks to the left and right within a certain angle ω (see Figure 2). This angle depends on the current
thermal comfort (or how urgent it is to cool down). Then the region of possible paths is processed by
the agent and alternative paths are weighted according to the personal cost function. This function
depends on path length, ratios of route parts of certain type (e.g. sun, shade, grass) and coefficients
relating the cost of walking in this type of environment to the cost of walking in some reference
conditions (e.g. shade). In case of only two types of visible thermal zones, e.g. sun and shade, we
, and the
define to be the cost function (3) dependent on path length , ratio of a shady path
. Finally, an
cost multiplier of travelling a unit distance in the sun compared to travelling in shade,
alternative path minimizing the cost is selected and a new trajectory is planned.




(3)

190	

Valentin Melnikov et al. / Procedia Computer Science 108C (2017) 185–194

Figure 2. Proactive path planning: regions of searching for an optimal path at two different angles of vision ω.

3.4 Experience-motivated route alternation model
In our daily life, we are continuously gaining experience that helps us avoiding discomfort in the
future. In addition to the simple vision-motivated decisions, people are building more complex
decision chains based on their intelligence and memory. For example, if we need to go around a half
of a building in a sunny day then we can easily predict which side of the building is shady before we
actually see it. Or we may remember that one side can offer a nice tree canopy above the pathway. Or
in the end of the day, after the sunset, we can calculate which side has been shady for the past few
hours and is therefore cooler. To model this in the future, we will need also extra agent properties
(age, heat resistance, etc.) and date and time to calculate the sun position and shady areas.

3.5 Heat stress accumulation model
To assess the effect of each type of adaptation we use two measures of "heat stress": the
over the travel time :
accumulated amount of heat stress and the average stress
where
(4)

4 Simulation results
To test the implementation of thermal adaptive behaviour rules integrated into the general walking
behaviour, we designed 3 simple scenarios: reactive speed adaptation and thermal attraction, and
proactive vision-motivated route planning.

4.1 Speed adaptation simulation results
For demonstration of the speed variation behaviour, we used a quasi-one-dimensional stripe of 200
meters with 5 zones of different length with a varying value of PET. The agent is travelling from left
to right, crossing these different thermal zones (see Figure 3). Agent’s PET thermal perception is
updated to a new value instantaneously, i.e. the change from one value of PET to another is a step
function. The results of speed adaptation are shown in Figure 3. The table inset shows that speed
adaptation reduced the amount of accumulated heat stress by 20%, and the average is reduced only by
8% (because travel time reduced with the speed increase in hot areas).

	

Valentin Melnikov et al. / Procedia Computer Science 108C (2017) 185–194

Figure 3. Simulation result of pedestrian speed adaptation in hot areas. The agent moves straight through five
areas with different "feels-like" temperatures (PET), increasing the speed in hot regions to get to the comfortably
cool area faster.

4.2 Reactive thermal attraction simulation results
To demonstrate reactive adaptive behaviour, the following simulation setup is used: twodimensional area 200 m by 50 m, PET linearly increases from 26 ºC to 36 ºC along Y-direction (see
Figure 4). Several agents are travelling from left to right from the same origin to the same destination
(the shortest path would be parallel to X-axis). Agents feel the temperature 0.4 metre to the left and to
the right and adjust their direction towards a cooler area. Parameters governing the resulting trajectory
degrees) and sensitivity to the
of agents are the maximum angle of deviation from direct path (
cooling stimuli (θ). Figure 4 shows how these parameters affect the curvature of the path. The longest
path is taken by the agent with the largest deviation angle and highest sensitivity (smallest θ).
=14°
The table inset in Figure 4 shows that the accumulated heat stress of the agent with
and θ =0.0 °Cǡ is 73% lower than that of walking straight through the hot area. Adding speed
adaptation to the trajectory change further reduces the heat stress by 2%. As the agent deviates to a
cooler place, it uses less speed adaptation, thus the contribution of speed adaptation in heat stress
reduction is rather small. Agents are responsive to cool stimulus only when they are experiencing
temperature higher than comfortable; we can see that the red trajectory becomes parallel to X-axis
once the agent reaches a comfortable PETcomf =28 ºC. This trajectory also demonstrates the agent’s
perception of heat: it is not returning to the destination until the very last moment, to minimize the
heat stress.

Figure 4. Simulated thermal attraction behaviour of pedestrians with different sets of parameters. Table inset:
"No adaptation" corresponds to the straight line; SA is speed adaptation along the straight line; TA is thermal
attraction trajectory with
=14° and θ =0.0 °C; TA+SA is a combination of speed and trajectory adaptation.

191

Valentin Melnikov et al. / Procedia Computer Science 108C (2017) 185–194

192	

4.3 Proactive route planning simulation results
Simulation of vision-motivated proactive path planning was performed in a rectangular
environment of 200 by 100 metres. There are 3 shady regions, for simplicity we assume that these
shades are produced by the sun screens installed in many pedestrian zones in Singapore. The rest is
heated by the scorching sun. There are no obstacles, so the agents are free to choose any trajectory
they consider optimal. Figure 5 demonstrates the pathways of agents with a plan to go from side to
side (Figure 5, left) and from corner to corner (right). The smartest tactics is to go directly to the shade
and move in the shade as long as possible (that is, while it still lies within the region of possible
paths). While building alternative paths, the agents consider each shaded region in their vision and
calculate an optimal path within this shade. Then all possible combinations of up to 3 shades are
evaluated by minimizing the cost function. Finally, a path with the minimal cost is selected. Figure 5
demonstrates that for different origin-destination pairs as well as cost functions, different alternatives
will be chosen. People in real life tend to keep some clearance from the edge of shade. This is taken
into account in the model, and all alternative paths go with a 3-meter margin from the edge of shade.
This parameter can be set different for individual pedestrians to create more variation in paths and to
make them more realistic.

Figure 5. Simulation of vision-motivated route alternation: alternatives and their costs for different goals and cost
coefficients
penalizing the time of being exposed to the sun.

5 Conclusions and future work
Thermal comfort of outdoor environments should be analysed from the perspective of individual
users of space, able to perceive environment thermally and to adapt to it both reactively and
proactively. This paper reports on the first steps to construct a ‘human’ component of outdoor thermal
comfort modelling platform. We propose four models of thermal adaptive behaviour of pedestrians.
Three of these adaptive strategies with various model parameters have been studied and evaluated in
terms of the accumulated and average heat stresses. These numerical studies will help designing reallife experiments, which in turn will calibrate the behavioural models. By performing and analysing
these experiments, we will:
1.
2.
3.
4.

Prove or reject the existence of discussed types of behaviour;
Calibrate model parameters;
Find other behaviour patterns;
Understand the principles of complex experience-motivated behaviour (described in this
paper, but not implemented yet).

	

Valentin Melnikov et al. / Procedia Computer Science 108C (2017) 185–194

Modelling the physiological thermoregulation system of each agent will allow us to obtain a more
realistic measure of thermal (dis)comfort of people with individual characteristics like height, weight,
metabolic rate, time of exposure and thermal history of that person. That will also provide a better
measure of accumulated heat stress and help developing more precise models, e.g. taking into account
the fact that speeding up increases internal heat production due to the higher energy consumption.
After coupling our pedestrian simulation engine with the other components of the project designsimulation-loop tools, city planners can evaluate urban spaces in terms of thermal comfort of people
using those environments.

Acknowledgements
This research is financially supported by the Russian Science Foundation, Agreement #14–21–00137
(15.08.2014). Valentin Melnikov conducted research at the Future Cities Laboratory at the SingaporeETH Centre, which was established collaboratively between ETH Zurich and Singapore's National
Research Foundation (FI 370074016) under its Campus for Research Excellence and Technological
Enterprise programme.

References
[1] United Nations, World Urbanization Prospects, New York, 2014.
[2] J. M. Robine, S. L. K. Cheung, S. Le Roy, H. Van Oyen, C. Griffiths, J. P. Michel, F. R.
Herrmann, Death toll exceeded 70,000 in Europe during the summer of 2003, Comptes rendus
biologies, V. 331, N 2, pp. 171-178, 2008.
[3] M. Roth, Urban Heat Islands, in Handbook of Environmental Fluid Dynamics, Volume Two:
Systems, Pollution, Modeling, and Measurements, H. J. S. Fernando, Ed., CRC Press, pp. 143159, 2012.
[4] M. Santamouris, Heat Island Research in Europe: The State of the Art, Advances in Building
Energy Research, V. 1, N 1, pp. 123-150, 2007.
[5] National Environment Agency, Singapore, Weather Statistics, 2017.
http://www.nea.gov.sg/weather-climate/climate/weather-statistics
[6] M. Roth, W. T. L. Chow, Temporal dynamics of the urban heat island of Singapore, International
Journal of Climatology, N 26, pp. 2243-2260, 2006.
[7] P. Höppe, he physiological equivalent temperature – a universal index for the biometeorological
assessment of the thermal environment, International journal of Biometeorology, V. 43, N 2, pp.
71-75, 1999.
[8] G. Jendritzky, R. De Dear, G. Havenith, UTCI — why another thermal index?, International
journal of biometeorology, V. 56, N 3, pp. 421-428, 2012.
[9] A. Matzarakis, F. Rutz, H. Mayer, Modelling radiation fluxes in simple and complex
environments—application of the RayMan model, International journal of biometeorology, V.
51, N 4, pp. 323-334, 2007.
[10] F. Lindberg, B. Holmer, S. Thorsson, SOLWEIG 1.0–Modelling spatial variations of 3D radiant
fluxes and mean radiant temperature in complex urban settings, International Journal of
Biometeorology, V. 52, N 7, pp. 697-713, 2008.
[11] I. Eliasson, I. Knez, U. Westerberg, S. Thorsson, F. Lindberg, Climate and behaviour in a Nordic
city, Landscape and Urban Planning, V. 82, N 1, pp. 72-84, 2007.
[12] T.-P. Lin, Thermal perception, adaptation and attendance in a public square in hot and humid
regions, Building and environment, V. 44, N 10, pp. 2017-2026, 2009.

193

194	

Valentin Melnikov et al. / Procedia Computer Science 108C (2017) 185–194

[13] M. Nikolopoulou, S. Lykoudis, Use of outdoor spaces and microclimate in a Mediterranean urban
area, Building and environment, V. 42, N 10, pp. 3691-3707, 2007.
[14] C. Dang, M. Iwai, Y. Tobe, K. Umeda, K. Sezaki, A framework for pedestrian comfort navigation
using multi-modal environmental sensors, Pervasive and Mobile Computing, V. 9, N 3, pp. 421436, 2013.
[15] G. Aschwanden, Health and Place: an analysis of the built environment’s impact on walking
behavior and health. Doctoral Thesis, ETH-Zürich, 2014.
[16] M. Xu, M. Brülisauer, M. Berger, Development of a new urban heat island modelling tool: Kent
Vale case study, Proceedings of International Conference in Computational Science 2017.
Procedia Computer Science, 2017.
[17] A. Mordvintsev, V. Krzhizhanovskaya, M. Lees and P. Sloot, Simulation of City Evacuation
Coupled to Flood Dynamics, in Pedestrian and Evacuation Dynamics 2012, pp. 485-499, 2014.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-02447-9_40
[18] M. Nikolopoulou, N. Baker and K. Steemers, Thermal comfort in urban spaces: different forms of
adaptation, in International Conference: The Cities of Tomorrow, Barcelona, 1999
[19] M. Nkolopoulou, K. Steemers, Thermal comfort and psychological adaptation as a guide for
designing urban spaces, Energy and Buildings, V. 35, pp. 95-101, 2003.
[20] S. P. Hoogendoorn, P. H. L. Bovy, Pedestrian route-choice and activity scheduling theory and
models, Transportation Research Part B: Methodological, V. 38, N 2, pp. 169-190, 2004.
[21] D. J. McFarland, Oxford companion to animal behavior, Oxford University Press, 1981.
[22] C. Reynolds, Steering behaviors for autonomous characters, 1999.
http://www.red3d.com/cwr/steer/gdc99/
[23] J. Van den Berg, M. Lin, D. Manocha, Reciprocal velocity obstacles for real-time multi-agent
navigation, Robotics and Automation, pp. 1928-1935, 2008.
[24] M. Franěk, L. Van Noorden, L. Režný, Tempo and walking speed with music in the urban
context, Frontiers in psychology, V. 5, p. 1361, 2014.
[25] K. Finnis and D. Walton, Field observations of factors influencing walking speeds, in 2nd
International conference on sustainability engineering and science, 2007
[26] P. Gupta, Y. Li and G. Fernie, Effects of temperature and time of day on pedestrian walking
speed, in International Conference on Aging, Disability and Independence, St. Petersburg, FL,
2008
[27] J. D. Hardy, T. W. Oppel, Studies in temperature sensation. III. The sensitivity of the body to heat
and the spatial summation of the end organ responses, Journal of Clinical Investigation, V. 16, N
4, pp. 533-540, 1937.
[28] G. Antonini, M. Bierlaire, M. Weber, Discrete choice models of pedestrian walking behavior,
Transportation Research Part B: Methodological, V. 40, N 8, pp. 667-687, 2006.
[29] A. Borgers, H. Timmermans, A model of pedestrian route choice and demand for retail facilities
within inner‐city shopping areas, Geographical analysis, V. 18, N 2, pp. 115-128, 1986.
[30] S. Watanabe, J. Ishii, Effect of outdoor thermal environment on pedestrians' behavior selecting a
shaded area in a humid subtropical region, Building and Environment, V. 95, pp. 32-41, 2016.
[31] D. Helbing, P. Molnar, Social force model for pedestrian dynamics, Physical review E, V. 51, N
5, 1995.
[32] M. Moussaïd, D. Helbing, G. Theraulaz, How simple rules determine pedestrian behavior and
crowd disasters, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, V. 108, N 17, pp. 6884-6888,
2011.

