Available online at www.sciencedirect.com

ScienceDirect
Procedia Computer Science 108C (2017) 2478–2487

International Conference on Computational Science, ICCS 2017, 12-14 June 2017,
Zurich, Switzerland

Clustering
Clustering of
of comorbidities
comorbidities based
based on
on conditional
conditional
probabilities
probabilities of
of diseases
diseases in
in hypertensive
hypertensive patients
patients
Nikita Bukhanov11, Marina Balakhontceva11, Alexey Krikunov11, Arthur
Nikita Bukhanov , Marina Balakhontceva , Alexey Krikunov , Arthur1,2
Sabirov11, Anna Semakova11, Nadezhda Zvartau1,2
1,2 and Aleksandra Konradi1,2
1
Sabirov , Anna Semakova
, Nadezhda
Zvartau
andFederation
Aleksandra Konradi
ITMO University,
St. Petersburg,
Russian
1
ITMO University,
Petersburg,
Russian
FederationRussian Federation
Almazov North-West
MedicalSt.
Research
Centre,
St. Petersburg,
Federal Almazov North-West Medical Research Centre, St. Petersburg, Russian Federation

2
Federal
2

Abstract
Abstract
Treatment of chronic diseases, such as arterial hypertension, is always a difficult
Treatment
of chronic As
diseases,
such as
arterial hypertension,
is always
difficult
decision
for cardiologist.
the majority
of hypertensive
patients are
of olderaage,
they
decision
cardiologist.
the majority
of hypertensive
are of
age, they
also havefor
many
comorbidAsdiseases.
Optimized
treatment patients
is supposed
toolder
be targeted
to
also
have many
comorbid
diseases. Optimized
treatmentofis study
supposed
to find
be targeted
to
the specific
cluster
of comorbidities.
The objective
is to
effective
the
specific
cluster
of
comorbidities.
The
objective
of
study
is
to
find
effective
algorithms for clustering of comorbidities in hypertensive patients. Hierarchical
algorithms
clustering
of comorbidities
in hypertensive
patients.
Hierarchical
structure of for
diseases,
their types
and groups was
extracted from
text descriptions
in
structure
of
diseases,
their
types
and
groups
was
extracted
from
text
descriptions
in
EHR database of Federal Almazov North-West Medical Research Centre. Three
EHR
database
of
Federal
Almazov
North-West
Medical
Research
Centre.
Three
approaches were tested to find connections between comorbidities: frequency analysis,
approaches
were mining
tested toand
findBayesian
connections
between
comorbidities:
frequencywas
analysis,
association rules
networks.
Robust
cluster of diseases
found
association
rules
mining and Bayesian
networks. musculoskeletal
Robust cluster ofand
diseases
wassystem
found
and
contains
cardiovascular,
endocrinological,
nervous
and contains
musculoskeletal
and
nervous
system
groups.
Furthercardiovascular,
research will beendocrinological,
focused on investigating
this cluster
at the
next level
of
groups.
Further
research willtime
be focused
on of
investigating
this into
cluster
at the next level of
hierarchy
and incorporating
scale data
patients’ visits
analysis.
hierarchy and incorporating time scale data of patients’ visits into analysis.

© 2017 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V.
Peer-review under responsibility of the scientific committee of the International Conference on Computational Science

1 Introduction
1 Introduction

Arterial hypertension is supposed to have life-long treatment for the patients and vast variety of
Arterial
hypertension
supposed
have life-long
treatment
forhave
the patients
and vast
variety
of
possible
therapies.
On theis other
hand,todifferent
kinds of
treatment
no significant
bias
in their
possible
therapies.
On
the
other
hand,
different
kinds
of
treatment
have
no
significant
bias
in
their
effectiveness, because the recommendations were obtained based on time-constrained clinical trials
effectiveness,
becausesize.
the recommendations
weretoobtained
based
on general
time-constrained
clinical trials
with small population
That makes them hard
extrapolate
to the
clinical practice.
withBeing
smallapopulation
size.
That
makes
them
hard
to
extrapolate
to
the
general
clinical
practice.
chronic disease, hypertension affects 65 million adults in the US, or about one in three
Beingaged
a chronic
disease,
hypertension
affectsand
65 control
million of
adults
in the US,are
or important,
about one because
in three
persons
18 years
[1]. The
identification
hypertension
persons
aged
18
years
[1].
The
identification
and
control
of
hypertension
are
important,
because
effective treatment can reduce the risks of coronary artery disease, stroke, heart failure, and other
effective
treatment
can reduce
the risks isofacoronary
artery disease,
stroke,Cardiovascular
heart failure, and
other
complications
for which
hypertension
well-established
risk factor.
diseases,
complications
whichhypertension,
hypertension and
is aheart
well-established
including
heartfor
disease,
failure, alongrisk
withfactor.
stroke,Cardiovascular
continue to bediseases,
leading
including
heart [2].
disease, hypertension, and heart failure, along with stroke, continue to be leading
causes of death
causes of death [2].

1877-0509 © 2017 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V.
Peer-review under responsibility of the scientific committee of the International Conference on Computational Science
10.1016/j.procs.2017.05.073

	

Nikita Bukhanov et al. / Procedia Computer Science 108C (2017) 2478–2487

Evidence-based medicine is supported by the results of clinical trials. During clinical trial patients
are chose by severe inclusion criteria, treatment is supervised by monitor according to the time-plan.
That makes difficult to extrapolate the results to the whole population of patients. Therefore, there is
no information about efficiency, adhere events and side effects during long-term treatment for patients
with comorbid diseases.
The effectiveness of different kinds of treatment could be evaluated through the analysis of
Electronic Health Records (EHR). It can be useful for estimation of different risks, including factors
associated with comorbid diseases and treatment. Risk prediction model constructed from EHR could
yield more accurate and generalizable risk predictions because even relatively specific subpopulations (e.g., patients with multiple comorbidities) are likely to be well-represented in a large
database [3].
Applying of clustering methods in the analysis of EHR will confirm not only the certain links
between comorbidities that already used in medical practice. This gives an opportunity to get novel
insights about the nature of particular disease, its predictors and new aspects of effectiveness/safety
issues. Personalized recommendations could be formed for most frequent clusters of patients along
with sensitivity analysis of influential factors for the disease progression.

2 Related works
Methods for acquiring new knowledge about treatment outcomes based on an analysis of medical
data are widely used. Given the complexity of the cardiovascular system and of cardiovascular
diseases, systems-based approaches are likely to play an increasingly important role in elucidating the
higher-order interactions underlying traits such as atherosclerosis, cardiac hypertrophy, heart failure,
and arrhythmias. These approaches should have translational value in giving biological context to the
multitude of genetic variants reported to be associated with disease and in providing a framework for
the development of pharmacological treatments [4, 5].
A wide variety of studies on disease comorbidity (the simultaneous occurrence of two or more
distinct diseases) has shown that multiple risk factors cannot reliably be considered in isolation. Cooccurring factors can have a synergistic effect, leading to unexpectedly high risk. And statistical
clustering of comorbid diseases was surprisingly strong, even among young subjects [6].
A data-driven hypothesis generation approach creates a paradigm shift in health-care by leading to
discovery of new and often surprising trends in clinical outcomes. Identification of non-obvious
correlations and causal relationships may lead to a significant mitigation of side effects, need for
additional medications, reduction of hospitalizations, decrease in unnecessary care, loss of income for
patients, and eventually in the overall change in clinical practice [7].
The purpose of study in [8] was to clarify to what extent one or several parental histories of
hypertension, diabetes and dyslipidemia increase the risk for the clustering of these disorders when
parental history is divided into paternal and maternal history. Different approaches of association and
clustering of risk factors with the risk of hypertension in office workers and screed cohort were
undertaked [9, 10].
The results of the processing approximately 70 000 EHR in hypertensive patients presents in [1113]. The analysis allowed finding common clusters of patients, evaluate the variability of the
parameters for the past five years and predict the stability of the identified trends for the next 20 years.
Specific age and gender are considered to be independent risk factors for hypertension and various
cardiovascular and other complications. During the last five years, referred hypertensive patients
became older mostly due to increase of proportion of patients over 65 years. Male hypertensive
patients constituted 35.5% and were substantially younger than female population [11].

2479

2480	

Nikita Bukhanov et al. / Procedia Computer Science 108C (2017) 2478–2487

3 Problem statement
The organization maintains administrative and clinical electronic databases containing information
on member demographics and eligibility, inpatient admissions, pharmacy prescriptions and dispenses,
outpatient contacts, cumulative “problem lists,” outside claims and referrals, laboratory tests, and
clinical measurements (eg, body weight, blood pressure, blood glucose, and lipid levels). All of these
databases can be linked through unique health record numbers assigned to each member at the time of
his or her first enrollment in the health plan, and all such data can be arrayed in chronological order to
provide a detailed longitudinal profile of all medical and pharmacy services used by each plan
member [8].
In clinical practice of Federal Almazov North-West Medical Centre there are significant number
of out-patients with high-blood pressure, who are visiting cardiologist occasionally depending on their
condition, social status, severity of disease and even their mood. That fact forms the database of EHR
with sparse measurements and unequal timestamps. Database has huge amount of structured health
records. More than 500k people are registered in it. Medical information system helps to support more
than 200k out-patients and around 35k in-patients each year. The total number of record is about 100
million, which takes 500 Gb hard drive space. More than 90k records of patients with arterial
hypertension were extracted from database covering the period from 2010 till 2016 for analysis.
There are countless models and methodologies for analyzing data, but a large number of them fall
into four basic classes: categoric, cross-sectional, longitudinal, and time-to-event. Categorical data is
analyzed by calculating various types of correlation coefficients on frequency counts organized in
contingency tables, and sometimes this is all that can be done for a large population.
In addition to categoric variables (such as demographic and insurance information) of which
binary variables (such as diagnosis and procedure codes) are a special case, there are numeric
variables (such as lab values and drug dosages). There are often complex interactions between
variables, and ignoring these amounts to ignoring heterogeneous treatment effects.
A typical patient record is a time series of visits. The outcomes observed during any visit may be
correlated with outcomes during previous visits by the same patient (autocorrelation), there may be
individual-by-covariate interactions, and a confounding effect of some individuals having more
datapoints than others [14].
Concurrently, there is an opportunity to obtain data about hundreds of thousands of patients with
different comorbid diseases through medical information systems (Fig. 1). Typical profile from EHR
of particular patient in medical information system of Federal Almazov Medical Research center
includes blood pressure measurements, demographic data and risk factors.

Figure 1. Typical profile from patient's EHR of Federal Almazov Medical Research center.

	

Nikita Bukhanov et al. / Procedia Computer Science 108C (2017) 2478–2487

Fig. 2 shows that diabetes, dyslipidemia and hypertension, often cluster together, which may more
readily cause cardiovascular diseases. This result was prepared through analysis of EHR from medical
information system of Federal Almazov Medical Research center. The clustering of these
cardiovascular risk factors has become known as the metabolic syndrome or insulin resistance
syndrome. People who have close relatives with hypertension, diabetes and dyslipidemia are likely to
develop these diseases themselves, and familial aggregation of these diseases has been well reported.

Figure 2. Frequency distribution of comorbid diseases for hypertensive patients. Information
obtained from EHR database, containing >33k records. Dyslip – dyslipidemia, Diab – diabetes, IGT –
Impaired Glucose Tolerance
The main goals, that clustering of comorbidities and patients’ data can resolve include:
 Distinguish the main clusters of patients based on demographic data, risk factors and
comorbid diseases.
 Combine recommendations for diagnostics and treatment of diseases, which form most
frequent clusters. Point the intersections and contradictions at different levels:
symptomatology, diagnostics, therapy, including pharmacological drugs interaction
within different classes with their influence to effectiveness and safety.
 Compare the influence (based on clinical trials results) and effectiveness (general
practice) which help to find predictors of response for treatment depending on profile of
patient, clustering results and combination of recommendations.

4 Methods
4.1 Text mining for codes of diseases
Clinical text is the most abundant data type, but is also the most difficult to analyse
computationally. It is highly heterogeneous, does not always conform to normal grammar and is rich
in author- and domain-specific idiosyncrasies, acronyms and abbreviations, as well as spelling and
typing errors. The context is complicated by many negations or references to different subjects, and
assessments are often tentative or uncertain. Free text allows the flexibility to express case nuances

2481

Nikita Bukhanov et al. / Procedia Computer Science 108C (2017) 2478–2487

2482	

and clinical reasoning; this flexibility is valued by clinicians and is not easily replaced by structured
reporting formats that are often considered inflexible and time consuming [15]. Although the most
common approach in studies to investigate the patterns of co-occurrence of medical comorbidities is
based on International Classification of Diseases (ICD) codes [16], deriving structured information
about patient phenotypes from clinical text generally requires named entities or concepts in the text to
be recognized and mapped to codes in a relevant controlled vocabulary. The procedure performed in
this study includes several steps:
1.

Pre-processing and filtering data. Clinical text in the field ‘Diagnosis’ in outpatients EHRs was
parsed by the names of entities: ‘Primary diseases’, ‘Complications’, ‘Comorbid diseases’.

2.

Vocabulary of comorbid diseases. Cardiologist based on extracted keywords from previous step
developed vocabulary of comorbid diseases. That vocabulary represents classification of
encoded diseases with hierarchical structure of diseases codes (Fig. 3).

3.

Codes extraction. Every group of diseases was mapped to the specific code using vocabulary.

Figure 3. Hierarchical structure of diseases codes, extracted from database of Federal Almazov North-West
Medical Centre

4.2 Association rules
Association rule mining is a rule-based machine learning method for discovering hidden
relationships in large databases. Apriori algorithm, proposed in [6], is an association rule mining
technique that was initially designed for market basket analysis, yet the widespread of EHRs allowed
to implement such techniques for medical purposes.

	

Nikita Bukhanov et al. / Procedia Computer Science 108C (2017) 2478–2487

Among them are: data driven method for developing a knowledge base, which relates drugs to
pathological conditions through their therapeutic indications [17], association rule mining approach
for event sequences to predict patient’s future condition based on his past condition sequence [18],
system-prototype for Clinical State Correlation Prediction (CSCP) based [19].
Base concepts of Association Rule Mining algorithms are «support», «confidence» and «lift».
Association rule is defined as an implication
where X and Y are subsets of binary attributes
called items.
Support indicates how frequently the item set appears in a database. The support of X with respect
to T is defined as the proportion of transactions t in the database, which contains item set X:

Confidence indicates how often the rule has been found to be true. The confidence value of a rule
with respect to a set of transactions T, is the proportion of the transactions that contains X
which also contains Y:

Lift is quotient of the posterior and the prior confidence of an association rule:

Apriori algorithm iteratively generates candidate k-itemsets based on previously found (k-1)itemsets. After that, it checks the support of candidates to form frequent k-itemsets. The algorithm
terminates when no further successful extensions are found.

4.3 Bayesian networks
Bayesian networks (BN) are networks in which the connectivity of components is represented by
joint probabilities. For example, in coexpression networks, the correlation of individual components
can indicate functional associations, and causal interactions can be represented as joint probabilities
[4]. For each node, the probability that the variable will be in each possible state given its parents’
states can be calculated based on the frequency observed in a set of training data. It is often
useful/necessary to use a prior distribution for the model parameters, as, without a prior, a possible
configuration that was not seen in the training examples would be incorrectly assigned a zero
probability of ever being observed. (Equally well, these probabilities may be estimated by an expert
and used alongside those learned from data)[20].
Compared to support vector machines or neural networks, Bayesian networks have a clear edge in
interpretability, which is important to the end-users of these prediction models in the healthcare
domain (e.g., physicians and clinical researchers) [3]. Interpretation of the meaning of these
connections depends on specific diagnoses involved. For example, when the source node is diabetes
and the target node is hypertension, the connection likely represents comorbidities at a population
level. When the source is diabetes and the target is neuropathy, the connection likely represents
complications from disease [7].
Vast variety of BN approaches exist, depending of the structure of data. In particular, constrained
Bayesian networks (also defined as Suppes-Bayes Causal Network) account for the conditional

2483

Nikita Bukhanov et al. / Procedia Computer Science 108C (2017) 2478–2487

2484	

dependencies among genomic events, by combining specific priors based on Suppes' theory with a
maximum likelihood-fit procedure (with regularization) [21].
Generally BN is represented by directed acyclic graph (DAG) G, set of random variables X and a
joint probability distribution P. Nodes in G represents some objects in modeling domain and edges
represent direct dependences between nodes. In other words, edge show is one node affects or causes
the other, e.g. if there is arc A -> B, then A causes B, else A and B are independent. X describes
probabilities of different values of objects and can be both discreet and continues random variable, in
our work we consider only discreet case. P sets the joint probability distribution over X:

– value in the node , and
– is the set of parents of node .
Where
To build the BN we need to define structure of the dag G and the set of parameters
for each vertex
. These tasks are called structure and parameters
for each possible value of
learning respectively.
The task of structure learning can be provided by to main groups of structure learning algorithms,
namely score-based and constraint-based algorithms [22]. Score-based algorithms assumes that we
can give a score for each BN with respect to our data that measures how well that BN describes the
data set D. A score-based algorithm attempts to maximize this score. Constraint-based algorithms use
conditional independence tests to test whether two nodes statistically independent or not. More
detailed introduction in BN learning can be found in [23].
Having the Bayesian network structure, we can perform the parameters learning task. We need to
fit the parameters of the local distributions e.g. using maximum likelihood approaches. While we are
talking about discreet distributions these parameters will take the form of conditional probability
tables.
To build more confident BN we used bootstrap model averaging or bagging [24]. Bagging is
computer-based technique when we randomly uniformly and with replacement draw N subsamples
from our data to train N independent models. Then, we can use these models to build one averaged
model. In case of BN to average the model, we need to select arcs of bagging models should be
presented in the resulting graph. For each arc presented in any of N models we can consider some
quantity that shows the strength the arc like empirical frequency over a set of networks learned from
bootstrap samples. Then select only those arcs whose strength is greater than some threshold. To find
the threshold that gives us better results we performed cross-validation over averaged model obtained
with different thresholds.

5 Case Study
Frequency analysis of co-occurrences of codes describing groups of diseases highlighted close
association between cardiovascular and endocrinological groups (Fig. 4). Among another groups
musculoskeletal system is a part of 4 clusters out of 6, which makes it quite a significant contributor.
Although the connection between musculoskeletal system and arterial hypertension is unobvious and
requires additional analysis, it may be explained by the bias in the age of patients.
Neurology, digestive and urinary systems are the rest groups of diseases appeared in results, but
frequency analysis cannot give a clear view of their interconnections and dependencies with
cardiovascular group.

	

Nikita Bukhanov et al. / Procedia Computer Science 108C (2017) 2478–2487

Figure 4. Clusters of comorbidity groups based on frequency analysis. Each of these six clusters represents
more than a thousand patients with corresponding co-occurrences in diagnosis

Additional insights to groups correlation is brought by Apriori results. According to these results,
digestive system group of diseases has strong association with cardiovascular, musculoskeletal and
urinary systems (confidence = 0.655; lift = 1.986). At the same time Neurology group strongly
correlates with cardiovascular, musculoskeletal and endocrinological groups (confidence = 0.726; lift
= 1.527). Thus, two potential clusters could be formed for further investigation and optimization of
treatment.
Bayesian networks extend the view of relationships between deceases after frequency analysis
and association rules mining. Max-Min Hill Climbing (MMHC) algorithm [25] using the Akaike
Information Criterion network score was performed in order to learn the structure of BN. The
averaged network is obtained by performing 200 bagging iterations (Fig. 5).

Figure 5. Structure of the Bayesian network of groups of diseases

2485

Nikita Bukhanov et al. / Procedia Computer Science 108C (2017) 2478–2487

2486	

The emphasis here is stressed on the role of neurology with connections to three most frequent
groups. On the contrary, digestive and urinary systems groups do not have associations between
themselves and even with cardiovascular group. Therefore, cluster containing neurology group is
supposed to be robust cluster according to Bayesian network approach.
Experiments with different thresholds were performed in order to find optimal value for arcs
selection. Results of each experiment were evaluated using 10-fold cross-validation for Bayesian
networks using Log-Likelihood loss function. In accordance with the results of cross-validation the
thresholds 0.65 was selected.

6 Conclusions and Future Works
Three analytical approaches based on frequencies of co-occurrences and conditional probabilities
of comorbid diseases codes resulted in definition of a certain cluster of interconnected groups of
diseases in hypertensive patients. Moreover, few common medical facts received statistical support.
The robust cluster contains cardiovascular, endocrinological, musculoskeletal and nervous system
diseases. Strong and frequent correlation between cardiovascular and endocrinological diseases may
be another proof for insulin resistance syndrome, which consists of hypertension, diabetes and
dyslipidemia. The trend toward an older age of hypertensive patents compared to general population
is supported by the higher prevalence of musculoskeletal diseases in robust cluster of comorbidities.
Further research should be focused on clustering at new detailed level of diseases hierarchy, which
contains subgroups and types of diseases within general groups. Another direction is to incorporate
time scale of outpatients’ visits into consideration. That would require extending the use of Bayesian
networks, implementing hierarchical and dynamic algorithms. From medical point of view, this work
would benefit by describing found clusters using patients’ data as well as filtering constructed
networks by age, gender and risk factors. This will facilitate development of tailored treatment
guidelines according to frequent clusters of comorbidities in hypertensive patients.

Acknowledgments
This research is financially supported by The Russian Scientific Foundation, Agreement #14-1100823 (15.07.2014).

References
[1]. Weycker D et al. Risk-Factor Clustering and Cardiovascular Disease Risk in Hypertensive
Patients. American Journal of Hypertension, 20, 599-607; 2007.
[2]. Go et al. Effective Approach to High Blood Pressure Control. Hypertension; 2015.
[3]. Bandyopadhyay et al. Data mining for censored time-to-event data: a Bayesian network
model for predicting cardiovascular risk from electronic health record data. Data Min Knowl Disc, 29,
1033-1069; 2015.
[4]. Lusis A, Weiss J. Cardiovascular Networks: Systems-Based Approaches to Cardiovascular
Disease. Circulation, 121, 157-170; 2010.
[5]. Chmiel A, Klimek P, Thurner S. Spreading of diseases through comorbidity networks across
life and gender. New Journal of Physics, 16; 2014.
[6]. Agrawal R, Srikant R. Fast Algorithms for Mining Association Rules in Large Databases.
Journal of Computer Science and Technology, 15, 487–499; 1994.

	

Nikita Bukhanov et al. / Procedia Computer Science 108C (2017) 2478–2487

[7]. Vemulapalli et al. Non-obvious correlations to disease management unraveled by Bayesian
artificial intelligence analyses of CMS data. Artificial Intelligence in Medicine, 74, 1–8; 2016.
[8]. Wada et al. Association between parental histories of hypertension, diabetes and
dyslipidemia and the clustering of these disorders in offspring. Preventive Medicine, 42, 358-363;
2006.
[9]. Tozawa M et al. Multiple risk factor clustering of hypertension in a screened cohort. Journal
of Hypertension, 18, 1379-1385; 2000.
[10]. Nakanishi N et al. Multiple Risk Factor Clustering and Risk of Hypertension in Japanese
Male Office Workers. Industrial Health, 41, 327-331; 2003.
[11]. Zvartau N, Krikunov A, Semakova A, Bolgova E, Kovalchuk S, Boukhanovsky A, Konradi
A. Five-year trends in specific risk factors in hypertensive patients referred to specialized
cardiological centre. European Heart Journal, 37, 66-67; 2016.
[12]. N. Zvartau, A. Krikunov, A. Semakova, E. Bolgova, S. Kovalchuk, A. Boukhanovsky, A.O.
Konradi Five-years Trends in Demographic Characteristics of Hypertensive Patients Referred to
Specialized Cardiological Centre: Age and Gender // Journal of Hypertension, Vol 34, e-Supplement
2, 2016, pp. e62-e62;
[13]. N. Zvartau, A. Krikunov, A. Semakova, E. Bolgova, S. Kovalchuk, A. Boukhanovsky, A.
Konradi Prevalence of Diabetes and Lipid Disorders in Hypertension Patients Referred to Specialized
Cardiological Centre: Five-years Trends // Journal of Hypertension, Vol 34, e-Supplement 2, 2016,
pp. e322-e322).
[14]. Bokov et al. Denormalize and Delimit: How not to Make Data Extraction for Analysis More
Complex than Necessary. Procedia Computer Science: ICCS 2016, 80; 2016.
[15]. Jensen P, Jensen L, Brunak S. Mining electronic health records: towards better research
applications and clinical care. Nature Reviews: Genetics, 13; 2012.
[16]. Doshi-Velez F, Ge Y, Kohane I. Comorbidity Clusters in Autism Spectrum Disorders: An
Electronic Health Record Time-Series Analysis. Pediatrics, 54; 2013.
[17]. Severac F et al. Non-redundant association rules between diseases and medications: an
automated method for knowledge base construction. BMC medical informatics and decision making,
15; 2015.
[18]. Davis et al. Time to CARE: a collaborative engine for practical disease prediction. Data
Mining and Knowledge Discovery, 20, 388-415; 2010.
[19]. McCormick T, Rudin C, Madigan D. Bayesian hierarchical rule modeling for predicting
medical conditions. Annals of Applied Statistics, 6, 652–668; 2012.
[20]. Needham C et al. A Primer on Learning in Bayesian Networks for Computational Biology.
PLoS Comput Biol, 8; 2007.
[21]. Ramazzotti D, Graudenzi A, Antoniotti A. Modeling cumulative biological phenomena with
Suppes-Bayes causal networks. Procedia Computer Science: ICCS 2016, 80; 2016.
[22]. Margaritis D. Learning Bayesian network model structure from data. PhD Thesis; 2003.
[23]. Broom B, Do K, Subramanian D. Model averaging strategies for structure learning in
Bayesian networks with limited data. BMC bioinformatics, 13; 2012.
[24]. Friedman N, Goldszmidt M, Wyner A. Data analysis with Bayesian networks: A bootstrap
approach. Proceedings of Uncertainty in artificial intelligence, 196-205; 1999.
[25]. Tsamardinos I, Brown L, Aliferis C. The Max-Min Hill-Climbing Bayesian Network
Structure Learning Algorithm. Machine Learning, 31-78; 2006.

2487

