Available online at www.sciencedirect.com

ScienceDirect
Procedia Computer Science 108C (2017) 2161–2170

International Conference on Computational Science, ICCS 2017, 12-14 June 2017,
Zurich, Switzerland

A Way How to Impart Data Science Skills to Computer
Science
Exemplified
by Skills
OBDA-Systems
A Way
HowStudents
to Impart
Data Science
to Computer
Developmentby OBDA-Systems
Science Students Exemplified
Development
Svetlana Chuprina, Igor Postanogov, and Taisya Kostareva
Perm State University, Bukireva Str. 15, 614990, Perm, Russia

Svetlana
Chuprina, Igor
Postanogov, and Taisya
Kostareva
chuprinas@inbox.ru,
ipostanogov@outlook.com,
tais@nevod.ru
Perm State University, Bukireva Str. 15, 614990, Perm, Russia
chuprinas@inbox.ru, ipostanogov@outlook.com, tais@nevod.ru

Abstract
Nowadays to explore and examine data from a variety of angles to tackle Big Data problems, to devise
Abstract
data-driven solutions to the most pressing challenges, it is necessary to build multidisciplinary students’
Nowadays
to explore
andmethods
examine not
dataonly
fromfor
a variety
of angles
tackle Big
Data problems,
to devise
skills set for
innovative
master’s
in DatatoScience
programs
but in traditional
data-driven
solutions
to the most
challenges,
it is necessary
to build
multidisciplinary
students’
Computer Science
programs
also.pressing
In the paper,
we describe
how teaching
methods
and tools, which
are
skills
for students
innovative
methodsOntology-Based
not only for master’s
in Data
Science
but in traditional
used tosettrain
to develop
Data Access
systems
withprograms
natural language
interface
Computer
Science
programs
In theDegree
paper, students
we describe
how teaching
methods
and tools, with
whichData
are
to relational
databases
helps also.
Master’s
in Computer
Science
to collaborate
used
to train
students tointerdisciplinary
develop Ontology-Based
DatatoAccess
natural
language
Scientists
in real-world
projects and
preparesystems
them forwith
a data
science
career.interface
We use
to relational
databasesinhelps
Master’s Degree
studentsLanguage
in Computer
Sciencemethods
to collaborate
withlexicoData
ontology
engineering
a combination
with Natural
Processing
based on
Scientists
in real-world
interdisciplinary
and to
prepare
them for
a data scienceand
career.
We use
syntactic patterns,
in particular,
to extractprojects
needful data
from
structured,
semi-structured
unstructured
ontology
in atocombination
with Natural
Language
Processing
methods
on lexicodatasets inengineering
a uniform way
analyze real-world
Russian
social networks
related
to newbased
building
area.
syntactic patterns, in particular, to extract needful data from structured, semi-structured and unstructured
© 2017 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V.
datasets
in Data
a uniform
way
to analyze
real-world
Russian
social networks
to new building
Keywords:
Science
Skills,
OBDA-systems,
Natural
Language
Interface, related
Lexico-Syntactic
Patterns,area.
DataPeer-review under responsibility of the scientific committee of the International Conference on Computational Science
Driven Solutions
Keywords: Data Science Skills, OBDA-systems, Natural Language Interface, Lexico-Syntactic Patterns, DataDriven Solutions

1 Introduction
is well known, data science talent is in high demand (as McKinsey’s Big Data research report,
1 ItIntroduction

Gartner and IDC reports and predictions, and LinkedIn’s data indicate). The main goal of Data Science
is well known,
data science
in high
demandand
(as unstructured
McKinsey’s Big
Data research
report,
is aItconversion
of different
kinds talent
of datais both
structured
to knowledge
in order
to
Gartner data
and IDC
reports and
andcan
LinkedIn’s
indicate).
The main
goal
Data
Science
analyze
and present
thempredictions,
in a way that
help makedata
business
decisions.
Over
theofpast
few
years,
is
a conversion
different
kinds ofindata
both structured
andtounstructured
knowledge
businesses
(and of
Russian
businesses,
particular)
have begun
realize that to
data
science isintheorder
key to
analyze
data
and
present
them
in
a
way
that
can
help
make
business
decisions.
Over
the
past
few
years,
solving some of their most pressing problems. So they are trying to bring more and more data scientists
businesses
(and Russian
businesses,
in particular)
have
begun
realize that
datasubstantial.
science is the key to
into
the workforce,
but the
gap between
data science
supply
andtodemand
remains
solving
of their
they are tryingintothe
bring
more and
data scientists
Datasome
scientists
canmost
havepressing
varietyproblems.
roles and So
responsibilities
business
andmore
for different
roles,
into the workforce,
but the
between
data science
demand
remains
substantial.
different
skill sets often
aregap
needed.
A recent
Deloittesupply
report and
entitled
“Analytics
Trends
2016: The Next
Data scientists
can havethe
variety
and
responsibilities
in the (more
business
and
roles,
Evolution”
states, “Despite
surge roles
in data
science
related programs
than
100forindifferent
the US alone),
different skill
sets
often are
needed.
A recent
entitledto“Analytics
Trends 2016:
The Next
universities
and
colleges
cannot
produce
data Deloitte
scientistsreport
fast enough
meet the business
demands”.
The
Evolution” states, “Despite the surge in data science related programs (more than 100 in the US alone),
universities and colleges cannot produce data scientists fast enough to meet the business demands”. The
1877-0509 © 2017 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V.
Peer-review under responsibility of the scientific committee of the International Conference on Computational Science
10.1016/j.procs.2017.05.191

2162	

Svetlana Chuprina et al. / Procedia Computer Science 108C (2017) 2161–2170

related challenges and underlying causes of the talent gap problem are widely discussed both by
academia and industry (Chuprina, Alexandrov, & Alexandrov, 2016; Chuprina, Postanogov, &
Nasraoui, 2016; Mendelevitch, Stella, & Eadline, 2016) and we stress here only a few important points.
From our point of view, it’s actually impossible to produce a real guru in programming, statistic, and
business communications all together in one specialist during two or four-year educational programs.
Therefore, we stand with those who like the authors of (Mendelevitch et al., 2016) consider, “instead of
hiring data scientists with the combined skill sets of data engineers and applied scientists, build a team
comprised of data engineers and applied scientists, and focus on providing a working environment and
process that will drive productivity for the overall team”. Moreover, we believe, that first of all the data
scientist is more about finding sophisticated software proper for the problem under consideration that
has a lot of capabilities versus trying to build whole new software through code.
Computer Scientists, as well as Citizen Data Scientists, are not intended to replace data scientists,
and all these roles can work in collaboration. While data scientists can research and find novel ways of
creating data insights and new business values, Computer Scientists can upgrade existing or develop
new software tools, and Citizen Data Scientists can continue to use the tools.
Still, there are no commonly used techniques how to train Computer Science students to be ready to
collaborate with Data Scientists within multidisciplinary projects. Many computer scientists and
program engineers are not familiar with the data science role and have no experience to work with
skilled data scientists. So, we try to design our own technique taking into account the specific of the
educational process of Master's Program entitled “Applied Mathematics and Computer Science” at the
Faculty of Mechanics and Mathematics, Perm State University, Russia (Chuprina, 2015), which is
presented in the paper.

2 Data Scientist Ontological Profile Construction
When software developers are going to be working with data scientists, they must be ready to
understand each other in common research project context and also to apply advanced application
development techniques taking into account Big Data area specific and, if necessary, to create new
software tools in order to improve the software, developed specifically for the data scientists.
To help Master students understand what data scientists actually do and how Master as a computer
scientist can work effectively with them, we have designed a special kind of learning activities named
“DS-profile construction”. It seems to us that it is very useful from a methodical point of view to
construct Master students’ own ontological profiles of their Data Science skills (DS-profile).
We use ACM Computing Classification System (CCS, http://dl.acm.org/ccs/ccs_flat.cfm) and Data
Science Ontology (http://collaboratescience.com/WDS/) as target ontologies to construct students DSprofile. Note, that also the full CCS classification tree is freely available for educational and research
purposes in these downloadable formats: SKOS (XML), Word, and HTML. In the ACM Digital Library,
the CCS is presented in a visual display format that facilitates navigation and feedback. The full CCS
classification tree is also viewable as a flat file in the Digital Library. We convert this taxonomy as well
as mentioned above Data Science Ontology to the owl, which is a standard format of ontology
representation.
In paper (Chuprina, Alexandrov, et al., 2016) we have described how we train our students to build
the domain ontologies for ontology-driven applications. Now we show an example of DS-profile, which
involves an ontological description of knowledge, abilities, and skills of the student. To create this DSprofile we use adaptive visual ontological editor ONTOLIS 2.0 (Chuprina & Nasraoui, 2016) (the
reported study was partially supported by the Government of Perm Krai, research project No.C26/004.08 and by the Foundation of Assistance for Small Innovative Enterprises, Russia). Figure 1
shows a fragment of a real computer science student’s DS-profile. The nodes named “&” are the result
of a visual operation, which is used for some kind of a cognitive compression of visual information:

	

Svetlana Chuprina et al. / Procedia Computer Science 108C (2017) 2161–2170

instead of a set of arcs named “has knowledge”, “has ability” and “has skills” we can see only three
named arcs and the set of unnamed arcs.

Figure 1: Fragment of a real computer science student’s DS-profile

Figure 2 shows a part of DS-profile in more readable form, which describes only skills set. Every
Masters student prepares the report, which is a description of all DS-profile ontology building stages,
including definition and a short description of each concept. Every draft is under discussion not only
with a teacher but if is necessary among other students also. It is a good feedback.

3 Focus of Students' Research Work
Research work of Master students is focused on development of two types of software both based
on ontology engineering methods and lexico-syntactic patterns: natural language interface, which is a
uniform way to perform meaningful searching in structured and unstructured datasets within OntologyBased Data Access systems (OBDA-systems), in particular, and toolsets, which provide high-variety
information processing in a high adaptable way. This is so because a variety is becoming the single
biggest driver of big data investments and Natural Language Processing (NLP) as well as others
cognitive technologies will play an important role in the future of analytics and the education around it.
Let us dwell on a brief justification of the last statement. While all three main Big Data Vs are
growing, a variety is becoming the single biggest driver of big data investments, as seen in the results
of a recent survey by New Vantage Partners. As noted in the survey, this trend will continue to grow as
firms seek to integrate more sources and focus on the “long tail” of big data. From schema-free JSON
to nested types in other databases (relational and NoSQL), to non-flat data (Avro, Parquet, XML), data
formats are multiplying and connectors are becoming crucial. We want to add that advanced methods

2163

2164	

Svetlana Chuprina et al. / Procedia Computer Science 108C (2017) 2161–2170

of the automatic processing of heterogeneous data sources play an important role in solving analytical
problems, not only for Big Data.

Figure 2: Ontology description of students skills set as a part of DS-profile

Bernard Marr, who is a bestselling business author, keynote speaker, and consultant in Big Data
analytics and enterprise posted “As the value of data analytics becomes apparent in all fields of activity,
a growing number of people will want to be able to extract insights from their data. They might not want
to take three or four years out to learn advanced computer science and statistics, and with the advances
in
cognitive
computing
that
won’t
be
necessary”
(https://www.forbes.com/sites/bernardmarr/2016/04/27/will-we-soon-no-longer-need-data-scientists/).
All that requires of Computer Scientist to have good skills in NLP technologies.
Let us show what kinds of learning activities and practical assignments we suggest students in
Master’s Program to improve their skills in OBDA- and NLP systems development. The use case for all
examples mentioned below is described in section 3.1.

3.1 Use Case “SovaCity” project
The project titled “SovaCity” is a real-world project, which is a transnational Russian language set
of Web-services for automatic analysis of textual new building reviews and smart decision-making. It
aims at developing highly adaptable web-services for automatic classification and analysis of new
building reviews within http://sova.city portal helping different types of clients make smart decisions.

	

Svetlana Chuprina et al. / Procedia Computer Science 108C (2017) 2161–2170

Those intelligent analytical services would cater to the needs of such categories of the users as real estate
developers from Russia and ex-USSR countries, customers, analytics and information aggregators.
The difficult politico-economic situation in Russia stimulates real estate developers to find and use
all available intelligent tools and methods, including recommender systems, to verify and improve their
decisions for investment. With that in mind, our web-services will analyze a huge amount of records
about building details, complaints/violations, crime statistics, pricing histories, local amenities,
demographic breakdowns, and more to reveal the unbiased truth about a specific country, region,
condominium, co-op, or apartment building and its neighborhood.
Many other Russian (and not only Russian) websites which advertise new buildings, aggregate
feedbacks and provide ranking have no adaptation to personal user preferences, sometimes hide
unwanted reviews and manipulate the public opinion. That's why there is a need for a new platform for
aggregating the real information from big amount of various types of data sources and provide intelligent
tools for analyzing the data. The demo of our platform named SovaCityRecommender is available at
http://sova.city. The customer of our project is Consulting agency SOVA, Perm, Russia.
To support and simplify the decision-making process for customers who want to buy a new flat and
as well as for investors who want to have a means of identifying priorities for investment in new building
construction not only complete and reliable information about the new buildings and the real estate
developer should be provided but also a comprehensive analysis and recommendations. To tackle the
problems mentioned above we need to solve a task of automatic sense making extraction (extraction of
the meaning) from texts and multiple datasets via exploitation of a neighborhood knowledge (for key
phrase extraction) and process them in a uniform way. The key phrases and relationships must be
uniformly extracted from structured (databases, spreadsheets; call-center information systems’
datasets), semi-structured and unstructured resources (blog posts, websites, analytical reviews, social
networks).
To perform a comprehensive competitive analysis and forecast we suggest using a combination of
modern machine learning technique, NLP (Natural Language Processing), Data Mining, Text Mining,
Knowledge Engineering (including Ontology Engineering) methods. NLP methods are strongly
required because it is necessary to solve the problems of polysemy and misinterpretation. For example,
the following two comments "they are not cleaning the hall" and "really dirty on stair landing" use
different words but mean the same within the context of our application area. The techniques mentioned
above, accompanied by the sentiment analysis, would help us to show the actual state of things, to show
whether all builders’ public promises were fulfilled and take into account different points of view for
developers ranking.
Using ontology engineering methods, OBDA-techniques would help us to create the ontology-driven
analytical services and gradually expand the scope of information resource analysis from the town-scale
to the region and the whole country. Analytical and visualization components, which we will develop
during this project would be adaptable to new analytics' needs, other languages and even to other
domains. For example, we would be able to customize the SovaCity web-portal to restaurant business
only by replacing the domain ontology of new building construction with new domain ontology of
restaurants and its services, adding new relevant data sources and domain-specific linguistic resources.
No source code modification would be required. We are using the same approach in the most of our
projects, e.g. “Socio-Cognitive Modeling of Social Networks Users Verbal and Non-Verbal Behavior
Based on Machine Learning and Geoinformation Technologies” (the reported study is supported by
Ministry of Education and Science of the Russian Federation, State Assignment № 34.1505.2017/PCh,
PSU, 2017–2019).
We use resources and tools developed within SovaCity and other projects to improve Data Science
and ontology engineering skills in such domain as OBDA-system designing, NLP, an automatic
transformation of traditional information systems to the intelligent systems with NL-interface, semantic
indexing and natural language query interfaces for structured data sources (such as databases of legacy

2165

2166	

Svetlana Chuprina et al. / Procedia Computer Science 108C (2017) 2161–2170

information systems) and for arbitrary unstructured resources. We prepare Master students to become
contributors and real developers of these projects.

3.2 Building Skills Set for OBDA-system Development
As usual, gaining insights from data can meet some obstacles in an organization (not only in the case
of Big Data). Firstly, running ad-hoc analytical queries to the data is usually difficult for information
systems, which have not been designed to support it. Many companies have legacy information system
for which modification is problematic or even impossible because source code loss or legal issues
problems (especially if external modules are used). Secondly, even if source code modification is
allowed, IT-division might be overwhelmed with tasks (which can also be misunderstood), it is
necessary to have a lot of time for retrieving the data for analysis (see (Kharlamov et al., 2014)). Thirdly,
nowadays analysis related to social sphere requires using external open resources, which cannot be so
easily integrated with traditional information systems. Finally, there is a talent gap in such kind of
advanced analytics.
In light of that, we include courses related to Data Mining, Text Mining, and Web Mining, intelligent
systems with natural language interface and ontology-based data access systems (OBDA-systems) in
the Master's Program “Applied Mathematics and Computer Science” at the Faculty of Mechanics and
Mathematics at Perm State University, Russia. Data Mining, Text Mining, and Web Mining courses
provide a basis for such in-demand skills as performing data analysis using classification and clustering
techniques, finding frequent sets and frequent sequences, doing link analysis and performing
information retrieval from unstructured data sources.
In the paper (Chuprina, Postanogov, et al., 2016) we have described the architecture of the Reply
web-service. According to the suggested approach, we transform natural language query into
SPARQL-query with the help of domain ontology. The query then is translated into SQL-query using
OBDA-framework Ontop and the results are rendered to the casual user. Using Reply's bootstrapper
component, the ontology and mapping rules were automatically generated from the related RDB
schema. That ontology has been merged with a domain ontology using ontology editor ONTOLIS, and
we are developing tools to support this process (see Figure 3).
The following listing shows the SPARQL query has been generated for the natural language query
"I would like to know developers, which violate the building planned handover date". The automatically
generated SQL query has been omitted for the sake of saving space (the examples of automatically
generated SQL query for another application domain you can see in (Chuprina, Postanogov, et al.,
2016)).
SELECT DISTINCT ?developer_name {
?review :review___review_ibfk_1 ?flat.
?flat :flat___flat_ibfk_1 ?building.
?building :building___building_ibfk_2 ?developer.
?developer :developer_name ?developer_name.
?ontology_review_mapping :FK_review_ontology_review ?review.
?ontology_review_mapping :review_ontology_iri_ontologyConcept ?iri.
FILTER (?iri = "iri-schedule")
}

The screenshots below (see Figure 4) demonstrate the results of ontology-based searching: you can
see the answers for two NL-queries: "I would like to know developers, which violate the building
planned handover date" and "What’s about addresses and developers, whose buildings have problems
with parking lots".

	

Svetlana Chuprina et al. / Procedia Computer Science 108C (2017) 2161–2170

Figure 3: Automatically generated domain ontology

Figure 4: Reply web-service interface for NL-query

2167

2168	

Svetlana Chuprina et al. / Procedia Computer Science 108C (2017) 2161–2170

3.3 Building Skills Set for NLP-system Development
To improve such useful for a data scientist skills as extracting, collecting and processing value from
massive and diverse data sets, Master's Degree students need to use special high-level tools to automate
and simplify NLP studying as well as the process of ontology learning and augment. Special for these
purposes we have developed a meta-tooling framework TAISim (Text Artificial Intelligence Similarity)
(Kostareva, Chuprina, & Nam, 2016). TAISim can be used both as a learning environment for the
automated tackling of NLP class tasks and environment to NLP-application development. TAISim NLP
components are inherited from freeware Serelex developed by Alexander Panchenko (Panchenko,
2013). It should be stressed that the system, thanks to a pattern-based approach, allows not only to
extract concepts and relationships using so-called lexico-syntactic patterns (LSPs) but also to create an
ontology profile for any input texts and use this profile both for semantic indexing of documents and for
analytical tasks. TAISim offers special opportunities for ontology learning and helps to enrich the
existing ontology using external linguistic resources such as Wikipedia and ukWaC.
LSPs can be domain-independent or conversely be highly specialized for a particular field. Anyway,
all of them are tightly language-dependent that presents both their benefit and disadvantage. On one
hand, lexico-syntactic patterns can consider all the nuances of a language needed to extract the value
from row texts. On the other hand, the process of lexico-syntactic patterns design requires significant
efforts from a computer linguist or a data scientist. But these efforts are much lower than ones required
to develop such resource as a WordNet.
LSPs are successfully used in many studies (Klaussner & Zhekova, 2011; Maynard, Funk, & Peters,
2009), and as usual, a researcher has to make some efforts to improve lexico-syntactic patterns to get
better precise and recall for diverse languages (Klaussner & Zhekova, 2011; Maynard et al., 2009;
Panchenko, 2013). To use them for educational purposes it is necessary to develop high-level tools for
LSPs construction and their reuse. Unfortunately, for Russian, there are no such well-elaborated LSPs
repositories as for English.
Our system has a basic set of LSPs developed by Hearst (Hearst, 1992), Alexander Panchenko
(Panchenko, 2013) and Artem Lukanin (Sabirova & Lukanin, 2014) for English and Russian. To
improve TAISim with a new functionality we have designed a new high-level user interface for the
needs of LSPs. It enables a user to create patterns on his own and observe the results of processing using
the obtained patterns. It allows the future data scientist to develop means for extracting data and to
analyze the obtained results through ontology learning.
Figure 5 shows the results of automatic ontology construction, which is extracted from unstructured
texts.

Figure 5: TAISim: automatically generated fragments of ontologies from
https://www.newhomesource.com/resourcecenter/articles/energy-star-the-newhomesource-interview

	

Svetlana Chuprina et al. / Procedia Computer Science 108C (2017) 2161–2170

To interpret the NL-query we use patterns enhanced with concepts from the domain ontology. We
have also partially applied patterns to the opposite task that consists of filling the newbuilder's database
from unstructured data sources (reviews).
Our students have an opportunity to train their skills on LSPs designing and use them to automate
domain ontology building, which is used to provide semantic indexing of new buildings’ reviews and
to extract facts from social networks to perform meaningful analysis.

3.4 Results and Discussion
In order to impart some Data Science skills to Computer Science students we create mentioned above
ontology based methodic and use it since 2013. We haven't collected enough statistics yet but despite a
short period of time, we think that we have good results. During the number of ontology construction
iterations for a specific area of research, students are lead to present broader and deeper view to their
application domain that helps them to take part in real world projects. Building of application domain
or applied ontology at the initial stage of multidisciplinary IT projects, especially in Big Data area, can
reduce the common time for newcomers to enter the project. In addition, built-on ontologies can be
stored in repositories and used as a basis for ontology-driven solutions. DS-profile construction and its
analysis help students to understand a perspective of their Data Scientist career in an explicit form.
Speaking about a contribution of ontology engineering methods both into education process and
students’ research work at our Department we want to present some recent achievements:
•
•
•
•

Nearly a half of students’ course works, masters’ thesis and research works of bachelors and
masters are dedicated to using ontology engineering methods in a wide variety of areas from
semantic search to adaptive scientific visualization tools, computer vision and augment reality.
Over 2/3 of reports of the student’s research-to-practice IT conference devoted to the 25th
anniversary of our Department (2016) directly or indirectly touched upon a subject of ontology
engineering.
During past few years, research works of all our Ph.D. students cover varying aspects of Big
Data issues.
About 2/3 of reports of workshop named “Business analytics: from data to knowledge. Novel
opportunities to deal with large data sets” which was held in PSU on May 19, 2016, were
devoted to presentation of ontology-based products developed at Mechanical and Mathematical
Faculty of PSU.

We are glad that Master students tend to use gained skills in NLP and OBDA-systems development
to perform traditional exercises within remit of other Master’s Degree subjects by new means.

4 Conclusion
In this paper, we have described our approach to training Computer Science students to be ready to
work with Data Scientists in the same team and have shown how we use the real-world project as a
common platform for such purposes. We focus on OBDA-Systems Development and NLP because they
can help to tackle Big Data variety challenges.
We use ontologies to support ETL (Extract Transform Load) process for structured, semi-structured
and unstructured input sources in a uniform way. Ontologies help us capture the semantics of the data,
for example, to extract the useful facts from social networks in the newbuilding area. Considering the
fact that ontology construction is a difficult and time-consuming process, we have developed TAISim
framework which can bootstrap ontologies from text corpus (Russian or English). This framework is
actively used for teaching lexico-syntactical analysis.

2169

Svetlana Chuprina et al. / Procedia Computer Science 108C (2017) 2161–2170

2170	

To transform legacy information systems to intelligent systems with a natural language query
interface we developed web-service Reply. Exemplified by Reply, students learn how to connect
external components to a legacy information system, what is one of the main difficulties in interpreting
and transforming natural language queries into queries to structured data sources. It is a very useful
experience that shows how to develop software tools for Citizen Data Scientists.
We are planning to design high-level ontology based platform to recommender systems development
to meet ontology learning and machine learning methods to improve the capacity of explaining of
modern recommender systems.

References
Chuprina, S. (2015). Steps towards Bridging the HPC and Computational Science Talent Gap Based on
Ontology Engineering Methods. Procedia Computer Science, 51, 1705–1713.
http://doi.org/10.1016/j.procs.2015.05.308
Chuprina, S., Alexandrov, V., & Alexandrov, N. (2016). Using ontology engineering methods to
improve computer science and data science skills. In Procedia Computer Science (Vol. 80, pp.
1780–1790). http://doi.org/10.1016/j.procs.2016.05.447
Chuprina, S., & Nasraoui, O. (2016). Using Ontology-based Adaptable Scientific Visualization and
Cognitive Graphics Tools to Transform Traditional Information Systems into Intelligent Systems.
Scientific Visualization, 8(1), 23–44.
Chuprina, S., Postanogov, I., & Nasraoui, O. (2016). Ontology based data access methods to teach
students to transform traditional information systems and simplify decision making process. In
Procedia Computer Science (Vol. 80, pp. 1801–1811). http://doi.org/10.1016/j.procs.2016.05.458
Hearst, M. A. (1992). Automatic Acquisition of Hyponyms from Large Text Corpora 1 Introduction. In
Proceedings of the 14th Conference on Computational Linguistics (pp. 539–545).
http://doi.org/10.3115/992133.992154
Kharlamov, E., Solomakhina, N., Özçep, Ö. L., Zheleznyakov, D., Hubauer, T., Lamparter, S., …
Watson, S. (2014). How semantic technologies can enhance data access at siemens energy. In
Lecture Notes in Computer Science (including subseries Lecture Notes in Artificial Intelligence
and Lecture Notes in Bioinformatics) (Vol. 8796, pp. 601–619). http://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-31911964-9
Klaussner, C., & Zhekova, D. (2011). Lexico-Syntactic Patterns for Automatic Ontology Building. In
Proceedings of the Student Research Workshop associated with RANLP (pp. 109–114). Hissar,
Bulgaria.
Kostareva, T., Chuprina, S., & Nam, A. (2016). Using Ontology-Driven Methods to Develop
Frameworks for Tackling NLP Problems. In Supplementary Proceedings of the Fifth International
Conference on Analysis of Images, Social Networks and Texts (AIST 2016) (pp. 102–113).
Retrieved from http://ceur-ws.org/Vol-1710/paper11.pdf
Maynard, D., Funk, A., & Peters, W. (2009). Using Lexico-syntactic Ontology Design Patterns for
Ontology Creation and Population. In Proceedings of the 2009 International Conference on
Ontology Patterns - Volume 516 (pp. 39–52). Aachen, Germany, Germany: CEUR-WS.org.
Mendelevitch, O., Stella, C., & Eadline, D. (2016). Practical Data Science with Hadoop and Spark:
Designing and Building Effective Analytics at Scale (Addison-Wesley Data & Analytics).
Addison-Wesley Professional.
Panchenko, A. (2013). Similarity Measures for Semantic Relation Extraction. Université catholique de
Louvain. Retrieved from http://cental.fltr.ucl.ac.be/team/panchenko/thesis.pdf
Sabirova, K., & Lukanin, A. (2014). Automatic extraction of hypernyms and hyponyms from Russian
texts. CEUR Workshop Proceedings, 1197, 35–40.

