Procedia Computer Science
Volume 51, 2015, Pages 306–315
ICCS 2015 International Conference On Computational Science

A Novel Cost Estimation Approach for Wood Harvesting
Operations Using Symbolic Planning
Daniel Losch1 , Nils Wantia1 , and J¨
urgen Roßmann1
Institute for Man-Machine Interaction, RWTH Aachen University, Aachen, Germany
{losch, wantia, rossmann}@mmi.rwth-aachen.de

Abstract
While forestry is an important economic factor, the methods commonly used to estimate potential ﬁnancial gains from undertaking a harvesting operation are usually based on heuristics and
experience. Those methods use an abstract view on the harvesting project at hand, focusing
on a few general statistical parameters. To improve the accuracy of felling cost estimates, we
propose a novel, single-tree-based cost estimation approach, which utilizes knowledge about
the harvesting operation at hand to allow for a more speciﬁc and accurate estimate of felling
costs. The approach utilizes well-known symbolic planning algorithms which are interfaced
via the Planning Domain Deﬁnition Language (PDDL) and compile work orders. The work
orders can then be used to estimate the total working time and thus the estimated cost for
an individual harvesting project, as well as some additional eﬃciency statistics. Since a large
proportion of today’s harvesting operations are mechanized instead of motor manual, we focus
on the planning of harvester and forwarder workﬂows. However, the use of these heavy forest
machines carries the risk of damaging forest soil when repeatedly driving along skidding roads.
Our approach readily allows for assessment of these risks.
Keywords: GIS, Forestry, Symbolic Planning, Environment Protection, Cost Estimation

1

Introduction

The process of cost estimation for wood harvesting operations usually relies on experience,
codiﬁed into oﬃcial forest assessment guidelines. These guidelines are published annually, for
example by the Forestry or Environment Departments of German federal states such as North
Rhine-Westphalia [1] or Brandenburg[2]. The harvesting operation costs derived from these
guidelines only rely on the estimated total volume of harvested wood and the age and species
of the trees aﬀected by the operation. They do not consider individual parameters of harvest
operations, such as the types of machinery involved, or the number and position of skidding
roads in the aﬀected stand. Therefore, they can only calculate a rough estimate of the costs
resulting from a harvest operation.
306

Selection and peer-review under responsibility of the Scientiﬁc Programme Committee of ICCS 2015
c The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V.

doi:10.1016/j.procs.2015.05.247

A Novel Cost Estimation Approach for Wood Harvesting Operations

All trees felled?

Losch, Wantia and Roßmann

All wood piles at
landing site?

Y

N

N

Navigate to next
felling position

Navigate to next
wood pile

N

Y

Load wood pile

N

Trees to be
felled at position?

All wood piles
collected?

Forwarder fully
loaded?

N

Y

Y

Y

Process timber
assortments

Fell tree

(a) Harvester

Unload logs

Navigate to landing
site

(b) Forwarder

Figure 1: Simpliﬁed workﬂows of forest machines
A complete work ﬂow simulation, including detailed harvester movements that account for
individual path properties, can be used to predict harvesting costs accurately. Planning these
movements, however, is a non-trivial task, since available road nets can be quite complex and
thus allow for a plethora of possible transition combinations.
One approach to improve the accuracy of cost estimations is the simulation of single harvest operations. Bruchner[3] and Hemm[4, 5] followed this approach, relying on the software
AutoModTM and highly specialized and ﬁne-tuned simulation models to conduct their simulations.
In this paper, we present a ﬂexible and novel approach to accurately estimate the costs
of harvest operations, based on knowledge of the parameters of a concrete harvest operation,
utilizing symbolic planners.

2

Machinized Wood Harvesting

The general process of fully mechanized harvesting operations (see ﬁg. 2) consists of the work
of harvesters and forwarders, with the forwarder working after the harvesters ﬁnished their
task [6, 7]. The harvester’s task is to fell and process a set of marked trees, to process them
according to a given, pre-calculated assortment and placing the resulting sorts on wood piles at
the side of the skidding road. The forwarder’s task is the delivery of those wood piles toward
a central landing site where the wood is stored. A model of the workﬂows of harvesters and
forwarders was presented by Asikainen [8].
In order to develop our Symbolic Planning Approach, we adapted and simpliﬁed Asikainen’s
307

A Novel Cost Estimation Approach for Wood Harvesting Operations

Losch, Wantia and Roßmann

Figure 2: A harvester felling a tree in the 3D view of our 4D-GIS system

working models in a way that allowed us to base our planning task deﬁnitions and planning
domains (see sec. 5.1 and 5.2) on them.
The harvester working model (ﬁg. 1a) consists of the task complexes navigation to the next
felling position and felling and processing of a tree. When a harvester is located on a position
from where it can fell and process multiple trees, it does so without navigating in between the
felling tasks.
In contrast to a harvester, a forwarder’s modeled workﬂow (ﬁg. 1b) consists of the task
complexes of navigation to the next wood pile, loading of wood piles and navigation to the
landing site and unloading its currently loaded logs. A forwarder has a model-dependent loading
capacity that usually prohibits the collection of all wood piles at once, resulting in repeated
intermediate trips to the landing site to clear the load. Even when all wood piles are collected,
the forwarder has to take a last trip to the landing site to unload all logs that are loaded.

3

Symbolic Planning

Symbolic planning is a generic problem solving approach that aims to allow for the deﬁnition
of a problem domain rather than the implementation of a speciﬁc solving algorithm. To this
end, the Planning Domain Deﬁnition Language (PDDL) is widely used. It was designed for
the ﬁrst International Planning Competition (IPC) in 1998 in order to standardize the input
for automated planners and enable comparison between them [9]. The input to a planner,
as deﬁned by PDDL, comprises at least a deﬁnition of objects involved, a set of actions with
preconditions and eﬀects and an initial and a goal state description. More recent versions of
PDDL allow for numerous additional features, extending the expressiveness of the language [10]
[11] [12], but demanding more powerful solving algorithms. An example of a PDDL problem
description can be seen in listing 1, which is described in more detail in section 5.2.1.
In the aftermath of the second IPC in 2000, heuristic search planning has become state of the
art for symbolic planning algorithms and modern planners usually combine diﬀerent heuristics,
search strategies and other techniques [13] [14] [15].
308

A Novel Cost Estimation Approach for Wood Harvesting Operations

Losch, Wantia and Roßmann

Figure 3: The graphical user interface of the 4D-GIS, containing a 3D view on a stand on which
we can plan harvest operations

4

A 4D-GIS Implementation

Since the goal of our approach is the planning-based estimation of felling costs for individual
scenarios, we need access to a range of preexisting data about the site and harvest machinery
associated with a felling operation:
1. The geometry of the stand that is aﬀected by the felling, including a digital ground
elevation model
2. The positions and courses of the diﬀerent types of roads (forest and skidding roads) that
form a road network
3. The positions, heights and diameters breast height of all the trees present in the stand,
as well as their species
4. The driving speed, fuel consumption, hourly operating costs, tool ranges, etc. of harvesters
and forwarders
To gain access to interfaces to existing data sources containing all the mentioned information, we decided to base our symbolic planning-based approach on the 4D-Geo-InformationSystem of the Virtual Forest [16, 17]. The 4D-Geo-Information-System of the Virtual Forest
oﬀers uncomplicated access to existing databases containing all the mentioned information.
Using the Virtual Forest as a foundation for our simulation system also grants us access to an
already-existing infrastructure capable of 2D and 3D-visualization (see ﬁg. 2 and 3), an eﬃcient
simulation state database and the means of interfacing the simulation software with external
applications and tools such as implementations of planning algorithms.
The Virtual Forest already implements interfaces to specialized co-simulation tools such
as SILVA [18] or BDAT [19] that calculate felling markers and timber assortments for trees
309

A Novel Cost Estimation Approach for Wood Harvesting Operations

Losch, Wantia and Roßmann

Selection of affected
stands

Selection of trees
that are to be felled

Selection of harvest
machines

Generation of
problem file

Planning

Import of solution
and generation of a
work protocol

Figure 4: The overall workﬂow to utilize a symbolic planner to simulate harvest operations

contained in the aforementioned tree database. The number of trees that are marked and the
corresponding timber assortments deﬁne the total amount associated with a harvest operation
and thus inﬂuence the total costs that incur with it.

5

Planning of Wood Harvesting Operations

We designed our cost calculation approach in a way that allows users to freely chose a set
of parameters of a harvest operation while automatizing certain process steps. The whole
work sequence for our approach is shown in ﬁg. 4. At ﬁrst, the geometrical constraint of a
harvest operation is deﬁned by selecting one or more stands via the 4D-GIS. Then, the user
may manually mark individual trees for felling, or delegate that task to an external tool such
as SILVA[18]. Afterwards the 4D-GIS is used to conﬁgure a set of options for BDAT [19],
inﬂuencing the resulting assortment for the marked trees. Finally the user chooses a harvester
and a forwarder from the predeﬁned machine database.
Afterwards, a problem description ﬁle that is written in PDDL format and conforms to
the domains described in 5.1 is generated, a working plan is calculated by a planner, and
the resulting plan is re-imported to the 4D-GIS to generate a work protocol that may be
reviewed and statistically analyzed in order to estimate the felling costs or to visualize the
plan. The description of a problem domain suitable to determine work sequences conforming to
the simpliﬁed machine workﬂows (as described in 2) as plans, as well as the export and import
of problems and solutions are described below.

5.1

Domain Deﬁnition

The problem of wood harvesting operations comprises scheduling of navigation and manipulation in the selected stand, which resorts to felling of trees for harvesters and transportation
of trees for forwarders. Therefore, a simple domain deﬁnition for a felling operation with a
harvester only needs two diﬀerent actions: A felling action and a moving action.
A felling action deﬁnition is very basic, since it requires only information about a location
and a nearby tree and results in the tree being marked as ’felled’. Navigation is more complex
and tasks that contain an extensive road net yield a large number of navigation options. In order
310

A Novel Cost Estimation Approach for Wood Harvesting Operations

Losch, Wantia and Roßmann

to reduce the search space and thus allow for planning of more complex tasks, we modiﬁed the
deﬁnition of the moving action by prohibiting to leave a location without felling nearby marked
trees, if present. Furthermore, moving was restricted to moving forward, i.e. a harvester should
not move backwards in the middle of a road. This required the introduction of a ’turn-around’
action, which is only allowed at dead ends.
Instead of felling, a forwarder loads or unloads logs in order to relocate them to landing
sites. However, since forwarders have a limited loading capacity, solving forwarder tasks is
signiﬁcantly more complex. We introduced a concept of slots that can be occupied by trees and
we split moving and turn-around actions into two variants, representing movement when all
slots on the forwarder are occupied and movement when there are free slots left. Thereby it is
possible to discern whether the fact that logs present at the current location might be ignored
during navigation. This further reduces the search space.

5.2

Planner Interface

In order to produce a PDDL task description for harvesters or forwarders that conforms to the
corresponding problem domain described in 5.1, we added algorithms to the simulation system
that compile a dataset from the given databases and the user deﬁned parameters. At ﬁrst, the
simulation system has to import a road network from the databases of the 4D-GIS, utilizing
the user deﬁned geometric boundary as a constraint, and convert it to a graph data structure
that serves as a basis for the resources’ navigation.
All trees that were marked for felling have to be assigned to nodes of the road network,
to model the position of the harvesting machinery when processing a tree or a pile of logs.
This calculation considers the selected resources’ maximum working ranges and usually splits
existing edges in the road networks graph representation to insert nodes on positions near trees
that are to be felled.
Afterwards, the simulation system calculates all driving times along each existing edge of
the road network graph, regarding the length and average inclination of the road corresponding
to the edge, as well as the resources driving speed along the type of the road (forest road,
skidding road, etc.). After the initial calculations, a PDDL task description ﬁle is written.
5.2.1

Task Description Export

The planner interface distinguishes between harvester and forwarder task descriptions; however,
since both are based on the same road network, they contain similar entries regarding their
navigation.
The task description for a harvester contains a list of all nodes of the road network graph, a
list of all trees that are to be felled and a representation of the edges of the road network by a
binary relation denoting that that two nodes are connected, as well as a corresponding function
that returns the driving time along the edge. The assignment of trees to the nodes of the road
network is deﬁned by a binary relation as well. As an additional information for the problem
solving algorithms, the dead end roads are marked by a unary relation.
Additionally, one node is predetermined as the starting point for the harvester. Finally, the
goal and the used metric are amended. The goal simply states that all trees have to be felled
and the harvester has to return to its starting point, while the metric is to minimize the total
working time, consisting of driving and tree felling times of the planned operation. An excerpt
from a harvester task description is presented in listing 1.

311

A Novel Cost Estimation Approach for Wood Harvesting Operations

Losch, Wantia and Roßmann

( define ( problem problem1 )
( : domain h a r v e s t e r )
( : objects
home l o c 0 l o c 1 ( . . . ) − l o c a t i o n
tree0 tree5 ( . . . ) − tree
)
( : init
(= ( t o t a l −c o s t ) 0 )
( l a s t v i s i t e d home )
(= ( t r a v e l t i m e l o c 2 5 6 l o c 1 9 1 ) 8 )
(= ( t r a v e l t i m e l o c 2 5 7 l o c 1 4 4 ) 1 5 )
; ...
( deadend l o c 2 1 )
( deadend l o c 3 1 )
; ...
( near t r e e 0 loc141 )
( near t r e e 8 loc143 )
; ...
( at loc79 )
( c o n n e c t e d home l o c 7 9 )
)

( connected loc256 loc191 )
( connected loc257 loc144 )

( : goal
(and
( at loc79 )
( f o r a l l ( ? l − l o c a t i o n ) ( not ( e x i s t s ( ? t − t r e e ) ( n e a r ? t ? l ) ) ) )
)
)
( : metric minimize ( t o t a l −c o s t ) )
)

Listing 1: Excerpt from a harvester PDDL task description ﬁle

In contrast to the harvester task deﬁnitions, a forwarder task description ﬁle contains a list
and the locations of wood piles previously generated by the harvester. The task deﬁnition also
contains a number of loading slots that correspond to the loading capacity of the forwarder that
was selected by the user. Additionally, the forwarder problem description contains the position
of the landing sites where the logs are to be unloaded by the forwarder.
While the description of the road network largely overlaps the one used to plan the harvester’s work order, the forwarder’s description is augmented by additional (longer) driving
times that have to be used when the forwarder is not empty. The goal of the forwarder states
that all logs must be collected and unloaded on a landing site. As with the harvester, the
forwarder’s metric is to minimize the total working time.
5.2.2

Solution Import

After a planner that was conﬁgured to load the domain deﬁnition and the previosly generated
PDDL problem ﬁle has ﬁnished its execution, the resulting plan can be reimported into the
312

A Novel Cost Estimation Approach for Wood Harvesting Operations

Losch, Wantia and Roßmann

Table 1: Statistic data extracted from a work protocol that was generated from a plan found
by a planner with the hFF heuristic.
Evaluated statical characteristic
Number of trees felled
Harvested wood volume
Gross working time
Resource eﬃciency
Fuel consumption
Fuel eﬃciency
Gross working costs per wood volume
Gross working costs

Value
575
367
32.66
11.24
457.21
1.25
13,35
4898.72

Unit
m3
h
m3 /h
l
l/m3
e/m3
e

4D-GIS and stored in the form of a work protocol. The work protocol contains not only the
sequence of the tasks performed by the harvesting resources, but also the exact execution times
for each process step. The calculation of these times is part of our symbolic planner interface
and is based on formulas presented in [3].

6

Results

The protocol resulting from the import of a complete plan may be used to calculate a total
working cost associated with the work plan. This can be done by simply multiplying the total
working time with the costs to operate per hour (extracted from the machine database) of each
resource. It is clear that a better plan results in a a shorter working time and therefore less
working costs.
The work protocol can also be evaluated to calculate various statistics about the planned
harvesting operation. The statistical analysis can generate values such as the average skidding
distance or the average work performance (measured in m3 /h) of the harvesters. Table 1
contains an example for the resulting work protocol statistics of a harvester working in a well
developed stand1 that can be harvested eﬃciently. The harvester that was selected for this
example had an associated cost factor of 150 e/h and a fuel consumption of 14 l/h; the felled
trees were spruces, predominantly aged 65–75 yr and having a diameter breast height of 30–
35 cm. We also calculated the gross working times and the resulting costs by increasing the net
values by 20 % (as described by [20]). These results were generated with a self-written heuristic
planner using relaxed plan calculation and the hFF/hAdd heuristic [13].
When comparing the resulting working costs per wood volume (13.35 e/m3 ) to the costs
given by the 2014 forest assessment guidelines of North Rhine-Westphalia (20.32 e/m3 for
spruces with a diameter breast height of 35 cm and a medium wood quality), one can see that
the guideline-based calculation overestimates the resulting felling costs. This is because the
calculation averages fully mechanized and (higher) motor manual costs and cannot consider the
fact that the exemplary stand is well developed.
The presented harvesting operation is quite extensive, but a modern desktop computer
was able to solve the task in about 30 seconds for the harvester. Planning the forwarder’s
movements, however, is more demanding, since the limited capacity of the vehicle opens up
1 Our approach is generally independent from the location of the harvest operation - we chose an examplary
stand in North Rhine-Westphalia due to the availability of geo-databases containing all required information
used by our planning system.

313

A Novel Cost Estimation Approach for Wood Harvesting Operations

Losch, Wantia and Roßmann

Figure 5: 2D view on a planning result on an exemplary stand, visualizing soil stress
many more possibilities and thus further enlarges the search space. In order to obtain results
in acceptable time, we had to limit task diﬃculty by reducing the number of trees and/or
the complexity of the road net. We therefore suggest to use this approach predominantly for
obtaining harvester workﬂows.
As an additional result we are able to obtain data about the soil impact resulting from the
movement of heavy machinery over the forest ground. We can calculate this stressful impact
based on two metrics, one being the total number of passes over each path of the road network,
the other one being the total weight moved over each path. Fig. 5 shows the visualization of
the soil stress from the presented harvest operation, measured in the total number of passes.
This allows for early detection of potential environmental damages inﬂicted on skidding roads
that result from frequent use by heavy machinery.

7

Conclusion

In this paper we presented an approach to compile work plans and thereby obtain detailed
metrics for wood harvesting operations. We used symbolic planning for increased ﬂexibility
compared to traditional table-based calculation methods and obtained ﬁrst results by implementing, integrating and evaluating our approach in a 4D-GIS application. The results indicate
that our approach is not only capable of determining case-based net working costs of harvesting operations, but also provides access to additional information regarding the environmental
impact as well as machine eﬃciency.
314

A Novel Cost Estimation Approach for Wood Harvesting Operations

Losch, Wantia and Roßmann

References
[1] Ministerium f¨
ur Umwelt und Naturschutz, Landwirtschaft und Verbraucherschutz des Landes
Nordrhein-Westfalen. Richtlinien zur Waldbewertung in Nordrhein-Westfalen. 2014.
[2] Landesbetrieb Forst Brandenburg. Richtlinie zur Waldbewertung des Landes Brandenburg. 2013.
[3] Anne-Katrin
Bruchner.
Industrielle
Simulationssoftware
als
Entscheidungsunterst¨
utzungsinstrument in der Produktionslogistik der Holzerntekette. PhD thesis, TU Munich,
Germany, 2003.
[4] Martin Hemm. Simulation forsttechnischer Arbeitsprozesse unter Einsatz der Software AutoMod
durch Modellierung eines Testbestandes aus dem Staatlichen Forstamt Paderborn. PhD thesis,
2006.
[5] Martin Hemm, Martin Ziesak, and Walter Warkotsch. Simulating harvesting procedures to evaluate diﬀerent working systems based on discrete single tree events. In Proceedings of the International Precision Forestry Symposium. Citeseer, 2006.
[6] Holger Sohns. Moderne Holzernte. Aus der Praxis f¨
ur die Praxis. Ulmer Eugen Verlag, 2012.
[7] Gerd Bischoﬀ. Der Forstwirt. Ulmer, 5th edition, 2011.
[8] Antti Asikainen, Joensuun yliopisto, and Suomen Mets¨
ayhdistys. Discrete-event simulation of
mechanized wood-harvesting systems. Joensuun yliopisto, 1995.
[9] Drew McDermott, Malik Ghallab, Adele Howe, Craig Knoblock, Ashwin Ram, Manuela Veloso,
Daniel Weld, and David Wilkins. PDDL-the planning domain deﬁnition language. 1998.
[10] Maria Fox and Derek Long. PDDL2.1: An extension to PDDL for expressing temporal planning
domains. J. Artif. Intell. Res.(JAIR), 20:61–124, 2003.
[11] Alfonso Gerevini and Derek Long. Plan constraints and preferences in PDDL 3. The Language
of the Fifth International Planning Competition. Tech. Rep. Technical Report, Department of
Electronics for Automation, University of Brescia, Italy, 75, 2005.
[12] Daniel L. Kovacs. BNF deﬁnition of PDDL 3.1. From the IPC-2011 website, 2011.
[13] J¨
org Hoﬀmann and Bernhard Nebel. The FF planning system: Fast plan generation through
heuristic search. Journal of Artiﬁcial Intelligence Research, 14:253–302, 2001.
[14] Malte Helmert. The fast downward planning system. Journal of Artiﬁcal Intelligence Research,
pages 191–246, 2006.
[15] Silvia Richter, Matthias Westphal, and Malte Helmert. LAMA 2008 and 2011. The 2011 International Planning Competition, page 50, 2011.
[16] J¨
urgen Rossmann, Michael Schluse, Arno B¨
ucken, Thomas Jung, and Petra Krahwinkler. Der
Virtuelle Wald in NRW. AFZ Der Wald–Allgemeine Forst Zeitschrift f¨
ur Wald und Forstwirtschaft,
18:966–971, 2007.
[17] J¨
urgen Rossmann, Michael Schluse, and Christian Schlette. The virtual forest: Robotics and simulation technology as the basis for new approaches to the biological and the technical production in
the forest. In Proceedings of the 13th World Multi-Conference Conference on Systems, Cybernetics
and Informatics, WMSCI, 2009.
[18] Hans Pretzsch, Peter Biber, Jan ¨Iursk`
y, and Rainer Sodtke. The individual-tree-based stand
simulator SILVA. In Sustainable Forest Management, pages 78–84. Springer, 2006.
[19] Edgar Kublin and Gottfried Scharnagl. Verfahrens-und Programmbeschreibung zum BWIUnterprogramm BDAT: Abschlußbericht zum Forschungsauftrag:” Biometrische L¨
osungen f¨
ur die
Berechnung des Volumens, der Sortierung, der Rindenabz¨
uge und der Ernteverluste im Rahmen
der Bundeswaldinventur” gem¨
aß Vertrag zwischen dem BML Bonn und FVA Freiburg vom 18.3.
1985. FVA Baden-W¨
urttemberg, 1988.
[20] Ekkehard von Bodelschwingh.
Analyse der Rundholzlogistik in der Deutschen Forst-und
Holzwirtschaft–Ans¨
atze f¨
ur ein u
¨bergreifendes Supply Chain Management. PhD thesis, TU Munich,
Germany, 2006.

315

