Procedia Computer Science
Volume 51, 2015, Pages 2127–2136
ICCS 2015 International Conference On Computational Science

Facilitating model reuse and integration in an
urban energy simulation platform
L. Andrew Bollinger1,2 and Ralph Evins1,2
1

Urban Energy Systems Laboratory, Empa
¨
Uberlandstrasse
129
D¨
ubendorf 8600, Switzerland
andrew.bollinger@empa.ch

2
Chair of Building Physics
Swiss Federal Institute of Technology ETH Z¨
urich
Z¨
urich 8093, Switzerland

Abstract
The need for more sustainable, liveable and resilient cities demands improved methods for
studying urban infrastructures as integrated wholes. Progress in this direction would be aided
by the ability to eﬀectively reuse and integrate existing computational models of urban systems.
Building on the concept of multi-model ecologies, this paper describes ongoing eﬀorts to facilitate model reuse and integration in the Holistic Urban Energy Simulation (HUES) platform an extendable simulation environment for the study of urban multi-energy systems.
We describe the design and development of a semantic wiki as part of the HUES platform.
The purpose of this wiki is to enable the sharing and navigation of model metadata – essential
information about the models and datasets of the platform. Each model and dataset in the
platform is represented in the wiki in a structured way to facilitate the identiﬁcation of opportunities for model reuse and integration. As the platform grows, this will help to ensure that it
develops coherently and makes eﬃcient use of existing formalized knowledge. We present the
core concepts of multi-model ecologies and semantic wikis, the current state of the platform
and associated wiki, and a case study demonstrating their use and beneﬁt.
Keywords: urban energy systems, simulation, multi-model ecologies, semantic wiki

1

Introduction

Urban areas are sustained by way of infrastructure networks that enable the movement of energy,
water, information, material goods, waste and people from one place to another. These networks
are complex within themselves and increasingly dependent on one another [20]. Moreover, their
development constitutes a process of co-evolution – the development of one infrastructure may
inﬂuence and/or be inﬂuenced by the development of other infrastructures.
Selection and peer-review under responsibility of the Scientiﬁc Programme Committee of ICCS 2015
c The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V.

doi:10.1016/j.procs.2015.05.484

2127

Facilitating model reuse and integration in an urban energy simulation platform

Bollinger & Evins

In light of this, and of growing needs for more sustainable, liveable and resilient cities, it is
essential that we develop better ways to understand and study urban infrastructures as integrated wholes. To enable this, we need improved methods to optimize and steer the operation
and evolution of urban multi-infrastructure systems. Signiﬁcant progress has been made in this
respect – an increasing number of modeling eﬀorts in the infrastructures domain have sought
to bridge multiple sectors, disciplines, perspectives and scales [19].
However, several key challenges hinder progress in this direction. Foremost amongst these is
the diﬃculty of model reuse. In addition to their primary role in addressing a speciﬁc problem,
models are repositories of formalized knowledge about how the world works. Via eﬀective reuse
of this formalized knowledge, we can increase the eﬃciency of future modeling eﬀorts. Via
targeted integration of existing models with other (existing or newly developed) models, we can
enhance the scope of problems that it is possible to address. In combination, the reuse and
integration of models can open up opportunities to address more challenging (e.g. multi-sector,
multi-disciplinary, multi-perspective, multi-scale) research questions with fewer resources and
less development work.
But reuse and integration of models are diﬃcult for many reasons. Most importantly,
models are not deﬁnitive representations of the real world, but “leaky abstractions” [21] with
limited scopes of validity. It can be a serious challenge for modelers not involved in the original
development process to understand the constraints on a model’s validity and the scope of
problems for which it may be suited. This problem is compounded when one seeks to integrate
multiple existing models.
Progress in understanding and studying urban multi-infrastructure systems hinges partially
on our ability to overcome these challenges. In this paper, we address a key one of these
challenges – the need for sharing model metadata. Drawing from recent work in the area
of multi-model ecologies [1] and urban energy system modeling [8], we describe the ongoing
development of a tool to facilitate model reuse and integration in the Holistic Urban Energy
Simulation (HUES) platform – an extendable simulation environment designed to facilitate the
study of urban multi-energy systems. This tool takes the form of a semantic wiki, applied to
enable the sharing and navigation of model metadata.
We continue in the following sections with a description of the multi-model ecologies concept
and an introduction to the urban energy simulation platform. We then outline the potential of
model metadata and a semantic wiki to facilitate the development of this platform. Building
on this, we describe the design and implementation of a prototype semantic wiki. We conclude
with a discussion of the future development of the HUES platform, and the role of the wiki
within this.

2

Multi-model Ecologies

In ﬁelds from environmental studies [14] to biomedicine [5] to national defense [18], the integration of models reﬂecting diﬀerent perspectives, disciplines and scales is fundamental to
addressing key scientiﬁc and practical challenges. Moreover, because of the large eﬀort, time
and cost entailed in model development, reuse of existing models is essential to enabling model
integration – a reality reﬂected in the eﬀorts of various communities to facilitate the sharing
and reuse of computer models[4, 11].
Approaches such as integrated modeling [22], multisimulation [17] and cosimulation – as well
as modeling frameworks [13] and interface standards [12] – have emerged to facilitate eﬀorts in
model integration. However, a signiﬁcant limitation of these approaches, and of many eﬀorts
employing them, is their neglect of: (1) the interactions of models with their socio-technical
2128

Facilitating model reuse and integration in an urban energy simulation platform

Bollinger & Evins

context, and (2) the inherently evolutionary nature of models and model systems. Changes
in the socio-technical context of a model – the technologies and actors surrounding model
development – may inﬂuence the feasibility of, or need for, model integration. Changes in
the composition of a model or set of models – an inherent part of most model development
processes – may do the same. These ongoing changes severely restrict the design of tightlycoupled modeling environments.
The notion of multi-model ecologies seeks to address this by conceptualizing systems of
interacting models and datasets in a manner that emphasizes their evolutionary nature and
socio-technical context [1]. From this perspective, models are viewed not as isolated elements,
but as potentially sociable individuals co-evolving with one another in a changing environment.
As illustrated in Figure 1, models may interact in diﬀerent ways – statically or dynamically,
directly or indirectly – and multiple interaction pathways are possible. Compared with e.g. a
middleware approach, the aim is not necessarily pure composability, but rather the cultivation
of an evolving set of resources that – with some additional eﬀort – can be conﬁgured and
reconﬁgured for diﬀerent purposes, and which also adapts to changing knowledge (needs).

Figure 1: Schematic of a hypothetical multi-model ecology.
One advantage of this approach is that possibilities for model integration and reuse are not
dictated by top-down design, but emerge over time from ongoing development eﬀorts. This has
implications for the model development process: modelers should design and document models
with an eye towards their potential reuse, and should deliberately seek opportunities to leverage
the modeling work of others. A full set of guidelines regarding this concept is provided in [1].

3

The HUES Platform

The HUES platform comprises a set of tools to aid in the design and operation of district
and urban energy systems. The platform has been developed over several years by multiple
researchers at the Empa Laboratory for Building Science and Technology and the Chair of
Building Physics at ETH Zurich. There are three core items around which the platform has
grown:
2129

Facilitating model reuse and integration in an urban energy simulation platform

Bollinger & Evins

• The Building, the dynamic thermal simulation used to determine the energy demands
of individual buildings, usually as an annual series of hourly values.
• The Energy system, the district-level system that meets demands by managing supplies
through energy conversion and storage.
• An Optimization suite, consisting of a range of optimization algorithms (for example a
multi-objective genetic algorithm) that can be applied to any variable or objective present
in the platform.
In addition there are many smaller modules and datasets that perform speciﬁc functions.
These include: (1) stochastic models that produce use proﬁles that represent time-varying
occupant uses of buildings; (2) a longwave radiation script that couples multiple building
models to allow radiation to be exchanged between them; (3) a statistical microclimate emulator that ﬁts a model to the results of a CFD simulation, for example to represent urban
air ﬂow patterns; (4) solar gains calculations based on urban morphology; (5) a network
model that links multiple energy systems together; (6) conﬁguration scripts that are used
by the evaluation function to allow the optimization suite to manipulate speciﬁc variables;
(8) detailed simulations of hydraulics and conversion / storage processes; (9) implementations of controllers for the building and energy system, plus an embedded controller for
real systems (allowing hardware-in-the-loop); (10) GIS and BIM data sources; and (11) cost
database for economic optimisation.
Embedded
controller

Building
controller

Longwave
radiation
Stochastic
models

Use
profiles

Energy system
controller

Building
configuration

Building
Solar gains

Microclimate
emulator

BIM data

Evaluation
function

Optimisation
suite

Urban
configuration
System
configuration

CFD

GIS data

Cost
database

Energy
system
Conversion,
storage
Network
configuration

Network
Hydraulics

Figure 2: Current composition of the HUES platform. White boxes are datasets and grey
boxes are modules, with a darker shade indicating a more important item.
The platform was originally developed to allow an optimisation algorithm to address variables relating to both buildings and the energy system. This work is presented in [7], where a
multi-objective genetic algorithm (NSGA-II) is used to run a building energy simulation (EnergyPlus), and the demands from this are passed to an energy system simulation (a mixed-integer
2130

Facilitating model reuse and integration in an urban energy simulation platform

Bollinger & Evins

linear programme). Other parts of the platform have been developed through separate research,
for example the stochastic behaviour models were used in [10], the microclimate emulator was
developed for [6], and the longwave radiation exchange was an outcome of [9].
The recent initiation of several projects related to the HUES platform has raised new research questions and challenges. In seeking to guide the platform’s growth and development, a
key question is how to facilitate the reuse and integration of the models and datasets within it.
The foreseen expansion of the HUES platform – in terms of the range of research questions addressed, the number of involved researchers and the disciplinary scope – poses several challenges
in terms of preserving and enhancing opportunities for model reuse and integration. In particular, as the number of models, datasets, and actors increase, ad-hoc methods of sharing model
code, results and related knowledge will no longer suﬃce. This hinders opportunities for the
reuse and integration of models and datasets, precisely when realization of these opportunities
may be most beneﬁcial.

4

The Role of Model Metadata

A key enabler of model reuse and integration is the ability to eﬃciently identify, evaluate and
select potentially useful models and datasets. Missing from the existing repertoire of communication channels – e.g. model documentation, scientiﬁc publications, online code repositories –
is a tool to facilitate: (1) the comprehensive and eﬃcient identiﬁcation, evaluation and selection
of existing models and datasets, and (2) the sharing of newly developed models and datasets.
The core of such a tool must be a method for sharing and navigating model metadata. If the
code of a model is the “data”, model metadata in this case comprises essential information
about the contents of this code to enable reuse.
Concepts of the semantic web can help to address this need. The semantic web is a movement
aimed at converting the current Web from a “web of documents” into a “web of data”. The
central idea of the semantic web is the structuring of data in the form of subject-predicate-object
expressions – i.e. as a graph database – that enable targeted navigation between diﬀerent pieces
of data. For instance, data describing a particular model may be linked with data describing
a dataset used by the model, which may in turn be linked with data describing the model
that produced this dataset. These formalized relations can facilitate the eﬃcient and eﬀective
navigation of large sets of model metadata.
Before model metadata can be structured and navigated, it must be made available. An
issue here is the aforementioned evolutionary nature of multi-model ecologies. New models are
constantly being developed and existing models improved, and old models become obsolete.
Moreover, these changes are occurring in a distributed manner, with diﬀerent researchers focusing on diﬀerent elements of an ecology. Sharing of a distributed and constantly changing
knowledge base may be eﬀectively enabled via wikis1 , as evidenced in particular by the success
of Wikipedia. In serving as a platform for the ongoing collection of distributed information,
wikis can be a useful channel for the sharing of model metadata in a multi-model ecology.
The semantic wiki concept combines the advantages of the semantic web in terms of structuring data with the advantages of wikis in terms of collecting distributed and ever-changing
knowledge. A semantic wiki is essentially a wiki in which information is presented in the form
of subject-predicate-object datapoints, allowing it to be described and navigated in a structured manner. Similar to XML, semantic wikis represent information in a format that is both

1A

wiki is a website which allows for the collaborative editing of content.

2131

Facilitating model reuse and integration in an urban energy simulation platform

Bollinger & Evins

human- and machine-readable2 . Semantic wikis have been used to enable the distributed collection and structuring of knowledge on topics from global power production [3, 2] to building
design/retroﬁt options [15].

5

Development of a Semantic Wiki for the HUES Platform

To enable the sharing and navigation of model metadata in the HUES platform, we have initiated the development of a semantic wiki. The ﬁrst step has been to establish which types of
model metadata need to be captured in the wiki, and how this information should be structured. In other words, we have sought to identify the relevant range of subject-predicate-object
relations – the ontological structure of information in the wiki. This structure is illustrated in
Figure 3.

Figure 3: Current ontological structure of information in the wiki.
The core of this ontological structure are the nodes “module” and “dataset”. Modules refer
to pieces of executable computer code which in combination may comprise a complete model.
Datasets refer to collections of data which may serve as inputs to, or represent the outputs of,
modules. Datasets and modules are linked to a number of other datapoints. For the case of
modules, this includes: a description of the module, the name of the ﬁle, a download URL, a
documentation URL, the language in which the module is programmed, other modules called
by this modules3 , the author of the module, and any datasets which the module may draw from
or output.
Additionally, the ontology includes the nodes “module class” and “dataset class” to categorize modules and datasets respectively. For instance, all energy hub models might be designated
with a module class “energy hub models”, or all datasets pertaining to the village of Zernez,
Switzerland, might be designated with a dataset class “Zernez case”. Modules and datasets
may belong to multiple classes, and new classes may be continually deﬁned by users as the
platform evolves. The purpose of classes is to allow higher level groupings, which may aid
modelers in identifying opportunities for model/dataset reuse and/or integration. For instance,
certain sets of modules may together represent multiple perspectives on, or implementations of,
a particular system. By assigning these modules to the same class, we facilitate researchers in
using these resources to explore the consequences of diﬀerent system representations.
2 Semantic wikis often use the RDF data model, which can (but does not have to) be represented in XML
syntax.
3 Based on this, it is also possible – via a query in the wiki – to identify which other modules call this module.

2132

Facilitating model reuse and integration in an urban energy simulation platform

Bollinger & Evins

In addition to modules, datasets and classes, we deﬁne a “collection” node. Collections refer
to tailored groupings of modules and datasets, which may be run in combination for a speciﬁc
purpose. An example of how collections may be used is provided in the following section. It
is important to keep in mind that the structure illustrated in Figure 3 is neither deﬁnitive nor
universally applicable. Based on the information needs or terminological preferences of the
actors involved, new categories of metadata may be needed. The structure of the ontology may
also change over time in line with the changing needs of these actors.

6

Implementation and Use of the Wiki

The ontological structure illustrated in Figure 3 has been implemented as a semantic wiki
and populated with metadata pertaining to the modules and datasets of the HUES platform.
The developed wiki makes use of MediaWiki – the wiki technology underlying Wikipedia –
together with the Semantic MediaWiki Extension, which enables the structured representation
of information in the wiki. Figure 4 shows several screenshots from the wiki.
By navigating the linked pages of the wiki, researchers can identify and evaluate possibilities
for model reuse and integration. For instance, if Researcher X is looking for energy supply data
to serve as input to an energy hub model, she might look at the list of dataset classes on the
homepage of the wiki, and navigate from there to the “Energy hub supply data” dataset class.
On this page, Researcher X can see a list of relevant datasets, with a short description of each.
If Researcher X ﬁnds a useful dataset, she can simply navigate to the page for that dataset and
click on the download URL to obtain it.

Figure 4: Snapshots of two pages from the wiki: the “Run AIMMS” module page and the
“Zernez energy hub optimization” collection page.
As another example, we take Researcher Y, who is just starting to develop a model for the
purpose of identifying an optimal energy hub conﬁguration for the Swiss village of Zernez. In
order to accomplish this, Researcher Y needs, amongst others: datasets describing the building
stock, weather and solar insolation in Zernez, an energy hub model and an optimization module.
The ﬁrst action Researcher Y might take in this case is to create a new collection called “Zernez
energy hub optimization”. Starting from the wiki’s homepage, he might then navigate the wiki
looking for potentially useful modules or datasets. Each time Researcher Y ﬁnds a useful module
2133

Facilitating model reuse and integration in an urban energy simulation platform

Bollinger & Evins

or dataset, he adds it to the new collection page. When Researcher Y is ﬁnished, he simply
clicks the “Download collection as ZIP” button at the bottom of the collection page, which
automatically navigates to the download URLs of the relevant modules, compiles them into a
ZIP and saves them to Researcher Y’s computer. Researcher Y may not yet have a complete
executable model, but he has a strong starting point that makes eﬃcient use of the formalized
knowledge already present within the platform.
Researcher X and Researcher Y will not simply use the models, but will add to and improve
them for their particular purpose. When they have ﬁnished constructing their models, they may
create new pages on the wiki describing the modules and datasets they have developed. This
allows future researchers to beneﬁt from their work in the same manner that they beneﬁted
from the work of others. Furthermore, in creating a new collection on the wiki, Researcher Y
has left behind a resource that may be used by other researchers seeking to develop models for
similar purposes. By viewing the list of modules and datasets that Researcher Y has used in
constructing his model, future researchers may be guided in constructing their own models.

7

Role of the Wiki in the Future Development of the Platform

In further developing the HUES platform, we intend to combine the diﬀerent facets of existing
work in new ways, to address new research questions that have arisen. For instance, it is
important to understand the degree to which uncertainty regarding time-varying loads aﬀects
energy system design decisions. The multi-level optimisation process will be combined with the
stochastic models to investigate this. Next to this, urban areas have many physical processes
that aﬀect energy use in buildings that are currently omitted when analysing prospective urban
conﬁgurations. The optimisation suite will be re-purposed to explore arrangements that account
for the urban microclimates that they produce, requiring the solar gain analysis, longwave
radiation coupling and microclimate emulator to be linked. Additionally, tightly integrating the
control of buildings and district-level energy systems may give signiﬁcant beneﬁts, for example
allowing buildings to be pre-heated when waste energy is available from another building.
Currently there is no easy way to simulate this process, so the building and system controllers
will be linked to their respective models and to each other.
Achieving these advances with disparate simulation tools, or attempting to build a new tool
to address all issues involved directly, would be an infeasible amount of work. With the ﬂexibility
of the HUES platform, this becomes manageable (though still not trivial, since modules must
be adjusted and new functionality added). The insight provided by the wiki assists in this
process, allowing many people to collaborate on such improvements.
The example use cases described in the previous section represent two of many possible
scenarios for the use of the wiki. The representation of model metadata in the form of a semantic
wiki oﬀers many possibilities beyond those described above. For instance, it is possible to
incorporate automatically generated and interactive visualizations of the simulation platform’s
structure based on the model metadata in the wiki. These visualizations would provide an
up-to-date overview of the platform structure, enabling modelers and stakeholders to keep pace
with developments and the platform’s cultivators to track progress.
In the longer term, we foresee the potential for the wiki to facilitate comprehensive exploration of model input and output data. An advantage of semantic wiki technology is the hosting,
analysis and visualization of linked data – collections of structured data spanning multiple data
sources. This can enable the comprehensive exploration of data across diﬀerent models, opening
2134

Facilitating model reuse and integration in an urban energy simulation platform

Bollinger & Evins

up possibilities to better understand the eﬀects of diﬀerent assumptions or perspectives applied
to the same problem. Used in this manner, the wiki can serve not only as a resource for model
development, but also a platform for stakeholders and researchers to interactively explore model
results and the data underlying them.
Progress along these lines is not without challenges, including: (1) motivating contribution
to the platform, (2) ensuring the usefulness and comprehensibility of the wiki as a portal to the
HUES platform, (3) dealing with intellectual property, and (4) communication of (the bounds
of) model validity. To address the ﬁrst of these issues, we are developing software to partially
automate the process of populating the wiki with model metadata. To address the second, we
are working with model developers towards a shared deﬁnition of the wiki ontology. To address
the third, we are designing mechanisms to share model licensing and terms of use information
via the wiki, and ways to selectively restrict access to certain portions of the wiki – allowing
researchers to individually tailor the sharing of their modules by choosing amongst diﬀerent
possible licenses (e.g. GNU GPL, CC BY-NC-SA). To address the fourth, we aim to develop
a set of documentation guidelines to ensure that evidence of a model’s demonstrated scope of
validity is eﬀectively communicated to users via the wiki.
Next to these challenges are the very practical issues associated with enabling softwarelevel interaction between modules. In line with the multi-model ecologies approach, our aim
is not pure composability – strict plug-and-play capability of components. Rather, it is the
cultivation of a evolving set of resources whose components can, with some additional eﬀort,
be combined and recombined in diﬀerent ways for diﬀerent purposes. Instead of constraining
model development with a strict set of guidelines to ensure software interoperability, we leave it
to researchers themselves to develop and manage the interactions between diﬀerent modules as
necessary. Via the wiki, we seek to ensure that the developed linkages between these modules –
whether in the form of ad-hoc computer scripts or more comprehensive middleware applications
– are preserved and made available for use by others. In this manner, possibilities for model
integration grow over time, as the platform itself grows.

8

Conclusions

Realization of opportunities for model reuse and integration is essential to furthering the study
of complex urban systems, and many challenges remain. This paper has sought to address
a key one of these challenges – the need for sharing model metadata. To this end, we have
described the preliminary development of the HUES platform and an associated semantic wiki.
We have described the ontological structure of this wiki, several use scenarios and possible
future developments. As the HUES platform grows, the wiki will ensure that the platform
develops as a coherent system rather than a disparate set of isolated tools.
It is in the nature of complex systems that no single formalism can suﬃciently describe
them [16]. In seeking to enhance our ability to grasp complex systems of diﬀerent types, it is
essential that we employ a range of tools reﬂecting diﬀerent formalisms. It is only in integrating
these tools that we can overcome the limitations of our bounded rationality as researchers. By
enabling the sharing and eﬃcient navigation of model metadata, semantic wikis can facilitate
such integration, and help us to deal more eﬀectively with complex systems.

9

Acknowledgements

This research has been ﬁnancially supported by CTI within SCCER FEEB&D (CTI.2014.0119).
2135

Facilitating model reuse and integration in an urban energy simulation platform

Bollinger & Evins

References
[1] L. Andrew Bollinger, Igor Nikolic, Chris B. Davis, and Gerard P.J. Dijkema. Multi-model ecologies:
cultivating model ecosystems in industrial ecology. Journal of Industrial Ecology, 2015.
[2] Chris Davis. Making Sense of Open Data - From Raw Data to Actionable Insight. PhD thesis,
Delft University of Technology, 2012.
[3] Delft University of Technology. Enipedia. Web site, 2013. Accessed February 2013.
[4] EMBL-EBI. Biomodels database. Web site, 2014. Accessed December 2014.
[5] E.Z. Erson and M.C. Cavusoglu. Design of a framework for modeling, integration and simulation
of physiological models. Computer Methods and Programs in Biomedicine, 107(3):524–537, 2012.
[6] R. Evins, J. Allegrini, and P. Moonen. Emulating site-speciﬁc wind ﬂow information for use in
building energy simulations. In Building Simulation and Optimization (BSO 2014), London, UK,
2014.
[7] Ralph Evins. Multi-level optimization of building design, energy system sizing and operation.
Energy, In review.
[8] Ralph Evins, Jonas Allegrini, Kristina Orehounig, Georgios Mavromatidis, Florian Ruesch, Viktor
Dorer, and Jan Carmeliet. Buildings as part of urban energy systems: a review of models and
tools. Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews, In review.
[9] Ralph Evins, Viktor Dorer, and Jan Carmeliet. Simulating external longwave radiation exchange
for buildings. Energy and Buildings, 75:472–482, 2014.
[10] Ralph Evins, Kristina Orehounig, and Viktor Dorer. Variability between domestic buildings: the
impact on energy use. Journal of Building Performance Simulation, 2015.
[11] Ellen Franconi. Building energy modeling (BEM) library. Web site, April 2013.
[12] J.B. Gregersen, P.J.A. Gijsbers, and S.J.P. Westen. OpenMI: open modelling interface. Journal
of Hydroinformatics, 9(3):175–191, 2007.
[13] Chris Hill, Cecilia DeLuca, Balaji, Max Suarez, and Arlindo de Silva. The architecture of the
earth system modeling framework. Computing in Science and Engineering, 6(18), 2004.
[14] Gerard F. Laniak, Gabriel Olchin, Jonathan Goodall, Alexey Voinov, Mary Hill, Pierre Glynn,
Gene Whelan, Gary Geller, Nigel Quinn, Michiel Blind, Scott Peckham, Sim Reaney, Noha Gaber,
Robert Kennedy, and Andrew Hughes. Integrated environmental modeling: A vision and roadmap
for the future. Environmental Modelling and Software, 39:3–23, 2013.
[15] A . Mahdavi, U . Pont, F . Shayeganfar, N . Ghiassi, A . Anjomshoaa, S . Fenz, J . Heurix, T .
Neubauer, and A . M . Tjoa. eWork and eBusiness in Architecture, Engineering and Construction, chapter SEMERGY: Semantic web technology support for comprehensive building design
assessment, pages 363–370. CRC Press, 2012.
[16] D. C. Mikulecky. Deﬁnition of complexity. Web site, 2013. Accessed August 2013.
[17] T.I. Oeren. Knowledge-Based Simulation: Methodology and Application, chapter Dynamic templates and semantic rules for simulation advisers and certiﬁers, pages 53–76. Springer, 1991.
[18] T.I. Oeren. Discrete Event Modeling and Simulation Technologies, chapter Towards a Modeling
Formalism for Conﬂict Management, pages 93–106. Springer, 2001.
[19] Min Ouyang. Review on modeling and simulation of interdependent critical infrastructure systems.
Reliability Engineering and System Safety, 121:43–60, 2014.
[20] S.M. Rinaldi. Identifying, understanding, and analyzing critical infrastructure interdependencies.
IEEE Control Systems, 21(6):11–25, 2001.
[21] Joel Spolsky. The law of leaky abstractions. Blog post, November 2002. Accessed February 2014.
[22] Alexey Voinov and Herman H. Shugart. Integronsters, integral and integrated modeling. Environmental Modelling and Software, 39:149–158, 2013.

2136

