Procedia Computer Science
Volume 51, 2015, Pages 2147–2156
ICCS 2015 International Conference On Computational Science

Economic, Climate Change, and Air Quality Analysis
of Distributed Energy Resource Systems
Akomeno Omu1, 2, 3*, Adam Rysanek3, 4, Marc Stettler3, and Ruchi
Choudhary3
1

2

Chair of Building Physics, ETH Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland
Empa, Swiss Federal Laboratories for Materials Science and Technology, Dubendorf,
Switzerland
3
Energy Efficient Cities Initiative, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, U.K.
4
Future Cities Laboratory, ETH Zurich, Singapore
omu@arch.ethz.ch, rysanek@arch.ethz.ch, ms828@cam.ac.uk, rc488@cam.ac.uk

Abstract
This paper presents an optimisation model and cost-benefit analysis framework for the quantification
of the economic, climate change, and air quality impacts of the installation of a distributed energy
resource system in the area surrounding Paddington train station in London, England. A mixed integer
linear programming model, called the Distributed Energy Network Optimisation (DENO) model, is
employed to design the optimal energy system for the district. DENO is then integrated into a costbenefit analysis framework that determines the resulting monetised climate change and air quality
impacts of the optimal energy systems for different technology scenarios in order to determine their
overall economic and environmental impacts.
Keywords: Distributed Energy Resource Systems, MILP, Air Quality, Optimisation

1 Introduction
The United Kingdom is committed to achieving an 80% reduction in national greenhouse gas
emissions by 2050. To do so will likely require the utilisation of a significant amount of renewable
resources and the adoption of distributed energy resource (DER) systems. Therefore there is a need to
develop optimisation models that facilitate the design of cost-effective, low carbon DER systems by
temporally matching energy generation with demand at fine time resolutions, i.e. time intervals of 1
hour or less, over long time horizons. However, it is incomplete to limit the performance analysis of
DER systems to just economic cost and CO2 emissions. It is also necessary to evaluate the impact that
distributed energy systems have on the air quality in the areas in which they are installed.
*

Corresponding author

Selection and peer-review under responsibility of the Scientiﬁc Programme Committee of ICCS 2015
c The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V.

doi:10.1016/j.procs.2015.05.487

2147

Analysis of Distributed Energy Resource Systems

Omu, Rysanek, Stettler and Choudhary

Epidemiological research suggests that there is a positive correlation between ambient concentrations
of fine particulate matter (i.e. PM2.5), which can occur as a result of fuel combustion, and the risk of
premature mortality due to lung and cardiovascular cancer (Laden et al, 2006). Therefore, the
integration of an air quality assessment with the economic and CO2 emissions analyses facilitates the
design of cost effective DER systems that are able to achieve the required CO2 emissions reductions
without negatively impacting the health of the local population.
An increasing number of studies have attempted to include this air quality analysis in their
assessment of the impact of DER systems. Genon et al (2009) conducted a study of the energetic and
environmental impact of a new district heating CHP system. In addition to calculating CO2, NOx, SOx,
and PM emissions from the CHP system, they also employed an air quality model to analyse the
dispersion of these pollutants into the local environment, and the resulting ambient concentrations.
However, they did not convert the environmental impact, i.e. the change in environmental quality, of
energy generation into the resulting environmental externality, i.e. the social cost or benefit of the
impact of that environmental quality change on the population. To address this externality issue, 50
research teams in more than 20 countries worked together on the ExternE project that aimed to
quantify the external costs of energy production so that they could be taken into account during energy
planning. The ExternE project utilised an impact pathway methodology which traces the emissions
from their source, to the change in ambient concentrations, to the resulting impact on receptors, and
finally to the monetary valuation of that impact (Roos, 2010). However, even though the ExternE
project created a framework for monetising the impact of energy production, few DER planning
studies actually carry out air quality modeling in order to determine the additional social costs of the
distributed energy systems. Instead, these studies, like Holmgren and Amiri (2007), employ
aggregated local heath impact data from the literature, mainly social cost outputs from the ExternE
project, which do not take into account the sub-national site-specific characteristics (i.e. population
density, meteorology, etc.) of the areas that they are studying. The integration of a DER system
optimisation model and an air quality model into the impact pathway approach that is presented in this
paper aims to fill this research gap by creating a cost-benefit analysis framework that results in a more
comprehensive assessment of the economic, climate change, and air quality impact of a distributed
energy system.

2 Methodology
Figure 1 outlines the process for the integrated cost-benefit analysis framework, which is
composed of five distinct modules. 1) The Distributed Energy Network Optimisation (DENO) Model,
2) the Air Pollution Dispersion (APD) Model, 3) the Air Quality Impact Assessment (AQIA) Model,
4) the Climate Change Impact Assessment (CCIA) Model, and 5) a final module that is used to
compare and analyse the outputs from each of the four aforementioned models.
Firstly, the DENO model developed by Omu et al (2013) is used to determine the optimal energy
system for the district that minimises economic cost, subject to constraints on energy generation, CO2
emissions, energy demand, etc. DENO produces three outputs for the optimal energy system in the
final year of the time horizon, 1) the annual CO2 emissions, 2) the annual economic cost, and 3) the
annual fuel consumption which is converted into the average hourly fuel consumption of each fuel
type over the entire year. The annual CO2 emissions are an input into CCIA, which uses the social cost
of carbon (SCC) to determine the social cost of climate change for the optimal energy system designed
by DENO. The average hourly fuel consumption is converted into average hourly PM2.5 emissions,
and is inputted into APD. APD employs a Gaussian dispersion model to calculate the resulting change
in the ambient concentration of PM2.5, which is then used as an input into AQIA. AQIA uses the
population density, PM2.5 concentration-response function, and the value of a statistical life (VSL) to
quantify and monetise the impact that the change in ambient PM2.5 concentrations has on the health of

2148

Analysis of Distributed Energy Resource Systems

Omu, Rysanek, Stettler and Choudhary

local population by calculating the social cost of air quality. The final module of the cost-benefit
analysis framework takes in the annual social cost of climate change from CCIA, the annual economic
cost from DENO, and the annual social cost of air quality from AQIA in order to determine the net
impact cost of the distributed energy system that was designed by DENO.

Figure 1: Process flow of the cost-benefit analysis framework

3 Case Study: Paddington Area
The cost-benefit assessment framework is used to analyse distributed energy system options for the
area surrounding Paddington station in London, England. 75 buildings were identified in the area in
the immediate vicinity of the station, bounded by the A40 motorway, Westbourne Terrace and the
A4209. The different building uses in the Paddington area are shown in the left of Figure 2, with
Paddington station and all the surrounding roads shown in grey.

Figure 2: Building use in Paddington Area (left) and identification of the clusters (right)

The area is going through a period of rapid redevelopment, with new buildings being constructed
and old infrastructure due to be razed and rebuilt in the coming years. There is interest in the adoption
of distributed energy resource systems in the area, as illustrated by the recent installation of series of
Combined Cooling, Heating, and Power (CCHP) systems in the Paddington Basin site indicated by the
group of air conditioned office buildings near the centre of the map shown on the left in Figure 2.

2149

Analysis of Distributed Energy Resource Systems

Omu, Rysanek, Stettler and Choudhary

DENO was therefore used to analyse the distributed energy system options for a 19 year time horizon
between 2012 and 2030. This time horizon was divided into three phases, a three-year phase from the
start of 2012 to the end of 2014, a five-year phase from the start of 2015 to the end of 2019, and an
eleven-year phase between the start of 2020 and the end of 2030. Each year was composed of 4 typical
days, one each for winter, spring, summer, and autumn, and each typical day was divided into 24 1hour time intervals. Table 1 summarises the model characteristics for the DENO implementation of
the Paddington case study.
The 75 buildings in the Paddington area were divided into 5 clusters (identified on the right of
Figure 2), based on geographic proximity, and the individual energy demand profiles for each building
within a cluster were aggregated to create five demand nodes for DENO to analyse. Annual energy
demand density was found to be the highest in building cluster 1, which is the location of a
conglomeration of high-rise air-conditioned offices, and lowest in cluster 5, which is mainly composed
of low rise residential buildings. Clusters 1 and 2 were found to have the highest electricity and
cooling demands, and cluster 5 has the lowest electricity and cooling demands. While, clusters 2 and 4
have the highest heating demands, and cluster 1 has the lowest heating demand.
Model Characteristics
Spatial scale
Spatial Resolution
Number of Demand Nodes
Time Horizon
Number of Phases
Number of Seasons
Total Time Intervals
Energy End Uses
Number of Variables [Integer]
Number of Constraints

75 buildings
Clusters of 10 – 20 buildings
5
19 years
3
4
288
Electricity, Heating, and Cooling
63,409 [11,560]
97,974

Table 1: Characteristics of the DENO model implementation for the Paddington case study

3.1 Scenario Development
The assessment of the distributed energy system options in the Paddington area employs the costbenefit analysis framework in order to analyse the economic, climate change, and air quality impacts
of various distributed technology options. This analysis is valuable when assessing electrified heating
versus cogeneration scenarios, as they have been found to have opposing impacts on local air quality.
Namely, the electrification of heating redistributes air pollutant emissions to national grid power
stations that are further away from populations, while cogeneration brings air pollutant emissions
closer to populations. However, the different technology options mean that the economic and climate
change impacts of these systems are not as easy to understand without first optimising their design
using DENO. There are three technology retrofit scenarios in this case study that create a set of
options that range from complete electrified heating to complete combustion heating. Note that the
cogeneration scenario has been expanded to encompass all technologies that combust fuel locally, i.e.
CHPs and boilers. The intermediate scenario reflects the projected deployment of electrification
technologies obtained from a Greater London Authority report on the economic analysis of the
deployment of distributed generation technologies in London by 2030 (GLA, 2011).
A business as usual (BAU) scenario was used to indicate the reference case in which all the
currently installed energy generation technologies in the Paddington buildings are kept. The BAU
scenario also assumes that the change in energy demand between 2012 and 2030 progresses along its
current trajectory. However, for the three technology retrofit scenarios, the projected changes in
energy demand are modelled, and heat demand in 2030 is reduced through 100% penetration of cavity
wall insulation, loft insulation, double glazing, and draught proofing in residential buildings. For nondomestic buildings, energy demands are reduced through the improvement of windows and wall u-

2150

Analysis of Distributed Energy Resource Systems

Omu, Rysanek, Stettler and Choudhary

values to 2002 Part L standards, and reduction of infiltration to 0.3 ACH. Thus, the four scenarios that
are employed in this case study are:
1. BAU: Energy is supplied using the technology choices that are currently installed at each
building.
2. Only Electric: Only heat pumps, electric chillers, electric heaters, PV, and solar thermal systems
can be installed in the Paddington area, and the on-site combustion of fuel is not allowed.
Furthermore, each building cluster in the Paddington area operates autonomously, with no
distribution of energy between clusters.
3. Mixed: The adoption level of electricity-driven heat technologies is limited to the GLA’s
expected technology penetration for London by 2030, i.e. 8% of heat generated by GSHP and 4%
of heat generated by ASHP. Furthermore there is no distribution of energy between clusters.
4. District CHP: No heat pumps, electric chillers, electric heaters, or solar thermal can be installed
in the Paddington area. Only combustion technologies and PV are allowed. The space
requirements of a district scale CHP system mean that only one district energy plant can be
installed, and this plant is allowed to supply energy to all of the clusters in the Paddington area.

3.2 Climate Change Impact Assessment (CCIA) Model
The climate impact of the CO2 emissions was determined by multiplying the annual CO2 emissions
by the global social cost of carbon (SCC). The global SCC, calculated by the Interagency Working
Group on the Social Cost of Carbon, is an average of the SCC determined by FUND, DICE, and
PAGE, which are the three most common integrated assessment models (IAMs) used for analysing the
SCC, and have been employed in the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC)
assessments. All three IAMs convert annual CO2 emission into changes in atmospheric CO2
concentrations, determine the resulting change in temperature, and finally calculate the global
economic damage that occurs as a result of the temperature change. The SCC employed in this study
was £14.27/tonne CO2, which corresponds to the average FUND, DICE, and PAGE SCC at a discount
rate of 3% (IWG, 2010).

3.3 Air Pollutant Dispersion (APD) Model
Local scale dispersion modeling is applied to estimate PM2.5 concentrations at a 10 m resolution
using AERMOD, a steady-state plume model recommended by the US Environmental Protection
Agency (Cimorelli et al., 2004). Meteorological data including upper sounding (UK Meteorological
Office, 2006a) and surface meteorological data (UK Meteorological Office, 2006b) were obtained
from the NCAS British Atmospheric Data Centre and UK Meteorological Office and pre-processed
using AERMET (USEPA, 2012). Calculated local concentrations are sensitive to the chosen surface
roughness length, z0. This was calculated using the formula from Britter and Hanna (2003) as 15% of
the average building height in the Paddington area. An average building height of 10.75 m was
calculated from building data that was collected for the Paddington area, resulting in z0 = 1.6 m. An
albedo of 0.2 was taken to be representative of Greater London (Kolokotroni and Giridharan, 2008).
The Paddington area was represented by a gridded square, and the annual average emission rate of
PM , in kg per second, from each grid square was inputted into AEROMOD.
2.5

PM2.5

3.4 Air Quality Impact Assessment (AQIA) Model
Once the ambient pollutant concentrations were determined, population data, concentrationresponse functions (CRF), and the value of a statistical life (VSL) were used to quantify and monetise
the resulting air-quality derived health impacts. Firstly, receptors were identified by mapping
population densities onto the grid squares. The ambient PM2.5 concentrations from the air quality
modelling and the population density data were then used to calculate population weighted PM2.5

2151

Analysis of Distributed Energy Resource Systems

Omu, Rysanek, Stettler and Choudhary

concentrations, which indicate the concentration of PM2.5 that the average person is exposed to. Next,
the resulting damage to human health was calculated using a CRF for PM2.5. CRFs quantify the
change in the risk of premature mortality that occurs due to the change in PM2.5 exposure. Cooke et al
(2007) and USEPA (2011) determined that there is a 1% decrease in all-cause deaths per decrease in
average PM2.5 exposure. Since the mortality impact of PM2.5 is dominant over all other impacts and
can account for around 80% of the social costs of air pollution (Andersen et al, 2008; Yim and Barrett,
2012), PM2.5-attributable premature mortality was the only damage that was monetised. Monetisation
was carried out using the VSL metric, which is calculated by determining how much people are
willing to pay in order to reduce their risk of premature death. The mean UK VSL of £3 million per
life (Yim and Barrett, 2012) was used. Finally, the social cost of air quality was calculated by
multiplying the VSL by the number of premature deaths for each scenario.

4 Results and Discussion
4.1 Distributed Energy System

Figure 3: Comparison of electricity, heating, and cooling generation from technologies in each scenario

The DENO model results for the four scenarios are presented in Table 2 and Figure 3. Table 2
shows the optimal technology set in the final year of each scenario, while Figure 3 shows the
quantities of electricity, heating, and cooling generated by each technology in each of the four
scenarios in 2030. The BAU scenario is characterised by a reliance on electricity purchased from the
national grid or generated by the 5.2 MWs of gas CHPs that are already installed in cluster 2. Heat is
mainly supplied by building-scale gas boilers, with only 8% of the heat is provided by ASHP and
electric heaters. In cluster 2, cooling is supplied by 2.3 MWs of absorption chillers, while in all other
clusters it is supplied by electric chillers. In the Only Electric scenario all electricity is purchased from
the grid and all cooling is supplied by electric chillers. A 1.5 MW GSHP is installed to supply heating
to cluster 3. ASHP are used to supply the majority of the heating demand, however, electric heaters

2152

Analysis of Distributed Energy Resource Systems

Omu, Rysanek, Stettler and Choudhary

are also installed in all the clusters to meet peak demands. In the Mixed scenario, 12% of the heat
generated is by heat pumps and 11% of the electricity generated is by PV. Furthermore, in comparison
to the BAU scenario, there is a decrease in the utilisation of gas CHPs and boilers, and an increase in
the amount of heat that is generated by biomass boilers. Finally, in the District CHP scenario, instead
of installing additional biomass boilers, gas boilers, or gas CHP units to compensate for the
displacement of the heat pumps and electric heaters, 4.6 MWs of biomass CHPs are installed. This is
likely due to the technology’s high heat to power ratio. 2 kWh of heat are generated for every 1 kWh
of electricity generated, therefore the biomass CHP produces more heat than the three other
combustion technologies for every kWh of fuel consumed. This means that there is also more heat
available for the absorption chiller, and therefore no electric chillers are required.
Scenario

Total Installed Capacity

Scenario

Total Installed Capacity

BAU

Absorption Chillers: 2.3 MW
ASHP: 500 kW
Electric Chillers: 6.2 MW
Electric Heaters: 1.2 MW
Gas Engine CHP: 5.2 MW
Natural Gas Boiler: 25.8 MW

Mixed

Absorption Chillers: 2.3 MW
ASHP: 400 kW
Biomass Boiler: 5.1 MW
Biomass CHP: 800 kW
Electric Chillers: 6.2 MW
Gas Engine CHP: 2.7 MW
GSHP: 700 kW
Natural Gas Boiler: 20.7 MW
PV: 16,277 m2

Only Electric

ASHP: 18.2 MW
Electric Chiller: 8.5 MW
Electric Heater: 11.4 MW
GSHP: 1.5 MW

District CHP

Absorption Chillers: 8.2 MW
Biomass CHP: 4.6 MW
Gas Engine CHP: 5.3 MW
Natural Gas Boiler: 14,1 MW
PV: 46,396 m2

Table 2: Optimal technology set for each scenario

Table 3 presents the economic, CO2, and PM2.5 results for the four scenarios. The BAU scenario
has the lowest annual economic cost, but the highest annual CO2 emissions in 2030. For the Only
Electric and Mixed scenarios, the increase in the annual economic cost is marginal, only 5%.
However, the installation of the biomass CHPs means that the District CHP scenario has an annual
economic cost that is 33% greater than the BAU scenario. Furthermore, while the District CHP
scenario leads to lower annual CO2 emissions than the Only Electric scenario, the trend is reversed for
the annual local PM2.5 emissions, illustrating the climate change and air quality trade-off between
combustion technologies and electrification technologies. While electrified heating technologies
reduce local PM2.5 emissions by shifting combustion to national grid power stations that are far away
from the consumers, the carbon intensity of the national grid is almost twice the gas CHP CO2
emission factor, and more than twenty times greater than the CHP biomass emission factor.

Scenario

Annual Economic Cost (£
millions)

Annual CO2 Emissions
(ktonnes)

Average PM2.5 Emissions
Rate (kg/s)

BAU

13.4

63.5

1. 10 x 10-4

Only Electric

14.2

54.1

0

Mixed

14.1

41.5

2.55 x 10-4

District CHP

17.9

25.2

4.94 x 10-4

Table 3: Energy supply modeling results for 2030

2153

Analysis of Distributed Energy Resource Systems

Omu, Rysanek, Stettler and Choudhary

4.2 Air Pollutant Dispersion Model and Impact Costs
Figures 4 (a-c) show the spatial variation of the annual PM2.5 concentration above background
levels for the three scenarios that have energy systems that emit PM2.5. In Figure 4a, the annual PM2.5
concentrations for the BAU scenario shows that peak pollutant concentrations occur in cluster 2,
where the gas CHPs are located. While in Figure 4b, the peak PM2.5 concentrations in the Mixed
scenario are located in clusters 2 and 5. In cluster 2, the peak concentration is due to the CHP units,
while the peak in cluster 5 is more spread out, and is a result of emissions from a large number of
biomass boiler units. Finally, in Figure 4c, the peak ambient PM2.5 concentration in the District CHP
scenario is located in cluster 2, where the district biomass CHP plant is sited. As all the biomass
combustion in the area is now confined to a single location, the PM2.5 concentrations around this point
source is 3 times higher than the PM2.5 concentrations in the other scenarios. However, because the
majority of the fuel combustion is located in cluster 2, the change in PM2.5 concentrations in all other
parts of the Paddington area, particularly cluster 5, is lower than it is in the Mixed scenarios.

a)

b)

c)
Annual PM2.5
above background levels (g/m3)

Figure 4: Spatial map of annual PM2.5 concentrations (μg/m3) in a) BAU, b) Mixed, and c) District CHP scenarios.

For each scenario, the population-weighted ambient PM2.5 concentrations above the background
level are given in Table 4, alongside the average PM2.5 emissions rate from Table 3. Although, the
District CHP scenario has the highest PM2.5 emissions rate, those emissions do not result in the highest
population-weighted PM2.5 concentrations. Instead, the highest population-weighted PM2.5
concentrations occur in the Mixed scenario. This is likely due to the location of the emissions in these
two scenarios. In the District CHP scenario, the majority of the PM2.5 is primarily emitted at one
point, the district biomass CHP plant, which has a high release height (i.e. flue stack level) that
enables the pollutants to be dispersed further away from the area. Conversely, in the Mixed scenario,
the PM2.5 emissions are primarily from individual biomass boilers that are located throughout cluster
5, and the release height is much lower (i.e. building level). Therefore, the pollutants remain in the
area and the local population is exposed to higher ambient concentrations. Furthermore, although a
comparison of the spatial map of the PM2.5 concentrations in both scenarios (Figures 4b and 4c) shows
that the District CHP scenario has the highest ambient PM2.5 concentration out of all scenarios. This
elevated concentration is restricted to a relatively small area, which is why the average change in the
population-weighted concentration is still lower than that of the Mixed scenario. The number of
premature mortalities and the resulting social cost of air quality for each scenario are also presented in
Table 4. As these values are functions of the population-weighted PM2.5 concentrations, they follow
the same trend. Therefore, the Mixed scenario has the highest social cost of air quality and the Only
Electric scenario has the lowest social cost of air quality, as there are no local PM2.5 emissions.

2154

Analysis of Distributed Energy Resource Systems

Scenario

Average PM2.5
emissions rate
(kg/s)

BAU
Only Electric
Mixed
District CHP

Omu, Rysanek, Stettler and Choudhary

Ambient populationweighted PM2.5
concentration above
background levels
(µg/m3 )

Premature Mortalities
(deaths/year)

Social cost of air
quality (£ thousands)

1. 10 x 10-4

0.00914

0.00191

5.73

0

0

0

0

2.55 x 10

-4

0.325

0.0637

191

4.94 x 10

-4

0.296

0.0596

179

Table 4: Mean PM 2.5 concentrations, premature mortalities, and social cost of air quality for all scenarios

4.3 Comparison of Impact Costs
Table 5 summaries the annual economic cost, social cost of climate change, and social cost of air
quality for all four scenarios. The BAU scenario has the lowest economic cost, but the highest social
cost of carbon, while the District CHP scenario has the highest economic cost but the lowest social
cost of carbon, and the Only Electric scenario has the lowest air quality cost. When all three impact
costs are added together, the BAU scenario has the lowest total impact cost. However, this result is
driven by the relative magnitude of the annual economic cost, which is at least an order of magnitude
larger than the social cost of climate change and the social cost of air quality. In comparison to the
BAU scenario, all three retrofit scenarios increase the annual economic cost and decrease the annual
social cost of carbon. However, while the Mixed and District CHP scenarios also increase the annual
social cost of air quality, the Only Electric scenario decreases it because all local PM2.5 emissions have
been displaced to the national grid power stations. The net impact cost of each scenario is then
calculated by summing the net economic, net climate change, and net air quality impact costs. Of the
three scenarios, the Mixed scenario has the lowest net impact cost because although it has the highest
social net air quality cost, it compensates by having the lowest net economic cost.
£ thousand
Net Impact Cost

Annual
Economic
Cost

Annual Social Cost
of Climate Change

Annual Social
Cost of Air
Quality

Total Impact
Cost

BAU

13,400

906

5.72

14,312

NA

Only
Electric

14,200

772

0

14,972

660

Mixed

14,100

593

191

14,884

572

District
CHP

17,900

359

179

18,438

4,126

Scenario

Table 5: Environmental impact assessment results for all the scenarios

However, the presentation of the impacts in monetary units and the straight summation of them to
determine the net impact cost assumes that all three impacts are of equal importance. This may not
necessarily be the case, as the context of the analysis may mean that particular impacts are deemed to
be more significant. For example, if funding has already been secured for an energy system, then the
air quality and climate change impacts may be more important than the economic impact. Therefore,
the modular structure of the cost-benefit analysis framework is an advantage because the performance
of each scenario can be calculated with respect to each impact or different combinations of the
impacts.

2155

Analysis of Distributed Energy Resource Systems

Omu, Rysanek, Stettler and Choudhary

5 Conclusion
In this paper an energy system analysis of the Paddington Area was used to illustrate how the
energy planning optimisation model, DENO, can be integrated with the cost-benefit analysis
framework in order to facilitate a more comprehensive analysis of distributed energy systems. One of
the benefits of this integration is that the air quality impacts of an energy system can be determined,
beyond just the calculation of emissions. As seen in Table 4, the magnitude of air pollutant emissions
is not directly correlated to the resulting change in ambient concentrations and health impacts.
Therefore, the modelling of pollutant dispersion is a vital step in the more rigorous quantification of
environmental impacts. Ultimately, the magnitude of the economic costs in the Paddington area
overshadowed both the climate change and air quality impact costs. However, the calculation of all
three costs in monetary units enables the understanding of the interactions and trade-offs between the
economic, climate change, and air quality impacts, which provides valuable information for decision
making.

References
Andersen MS, Frohn LM, Nielsen JS, Nielsen M, Jensen JB, Jensen SS (2008). A non-linear Eulerian approach
for assessment of health-cost externalities of air pollution. Conf of the Euro Assoc of Env and Res Eco.
Gothenburg.
Britter, R.E., Hanna, S.R. (2003). Flow and Dispersion in Urban Areas. Annu. Rev. Fluid Mech. 35, 469–496.
Cimorelli, A.J., Perry, S.G., Venkatram, A., Weil, J.C., Paine, R.J., Wilson, R.B., Lee, R.F., Peters, W.D., Brode,
R.W., Paumier, J.O., (2004). AERMOD: Description of model formulation.
Cooke, R. M., Wilson, A. M., Tuomisto, J. T., Morales, O., Tainio, M., Evans, J. S. (2007). A probabilistic
characterization of the relationship between fine particulate matter and mortality: Elicitation of European experts.
Env Sci and Tech. 41 (18). 6598−6605.
Genon, G., Torchio, M., Poggio, A., & Poggio, M. (2009). Energy and environmental assessment of small district
heating systems: Global and local effects in two case-studies. Energy Conv. and Management. 50. 522 – 529.
GLA. (2011). Decentralised Energy Capacity Study Phase 2: Deployment Potential. October 2011.
Holmgren, K. & Amiri, S. (2007). Internalising external costs of electricity and heat production in a municipal
energy system. Energy Policy. 35. 5242 – 5253.
Interagency Working Group of the Social Cost of Carbon. (2010). Social cost of carbon for regulatory impact
analysis under executive order 12866.
Kolokotroni, M., Giridharan, R., (2008). Urban heat island intensity in London: An investigation of the impact of
physical characteristics on changes in outdoor air temperature during summer. Sol. Energy 82, 986–998.
Laden, F., Schwartz, J., Speizer, F, Dockery, D. (2006). Reduction in fine particulate air pollution and mortality:
Extended follow-up of the Harvard Six Cities study. American J of Resp and Critical Care Med. 173. 667-672.
Omu, A., Choudhary, R., Boies, A. (2013). Distributed Energy Resource System Optimisation Using Mixed
Integer Linear Programming. Energy Policy. 61. 249-266.
Roos, J. (2010). The ExternE project series. http://www.externe.info/
UK Meteorological Office. (2006a). UK High Resolution Rediosonde Data. NCAS Br. Atmos. Data Cent.
UK Meteorological Office, (2006b). MIDAS Land Surface Stations Data. NCAS Br. Atmos. Data Cent.
USEPA. (2011). The Benefits and Costs of the Clean Air Act: 1990 to 2020. Final Report of U.S. Environmental
Protection Agency Office of Air and Radiation. 5−10.
USEPA. (2012). Preferred/Recommended Models | TTN - Support Center for Regulatory Atmospheric Modeling.
http://www.epa.gov/ttn/scram/dispersion_prefrec.htm#aermod.
Yim S. and Barrett S. (2012). Public health impacts of combustion sources in United Kingdom. Environmental
Science and Technology. 46. 8. 4291-4296.

2156

