Procedia Computer Science
Volume 51, 2015, Pages 2663–2667
ICCS 2015 International Conference On Computational Science

I have a DRIHM: A case study in lifting computational
science services up to the scientiﬁc mainstream
Michael Schiﬀers1 , Nils gentschen Felde1 , and Dieter Kranzlm¨
uller12
1

Ludwig-Maximilians-Universit¨
at M¨
unchen, Munich, Germany
{schiffer,felde,kranzlm}@nm.ifi.lmu.de
2
Leibniz Supercomputing Centre, Garching, Germany
Dieter.Kranzlmueller@lrz.de

Abstract
While we are witnessing a transition from petascale to exascale computing, we experience,
when teaching students and scientists to adopt distributed computing infrastructures for computational sciences, what Geoﬀrey A. Moore once coined the chasm between the visionaries in
computational sciences and the early majority of scientiﬁc pragmatists. Using the EU-funded
DRIHM project (Distributed Research Infrastructure for Hydro-Meteorology) as a case study,
we see that innovative research infrastructures have diﬃculties to be accepted by the scientiﬁc
pragmatists: The infrastructure services are not yet “mainstream”. Excellence in workforces
in computational sciences, however, can only be achieved if the tools are not only available but
also used. In this paper we show for DRIHM how the chasm exhibits and how it can be crossed.
Keywords: Research Infrastructure, Extreme Scale Computing, Hydro-Meteorology, Chasm Model

1

Background

Although supercomputing performance gains are slowing down, rather than speeding up, exascale performance is predicted to happen around 2020 [6]. While the European Technology
Platform for High Performance Computing (ETP4HP) alerts to the growing gap between science
and technology education at degree level on the one hand and the needs of the Science & Technology labour market on the other hand [4], the Exascale Mathematics Working Group proposes
to “increase the pool of computational scientists and mathematicians trained in both applied
mathematics and high-performance computing” [3]. The 2010 Fall report of the American Advanced Scientiﬁc Computing Advisory Committee (ASCAC) concurs with this perspective by
recommending to renew eﬀorts to recruit and train the next generation of scientists needed to
exploit exascale capabilities for e-science applications over e-infrastructures [1].
This reveals two challenges: Any successful exploitation of exascale capabilities ﬁrstly requires exploitable items provided by somebody; and it secondly requires groups of scientists to
adopt these items to solve their research questions. Obviously, this pattern not only depends
Selection and peer-review under responsibility of the Scientiﬁc Programme Committee of ICCS 2015
c The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V.

doi:10.1016/j.procs.2015.05.375

2663

Lifting science services up to the mainstream

Schiﬀers, gentschen Felde, Kranzlm¨
uller

on the items’ readiness levels [10], but also on their “market diﬀusion”. While we do not address the former challenge, the latter relates to lifting up computational science services from
fad to mainstream. Consequently, we propose to look at it from a – for computer scientists –
“non-orthodox” marketing perspective.
Our argumentation is based on the experiences gained while running several EU-funded
projects over the last ﬁve years. In particular we refer to the DRIHM project (Distributed
Research Infrastructure for Hydro-Meteorology1 ) as a typical multi-disciplinary representative
of the Hydro-Meteorological Research (HMR) community.
On the other hand, it is inspired by Everett Roger’s
bell-shaped technology adoption life cycle model [9]
and Moore’s revised version (ﬁgure 1) for marketing
disruptive high tech products [8], the latter also known
as the “chasm model”. Moore identiﬁed a “deep and
dividing chasm” between early adopters and the early
majority because the former are looking for some kind
of “change agent” while the latter – the group that
dominates the “mainstream” – aims at getting a “productivity improvement”.
The analogy renders obvious because Moore and
DRIHM both share a focus on discontinuous innovaFigure 1: Chasm Model of the Tech- tions (change-sensitive products in [8], change-sensitive
nology Adoption Life Cycle
HMR scientiﬁc services in DRIHM); secondly, both
share a perspective on target groups distinguishable
by their characteristic response to discontinuous innovations (see the groups in ﬁgure 1); thirdly, and more importantly, both share the observation
of dissociation – that is, the diﬃculty any group has in accepting an innovation if it is presented
in the same way as it was to the group “to its immediate left” in ﬁgure 1.

2

The DRIHM Case of Hydro-Meteorological Research

Predicting the impact of weather and climate phenomena on the environment is one of the
main challenges of the 21st century with signiﬁcant societal and economic implications [11, 12].
Central to all solution approaches are the ability to transparently access and chain hydrometeorological data and models, and to facilitate the cross-organizational collaboration between
meteorologists, hydrologists, and earth science experts for jointly advancing HMR.
DRIHM aims at supporting HMR by providing an appropriate Grid-based high performance
computing infrastructure to compile and execute linear chains of multiscale models [2]. Based on
real ﬂood events like Genoa 2011, Genoa 2014, and Serbia 2014, the project could demonstrate
the value of the developed infrastructure services and the scientiﬁc services [5].
Technically speaking, DRIHM provides an HMR portal which not only implements all necessary authentication and authorization mechanisms. It also supports the required model chaining and the chain execution on Grid resources (e.g., granted by the European Grid Infrastructure (EGI)2 ), Cloud resources (e.g., available through EGI’s Federated Cloud Initiative3 ),
HPC resources (e.g., provided through the Partnership for Advanced Computing in Europe
1 http://www.drihm.eu
2 http://www.egi.eu

3 https://wiki.egi.eu/wiki/Fedcloud-tf:Main

2664

Lifting science services up to the mainstream

Schiﬀers, gentschen Felde, Kranzlm¨
uller

(PRACE)4 ), or proprietary resources accessible via web services interfaces or any other speciﬁc
clients as ﬁgure 2 illustrates.
While DRIHM represents
a class of inter-disciplinary
DLR
CIMA
RHMSS
projects that are aiming at
Zeus
LRZ
Blue Joule
large scale computing while at
(Poland)
SuperMUC
(Daresbury)
the same time processing big
data sets across organizational
FedCloud
Static Data Repository
boundaries, technical issues are
LRZ Cluster
just one side of the coin. ReguScience Gateway
MyProxy Service
gUSE/WS-PGRADE
latory frameworks to adhere to,
„DRIHM Binary
Repository“
Information Service
adequate education & training programs, and tailored ITGrid Resource
Meta Scheduler
Management processes have to
deploys
gLite WMS
be considered equally [7]. Figure 3 illustrates this schematically as a matrix spanned by
HMR Scientist
Operations
defines
provides
a vertical technology axis and
the horizontal topic-related asResult
Workflow Design
Execution of Workflow Tasks
Interpretation
& Definition
pect axis.
Assessing DRIHM (and similar
projects) against the 16
Figure 2: DRIHM Distributed Computing Infrastructure
matrix cells exhibits some observations: First, the technological context is primarily set by “familiar” work habits, a typical
behavior right of the chasm in ﬁgure 1; second, in computational sciences, the acquisition of
new scientiﬁc knowledge correlates with the availability, usability, and accessibility of/to resources and services (“scientiﬁc divide”); third, ad hoc operational IT service management and
unmethodical software engineering are not seldom; fourth, short-term arranged education solves
short-term problems, only long-term arranged education has sustainable eﬀects.
A possible explanation for these and similar pheion
al
nt
cat g
)
re Leg es
(IT eme Edu ainin
nomena
is the lack of familiarity with the opportunia
u
g
r
f tw
Iss
na
&T
So
Ma
ties a methodologically sound application of computaCompute
tional science services may oﬀer. Especially the early
Data
majority tends to perceive these opportunities as “newNetwork
Security
fangled inventions” which may end up as passing fads.
Consequently, they are content to wait and see how
other scientists are making out before they jump on
Figure 3: Matrix of Challenges
the bandwagon themselves.
Web Service

Web

SLURM

GRAM-5

LoadLeveler

LSF

Others

Torque

rOCCI

Repository providing static
data for a particular model
Applies same concepts as
DRIHM Binary Repository

GRAM-5

myproxy.ipb.ac.rs

portal.drihm.eu

Portlet for graphical
workflow definition

Portlet for job
submission

Remote
visualization

Via dedicated portlet

BDII

Possible, but only used for
selecting special resources

egee-bdii.cnaf.infn.it
bdii.hellasgrid.gr
bdii.ipb.ac.rs

Download for
local
visualization

drihm-tools.pub.lab.nm.ifi.lmu.de

Statistics

input.tgz

CREAM

Input data
& Config

Local
scheduler

GRAM-5

Gridway

k
kfl
Workflow
Description

Interface

3D
Visualization

Quality ensurance and testing before prooduction deployment. Uses the EGCF test--

e-Infrastructures

Develops model and
defines job inputs

3

An Exercise in Applying the Chasm Model

In order to lift up computational science services to the scientiﬁc mainstream, we propose
applying Moore’s chasm model with scientists as “customers”, services (both infrastructure
ones and science related ones) as “products”, and the following groups (which could all be
identiﬁed in DRIHM):
4 http://www.prace-ri.eu/

2665

Lifting science services up to the mainstream

Schiﬀers, gentschen Felde, Kranzlm¨
uller

• Innovators (or Technology Enthusiasts): Scientists that pursue new research opportunities
by innovative technologies aggressively.
• Early Adopters (or Visionaries): Scientists that buy into new scientiﬁc concepts very early.
Unlike innovators, however, they are not technology driven. Rather they are people who
ﬁnd it easy to imagine, understand, and appreciate the beneﬁts of a new technology, and
to relate the potential beneﬁts to their other scientiﬁc concerns.
• Early Majority (or Pragmatists): Scientists that somehow relate to technology, but ultimately they are driven by a strong sense of scientiﬁc practicality. They are willing
to wait and see whether and how other scientists will behave before they “jump on the
bandwagon”.
• Late Majority (or Conservatives): Scientists that are not technology savvy. They will not
be able to handle the technologies to support their science. Consequently, they wait until
something has become an established scientiﬁc standard, and even then they want to see
lots of support and tend to follow “big names”.
• Laggards (or Skeptics): Scientists that do not want to have anything to do with new
scientiﬁc processes and the technology associated with them.
Moore suggests a set of procedures to follow for lifting up computational science services to
the mainstream [8].
1. Select the target customer: Target customers are selected using scenarios. The collection
of scenarios is then rated and ranked. We identiﬁed nine target customers (from nonacademic scientists to established (non-computer) scientists to master students). The
associated scenarios were rated against four “show stopper” issues (Are there “big name”
multiplicators? Does slow scientiﬁc progress “hurt”? Can DRIHM ﬁeld a complete and
compelling solution? Are there competitive solutions already available?) and four “nice
to have” factors (Are there already partners and allies to deliver solutions? Are there
provisioning channels already established? Is DRIHM’s reputation good enough? Will
the customer pave the way into other targets?).
2. Consider computational science services as “whole services”: Typically, there are gaps
between the promises made to scientists and the real ability of the provided services.
These gaps have to be overcome by a variety of ancillary services to become what is
called a “whole service”. Typical examples are well established libraries that are not adequate enough for extreme scale cases; or overloaded resource access methods; or restricted
workﬂow engines. Based on the scenario analysis in the previous step we identiﬁed the
areas DRIHM would take the primary responsibility for and the holes to be ﬁlled by
partners and allies. Figure 2 shows (an excerpt of) the result.
3. Competitive positioning: There is always “competition” around. This can be “the old
way” or some alternative science approaches. In DRIHM we focus on these competitive
approaches by not only communicating how “DRIHMiﬁed” science is diﬀerent, but also
by demonstrating the validity of the DRIHM claim. This was done at several occasions
and through several scientiﬁc publications. We could also prove the easy integration of
competitive and complementary approaches.
What did we achieve? We were able to increase the utilization of the DRIHM service
packages and to extend the DRIHM services by seamlessly integrating other packages. Scientists
could report on spectacular results which are in the process of being published. Students raised
2666

Lifting science services up to the mainstream

Schiﬀers, gentschen Felde, Kranzlm¨
uller

the demand for dedicated courses and seminars and are increasingly asking for theses in these
ﬁelds. Finally, international cooperations could be established (for example the DRIHM2US
initiative, http://www.drihm2us.eu/). And last but not least: Computer scientists learned
understanding HMR scientists and vice versa – a prerequisite for the “mainstream”.

4

Conclusion

During the DRIHM project we observed that innovative research infrastructures have diﬃculties
to be accepted by the early majority (the scientiﬁc pragmatists) because these infrastructures
are not yet “mainstream”. In this paper we reported on an exercise to use Moore’s chasm model
to lift computational science services up to this mainstream. However, further research has to
be conducted in order to prove the model’s general applicability. In particular, generalizing the
chasm approach requires adequate “organizational setups” but there is no experience yet for
virtual environments.

References
[1] ASCAC. The opportunities and challenges of exascale computing. Summary Report of the Advanced Scientiﬁc Computing Advisory Committee (ASCAC) Subcommittee, U.S. Department of
Energy, Oﬃce of Science, 2010.
[2] E. Danovaro, L. Roverelli, G. Zereik, A. Galizia, D. D’Agostino, G. Paschina, A. Quarati,
A. Clematis, F. Delogu, E. Fiori, A. Parodi, C. Straube, N. Felde, Q. Harpham, B. Jagers, L. Garrote, L. Dekic, M. Ivkovic, O. Caumont, and E. Richard. Setting Up an Hydro-Meteo Experiment
in Minutes: The DRIHM e-Infrastructure for HM Research. In Proceedings of the IEEE 10th
International Conference on e-Science, volume 1, pages 47–54, Oct 2014.
[3] Jack Dongarra, Jeﬀrey Hittinger, John Bell, Luis Chacn, Robert Falgout, Michael Heroux, Paul
Hovland, Esmond Ng, Clayton Webster, and Stefan Wild. Applied mathematics research for
exascale computing. Report, DOE ASCR Exascale Mathematics Working Group, 2014.
[4] ETP4HPC. ETP4HPC Strategic Research Agenda: Achieving HPC leadership in Europe. Report,
European Technology Platform for High Performance Computing (ETP4HP), 2013.
[5] E. Fiori, A. Comellas, L. Molini, N. Rebora, F. Siccardi, D.J. Gochis, S. Tanelli, and A. Parodi.
Analysis and hindcast simulations of an extreme rainfall event in the Mediterranean area: The
Genoa 2011 case. Atmospheric Research, 138(0):13 – 29, 2014.
[6] Peter M. Kogge and David R. Resnick. Yearly update: Exascale projections for 2013. Sandia
Report SAND2013-9229, Sandia National Laboratories, 2013.
[7] M. Leenaars and F. Karayannis. e-infrastructures roadmap. Report, e-Infrastructure Reﬂection
Group (e-IRG), 2007.
[8] Geoﬀrey A. Moore. Crossing the chasm: Marketing and selling disruptive products to mainstream
customers. HarperBusiness Essentials, New York and NY, rev. ed edition, 2002.
[9] Everett M. Rogers. Diﬀusion of innovations. Free Press, New York, 5th ed. edition, 2003.
[10] Brian Sauser, Dinesh Verma, Jose Ramirez-Marquez, and Ryan Gove. From TRL to SRL: The
concept of systems readiness levels. In Proceedings of the 4th Annual Conference on Systems
Engineering Research, Los Angeles, CA, 2006.
[11] Thomas F. Stocker. Climate change 2013: The physical science basis. Cambridge university press,
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, 2013.
[12] Patrick Vinck. World disasters report: Focus on technology and the future of humanitarian action.
International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies, Geneva, Switzerland, 2013.

2667

