Procedia Computer Science
Volume 51, 2015, Pages 693–702
ICCS 2015 International Conference On Computational Science

Modeling of Imaging Mass Spectrometry Data and
Testing by Permutation for Biomarkers Discovery in
Tissues
Michal Marczyk1*, Grzegorz Drazek2, Monika Pietrowska3, Piotr Widlak3,
Joanna Polanska1, Andrzej Polanski2
1

Data Mining Group, Institute of Automatic Control, Silesian University of Technology, Gliwice,
Poland
2
Institute of Informatics, Silesian University of Technology, Gliwice, Poland
3
Center for Translational Research and Molecular Biology of Maria Sklodowska-Curie Memorial
Cancer Center and Institute of Oncology, Gliwice, Poland
michal.marczyk@polsl.pl, grzegorz.drazek@polsl.pl, m_pietrowska@io.gliwice.pl,
widlak@io.gliwice.pl, joanna.polanska@polsl.pl, andrzej.polanski@polsl.pl

Abstract
Exploration of tissue sections by imaging mass spectrometry reveals abundance of different
biomolecular ions in different sample spots, allowing finding region specific features. In this paper we
present computational and statistical methods for investigation of protein biomarkers i.e. biological
features related to presence of different pathological states. Proposed complete processing pipeline
includes data pre-processing, detection and quantification of peaks by using Gaussian mixture
modeling and identification of specific features for different tissue regions by performing permutation
tests. Application of created methodology provides detection of proteins/peptides with concentration
levels specific for tumor area, normal epithelium, muscle or saliva gland regions with high confidence.
Keywords: cancer, Gaussian mixture model, imaging mass spectrometry, spectra pre-processing, permutation test.

1 Introduction
Mass spectrometry (MS) is used to measure weight of ionized proteins/peptides or their fragments,
and allows the identification of proteins based on the amino acid sequence in polypeptide chains. It is
the main research tool in modern proteomics and allows characterization of complex tissues. Among
mass spectrometry techniques that have the major impact on protein science and proteomics there is
*

Corresponding author.
This work was financially supported by POIG.02.03.01-24-099/13 (MM, GD), BK/265/RAU1/2014/10 (JP) and UMO2011/01/B/ST6/06868 (AP). All the calculations were carried out using GeCONiI infrastructure funded by project number
POIG.02.03.01-24-099/13.
Selection and peer-review under responsibility of the Scientiﬁc Programme Committee of ICCS 2015
c The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V.
doi:10.1016/j.procs.2015.05.186

693

Modeling and Testing of IMS Data for Biomarkers Discovery in Tissues

Marczyk M, et al.

Matrix-Assisted Laser Desorption/Ionization (MALDI) MS coupled with Time-of-Flight (ToF) type of
analyzer. In the MALDI-ToF technique proteins are mixed with solid matrix and then ionized after
laser light-induced desorption from the matrix. Generated ions are accelerated in the electromagnetic
field and the time of flight of individual ions before they hit the detector reflects their size. Spatiallycorrelated MALDI analysis of tissue sections, imaging MS (MALDI-IMS), can reveal abundance of
different biomolecular ions in different sample spots. The idea of IMS was applied to visualize spatial
distribution of peptides and proteins for the first time in 1997 [1]. Since that time IMS has been
successfully employed in cancer research, neuroscience, reproductive biology and pharmaceutics for
the study and development of new drugs [2]. Most of the IMS applications in cancer research are
connected with identification of spectrally unique regions within a sample by spatial segmentation [3,
4]. In this paper we are resolving a reverse problem – specific tissue areas are delineated by an
experienced pathologist giving information for each spectrum about region affiliation, which gives an
opportunity to find biomarkers with increased or decreased concentration level across regions.
The quality of spectrum depends on factors such as tissue preparation, matrix deposition and MS
acquisition. In order to provide appropriate results a comprehensive quality assessment step is
required. In literature there are some methods for quality assessment of IMS data based on comparing
the ion distribution maps of known proteins across all animals, Intensity-Intensity plots and analysis of
peaks intensity variance in a given group [5]. After removing improper signals mass spectra are preprocessed by baseline correction, alignment and normalization [6]. Baseline is a smooth and nonlinear curve observed at the low intensity part of the mass spectrum. It can arise by the presence of
delayed charges releasing clusters of matrix components and small molecular fragments from the
process of degradation, desorption and collisions in the acceleration phase. Each of the measurements
is also affected by an error, which cause nonlinear shifts in M/Z scale between spectra. Correction of
this error is called alignment. Alignment approaches can be divided into two categories: profile-based,
where whole spectra signals are taken and aligned to a reference spectrum and feature-based, where
signal dimension is reduced to the most important features (peaks) and then alignment is executed on
peaks. The purpose of spectrum normalization is to identify and remove sources of systematic
variation between spectra intensities due to varying amounts of sample, degradation over time in the
sample or variation in the instrument detector sensitivity. Normalization of mass spectra is beneficial
to minimization of inter-spectra variance that is not connected with the examined biological problem
[7].
The most important part of mass spectra pre-processing is the detection and quantification of
peaks. When proteomic mass profiles are analyzed and interpreted, peaks are used as features of mass
spectra. It is assumed that each peak corresponds to a certain protein/peptide, and the composition of
the mass spectrum carries direct information on composition of the analyzed samples. There are many
algorithms for proteomic MS peak detection and quantification [8, 9]. There are also tools created
strictly for MALDI-IMS data analysis [3]. Software suites provided by spectrometer suppliers include
an application to load the instrument-specific IMS data, reconstruct an image, and offer simple postprocessing tools to navigate through the data, enhance images, and help with data interpretation.
Among them there are: FlexImaging (Bruker, Billerica, MA, USA), ImageQuest (ThermoFisher
Scientific, Bremen, Germany), and Tissueview (AB SCIEX, Foster City, CA, USA). Functionality and
flexibility of such commercial software is limited. MSiReader is an open source software built on the
Matlab platform to process, analyze, and visualize imaging data. Commercial SCiLS Lab (SCiLS,
Bremen, Germany) is software for visualization, analysis and interpretation of MALDI imaging data.
Also Computis European project developed several complementary software tools to process mass
spectrometry imaging data [10]. We investigated all of the above software packages that are based on
signal peaks finding or simple modeling fragments of signal and state that none of them offer accurate
detection of signal peaks, which is an essential element of an imaging mass spectra analysis. An
interesting alternative approach to computational processing of proteomic MS spectra is modeling
spectra by a mixture of component functions. A natural choice for the single component shape is the

694

Modeling and Testing of IMS Data for Biomarkers Discovery in Tissues

Marczyk M, et al.

Gaussian distribution function. Gaussian mixture modeling methodology brought already many
discoveries in analysis of protein [11] and lipid [12] MALDI-ToF spectra and can be applied to
analysis of MALDI-IMS data.
Cancer is a genetic disease caused by damage of DNA chain by mutations in single cells and the
interaction of multiple genetic and environmental factors. Cancer cells are created from the normal
cells. Such a phenomenon excludes an assumption of independent samples, thus use of standard
statistical tests to find biomarkers is not allowed. Additionally, in molecular imaging of cancer
cells/regular tissue cells measured intensities from adjacent spots in a given region of interest are
highly correlated. To properly model distribution of test statistics, use of permutation tests is needed.
In this paper we aim to present a comprehensive methodology of MALDI-IMS data analysis
composed of known pre-processing tools, advanced mathematical modeling algorithms and
permutation tests, used to identify components differentiating among proteome profiles of tumor and
surrounding tissues. Applying proposed methods significantly expands the knowledge on molecular
biomarkers characterized by concentration level specific for particular parts of analyzed tissue. An
important advantage of the algorithm is a huge reduction of data dimensionality from billions of
measurement values to just a few millions, without any loss of important information.

2 Materials and Methods

Figure 1: Characterization of tissue specimen used in the study. Hematoxylin and Eosin stained sections
(left panel) and specific tissue areas delineated by pathologist (right panel); tumor area – red, normal
epithelium - blue, muscle – yellow, saliva gland – green.

2.1 Data
Surgery is the primary treatment in oral squamous cell carcinoma (OSCC), one of the most
frequent cancers in head and neck region. Material from one patient who underwent surgery because

695

Modeling and Testing of IMS Data for Biomarkers Discovery in Tissues

Marczyk M, et al.

of OSCC was collected. The tissue sample which contained tumor and surrounding tissues was
evaluated and resected by an experienced pathologist from fresh postoperative material (Figure 1). The
collected sample was frozen and kept at -700C. Tissue specimen was cut in a cryostat (10 mm
sections) and placed onto a glass slide coated with indium tin oxide (ITO). The prepared slide was
stored at -700C until analysis. Tissue section was measured with MALDI-TOF mass spectrometer
UltrafleXtreme (Bruker Daltonics) equipped with a smartbeam II™ laser operating at 1 kHz repetition
rate. Ions were accelerated at 25 kV with PIE time of 100 ns. Spectra were recorded in positive
reflectron mode within M/Z range of 800-4000 Da and externally calibrated with Peptide Calibration
Standard (Bruker Daltonics). A raster width of 100 μm was applied, 400 shots were collected from
each ablation point.

2.2 Processing Pipeline
As reproducibility is necessary for successful biomarker discovery, it is important to systematically
assess data quality in biologically relevant MALDI-IMS experiments. We propose a method for
finding low quality spectra based on modeling of robust signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) measure of
spectra intensity by mixture of Gaussians [13]. We are looking for the samples with too high SNR
values that indicates a large amount of only very low peaks, which may be the result of high noise
occurrence. To identify the cut-off value we use an idea of modeling the distribution of SNR using
Gaussian mixture model (GMM) and k-means algorithm to distinguish Gaussians consisting of low
quality spectra [14].
We estimate the baseline within multiple shifted windows and regress the varying baseline to the
window points using a spline approximation. Baseline correction algorithm relies on choosing a part
of the spectrum (constant number of measurements) and sorting them in an increasing way. Next the
value of percentile to refuse some points which are a low frequency noise should be chosen.
Afterwards the window should be moved to the next interval and the same operations should be
repeated. These points will create a baseline after approximating them using splines.
Spectra are aligned with use of PAFFT algorithm [15] which adapts fast Fourier transform crosscorrelation for shift estimation. The algorithm divides the spectrum into an arbitrary number of
segments such that the shift in each signal can be estimated independently. PAFFT makes use of the
sequential spectra segmentation model with a minimum segment size parameter and maximum shift
correction that is allowed. We introduced a new idea for estimating both parameters by setting its
values relative to mean M/Z of the analyzed segment. This idea strongly reduced alignment artifacts
and overalignments.
Since total laser power delivered to each spot on the sample by mass spectrometer is the same, we
assume that sum of ions that reach the detector should be comparable between all spectra. Total Ion
Current (TIC) normalization, in which we transform each spectrum in such a way that area under the
curve is the same in all spectra, is the most effective method for reducing the deviation from linearity.
It is also the most commonly used normalization method in practice [7].
We define peaks based on modeling average spectrum, calculated as a mean intensity signal of all
samples, using Gaussian mixture model [16]. We implemented the procedure of fitting the Gaussian
mixture model to the average spectrum by a modified version of expectation maximization (EM)
iterations. An important element of the EM algorithm is the choice of initial values for iterations.
There are studies devoted to comparisons of different methods of generating initial values for EM
iterations [17], but they were only performed for low number of Gaussian components (two or three
Gaussians in the model). The results obtained in these studies do not extend to problems of mixtures
of probability distributions with a large number of Gaussian components. In order to find initial
condition for Gaussian mixture model of the protein mass spectra, the signal is first partitioned into
fragments. The partition is obtained by using existing peak detection algorithms. The obtained
fragments are separately decomposed into Gaussian mixture models with just a few model
components. To provide regularization of the segments models we used Bayesian information

696

Modeling and Testing of IMS Data for Biomarkers Discovery in Tissues

Marczyk M, et al.

criterion for estimating the number of model components. The parameters of the computed models are
aggregated to form a final GMM model. Spectra averaging may introduce signal artifacts, so the postprocessing of components that represent artifacts is needed. It might happen that more than one
component in a model refer to the same protein/peptide, so we defined a similarity criterion that is
based on M/Z distance between model components. Merging is done with the use of the formula found
by method of moments. Also the components with extremely high variance are filtered out.

Figure 2: Block diagram describing steps of proposed processing pipeline

2.3 Statistical Analysis
The number of measured spectra for each tissue region is proportional to the size of the region. The
largest region on the analyzed sample is the muscle tissue. The large number of spectra in muscle
region (more than 3000) allows to compensate moderate imbalance by simple random sampling,
where each spectrum has the same probability of being chosen during the sampling process. Therefore,
we consider only randomly chosen 638 (median value from other group sizes) spectra from the largest
group to achieve the balance between groups sizes.
A permutation test gives a way to compute the sampling distribution for any test statistic, under the
strong null hypothesis that a set of protein intensities has absolutely no effect on the outcome, which is
defined as an affiliation to the tissue regions. To estimate the sampling distribution of the test statistic
we need many samples generated under the strong null hypothesis. By randomly shuffling the
outcome we can make up as many data sets as we like. If the null hypothesis is true the shuffled data
sets should look like the real data, otherwise they should look different from the real data. The ranking
of the real test statistic among the shuffled test statistics gives a proper p-value. Permutation tests are
popular for assessing statistical significance because they do not rely on specific distributional
assumptions and can be used in connection with standard statistical tests. In this study the 106
permutations were done for ANOVA testing of every spectral component. Additionally, Bonferroni
method was applied for multiple testing correction.

3 Results and Discussion
3.1 Data Size Reduction
MALDI-IMS analysis of one tissue sample gives measurements for 9 495 spots, where each of
them is represented by a single mass spectrum. Due to the high resolution of the mass spectrometer
used in the study, each spectrum contains 109 568 measured M/Z and intensity values. In summary,
we get about 2 billion measured values stored as integer data type. Applying post-processing of
Gaussian mixture model brings finally 3 156 components. By calculating the area under model
components in each spectrum we get about 30 million measured values stored as double type. This

697

Modeling and Testing of IMS Data for Biomarkers Discovery in Tissues

Marczyk M, et al.

gives almost 70 times smaller number of measurements stored without any loss of important
information about protein concentrations in all samples.
When we look at the occupied hard disk space, raw data occupy 7.91 GB on hard drive in mass
spectrometer manufacturer format (Bruker). After importing data to Matlab software and setting the
same M/Z scale for all spectra, we can reduce their size to 6.5 GB for data stored as a .mat file. By
decomposition of signal using Gaussian mixture model and calculating the area under components in
each spectrum we can reduce the size of stored data to 213 MB. This gives almost 30 times smaller
size comparing to full dataset. We get smaller reduction in data size than in number of data points, due
to the change in data type format from integer to double, however, it is necessary to perform such an
operation to increase accuracy of pre-processed MS signal.

3.2 GMM-based Peaks Modeling
Raw single mass spectrum obtained using MALDI-IMS is presented in Figure 3 (upper plot). At
least few thousands of signal peaks can be noticed by visual inspection. An isotopic pattern with
neighboring peaks occurring in the distance 1Da, which is characteristic for high resolution signal, is
observed when we zoom in the view of the spectrum (Figure 3, lower plot). Isotopic parts of the MS
signal are right skewed.

Figure 3: Single mass spectrum obtained using MALDI-IMS. Upper plot – spectrum in whole M/Z range.
Lower plot – magnified spectrum.

698

Modeling and Testing of IMS Data for Biomarkers Discovery in Tissues

Marczyk M, et al.

Before modeling MS signal with use of GMM, described pre-processing steps were applied. Data
were resampled, preserving original resolution, to a common M/Z space of 109 568 points, which
ranges from 799 to 3 996 Da. During quality control step with use of SNR-based method we removed
1.24% of data. Baseline artifacts were successfully removed independently for all spectra. Data were
aligned to reference spectrum, calculated by averaging intensities of all spectra in concurrent M/Z
values, by using moving window with minimum size of 0.7% of M/Z value in the middle of the
window and maximum shift allowed equal to 0.1% of M/Z value in the middle of the window. Data
were normalized to TIC value, which was equal to 3 034 678. After applying all pre-processing steps
average spectrum was created and used in mixture modeling part of processing pipeline.

Figure 4: Fragment of result of modeling average spectrum using GMM-based method. Upper plot – raw
model. Lower plot – post-processed model.

Constructed mixture model of average spectrum consists of 6 216 components with defined
location, spread and weight parameters (Figure 4, upper plot). Typically, application of our algorithm
results in modeling some peaks by two Gaussian components, which is consistent with the theory
described in [18]. Such results should be corrected. By post-processing of the original mixture model
we merged components that are close to the location parameter and filtered high variance components,
which are artifacts from the process of spectra averaging. Finally we found GMM model consisting of
3 156 components. Each component in the model represents measured protein/peptide concentration in
an analyzed spot on the tissue. Using the estimated location and dispersion parameters of Gaussian
components in the decomposition, we define the set of features as the logarithms of convolutions of
the probability density functions of components with the MS signals.

699

Modeling and Testing of IMS Data for Biomarkers Discovery in Tissues

Marczyk M, et al.

3.3 Different Regions Predictions
By using permutation tests, we found significant features for 4 human tissue regions: tumor area,
normal epithelium, muscle and saliva gland. If a feature was significant in a comparison of given
region to other regions and was not significant in a comparison between other regions, we assumed
that this feature is specific for a given region. From 3 156 GMM model components we found 56
features specific for tumor area, 25 for normal epithelium, 66 for muscle region and 194 for saliva
gland. By calculating sum of ranks of p-values of discrimination test between given region and other
regions and sorting them in ascending order, we created ranking of features specific for a given region.
In Table 1 we present 10 most significant features for each region.
From the list of top significant features specific for tumor area, the component with mean
parameter equal to 1169.61 Da was chosen for visualization purpose. Because position of each
spectrum on the tissue is known, we can create heat maps of concentration of protein/peptide
represented by the chosen component in the analyzed sample (Figure 5, upper left plot). We can
certainly notice increased intensities of given protein/peptide in a region marked by the pathologist as
tumor area. In other regions intensity of the same component remains at similar level. Concentration
level is higher in a position close to the center of the pathologist contour than at its edges. Boxplots of
intensities in different areas (Figure 5, upper right plot) show that median intensity of given
protein/peptide concentration in cancer region is higher than the upper quartile of intensities in other
regions. Spread of intensities is similar between all regions except saliva gland region. Investigation of
shape of average spectra created for different regions (Figure 5, lower plot) proves that the component
located at 1169.61 Da represents true signal with medium intensity level comparing to the highest
peak in the data.
Tissue region
Significant
components
M/Z in Da

Tumor
area
1043.55
2327.14
1169.61
2309.11
1044.55
2672.30
2636.28
2671.30
2399.34
2388.19

Epithelium

Muscle

1577.20
1740.63
1615.11
3269.59
3295.48
3441.85
1310.82
1962.19
3296.60
2338.35

1853.97
1856.19
1957.01
1956.00
1352.86
1274.69
932.59
1213.65
1535.02
1276.66

Saliva
gland
1504.78
1691.83
1585.81
1648.84
1458.75
3603.03
1267.19
1484.79
844.87
1582.77

Table 1: 10 most significant components specific to different regions

All of the above results suggest that the process of carcinogenesis is strictly connected with
intensified production of peptide located at 1169.61 Da which was identified as a fragment of
cytochrome c protein. This protein is associated with cellular respiration. It is a hemeprotein acting as
an electron carrier in the respiratory chain (one of the stages of cellular respiration). Each cytochrome
consist of heme group with centrally placed iron atom that during the reception of an electron passes
from the state of Fe3+ to Fe2+ state. After locating the electron to the next carrier iron atom returns to
Fe3+ state. Potentially a larger amount of this protein in cancer cells may be associated with a more
rapid metabolism of tumor cells. Cytochrome c plays also a role in apoptosis, which is a
programmable death of a cell. Suppression of the anti-apoptotic members or activation of the proapoptotic members of the Bcl-2 family leads to altered mitochondrial membrane permeability resulting
in release of cytochrome c into the cytosol. Binding of cytochrome c to Apaf-1 triggers the activation
of caspase-9, which then accelerates apoptosis by activating other caspases.

700

Modeling and Testing of IMS Data for Biomarkers Discovery in Tissues

Marczyk M, et al.

Figure 5: Visualization of cancer specific component located at 1169.618 Da. Upper left plot – tissue location
heat map with cancer region selected by pathologist. Upper right plot – boxplots of peptide level within 4
regions. Lower plot – average spectra for 4 regions.

4 Conclusions
Analysis of imaging mass spectrometry data by use of proposed processing pipeline connected
with permutation tests can lead to finding novel disease-specific molecular events and allow better
understanding of connections between tissue location and molecular processes. Using high resolution
IMS data we provide detection of proteins/peptides specific to different regions of tissue collected
from patient with oral squamous cell carcinoma. The most interesting findings are mixture model
components with significantly increased or decreased intensity values within spectra measured in
cancer region with comparison to other regions. Higher concentration of presented peptide in cancer
region may be associated with a faster metabolism of tumor cells or impaired apoptotic mechanism.

701

Modeling and Testing of IMS Data for Biomarkers Discovery in Tissues

Marczyk M, et al.

Estimated parameters of Gaussian components can be applied to calculate protein/peptide intensities
for tissues gathered for other oral squamous cell carcinoma patients, to prove its biomarker potential.

References
1. Caprioli RM, Farmer TB, Gile J. Molecular Imaging of Biological Samples:  Localization of
Peptides and Proteins Using MALDI-TOF MS. Anal Chem 1997;69(23):4751-60.
2. Nimesh S, Mohottalage S, Vincent R, Kumarathasan P. Current Status and Future Perspectives of
Mass Spectrometry Imaging. International journal of molecular sciences 2013;14(6):11277-301.
3. Alexandrov T. MALDI imaging mass spectrometry: statistical data analysis and current
computational challenges. BMC bioinformatics 2012;13 Suppl 16:S11.
4. Thiele H, Heldmann S, Trede D, Strehlow J, Wirtz S, Dreher W, et al. 2D and 3D MALDIimaging: conceptual strategies for visualization and data mining. Biochimica et biophysica acta
2014;1844(1 Pt A):117-37.
5. Karlsson O, Bergquist J, Andersson M. Quality measures of imaging mass spectrometry aids in
revealing long-term striatal protein changes induced by neonatal exposure to the cyanobacterial
toxin beta-N-methylamino-L-alanine (BMAA). Molecular & cellular proteomics : MCP
2014;13(1):93-104.
6. Roy P, Truntzer C, Maucort-Boulch D, Jouve T, Molinari N. Protein mass spectra data analysis for
clinical biomarker discovery: a global review. Brief Bioinform 2011;12(2):176-86.
7. Meuleman W, Engwegen JY, Gast MC, Beijnen JH, Reinders MJ, Wessels LF. Comparison of
normalisation methods for surface-enhanced laser desorption and ionisation (SELDI) time-of-flight
(TOF) mass spectrometry data. BMC bioinformatics 2008;9:88.
8. Yang C, He Z, Yu W. Comparison of public peak detection algorithms for MALDI mass
spectrometry data analysis. BMC bioinformatics 2009;10:4.
9. Emanuele VA, 2nd, Gurbaxani BM. Benchmarking currently available SELDI-TOF MS
preprocessing techniques. Proteomics 2009;9(7):1754-62.
10. Robbe M-F, Both J-P, Prideaux B, Klinkert I, Picaud V, Schramm T, et al. Software tools of the
Computis European project to process mass spectrometry images. European Journal of Mass
Spectrometry 2014;20(5):351-60.
11. Pietrowska M, Polanska J, Suwinski R, Widel M, Rutkowski T, Marczyk M, et al. Comparison of
peptide cancer signatures identified by mass spectrometry in serum of patients with head and neck,
lung and colorectal cancers: Association with tumor progression. Int J Oncol 2012;40(1):148-56.
12. Jelonek K, Pietrowska M, Ros M, Zagdanski A, Suchwalko A, Polanska J, et al. Radiation-induced
changes in serum lipidome of head and neck cancer patients. International journal of molecular
sciences 2014;15(4):6609-24.
13. Marczyk M, Polanska J. Methods for quality control of low-resolution MALDI-ToF spectra.
Proceedings of 5th International Conference on Bioinformatics Models, Methods and Algorithms:
Scitepress; 2014. p. 172-7.
14. Marczyk M, Jaksik R, Polanski A, Polanska J. Adaptive filtering of microarray gene expression
data based on Gaussian mixture decomposition. BMC bioinformatics 2013;14(1):101.
15. Wong JW, Durante C, Cartwright HM. Application of fast Fourier transform cross-correlation for
the alignment of large chromatographic and spectral datasets. Anal Chem 2005;77(17):5655-61.
16. McLachlan GJ, Peel D. Finite mixture models. New York: Wiley; 2000.
17. Karlis D, Xekalaki E. Choosing initial values for the EM algorithm for finite mixtures. Comput
Stat Data An 2003;41(3-4):577-90.
18. Kempka M, Sjodahl J, Bjork A, Roeraade J. Improved method for peak picking in matrix-assisted
laser desorption/ionization time-of-flight mass spectrometry. Rapid Communications in Mass
Spectrometry 2004;18(11):1208-12.

702

