Procedia Computer Science
Volume 51, 2015, Pages 2178–2187
ICCS 2015 International Conference On Computational Science

Fidelity of Precipitation Extremes in High Resolution
Global Climate Simulations.
Salil Mahajan1 , Katherine J. Evans1 , Marcia Branstetter1 , Valentine
Anantharaj1 , and Juliann K. Leifeld2
1

2

Computational Earth Sciences Group and Climate Change Science Institute,
Oak Ridge National Laboratory, Oak Ridge, Tennessee, U.S.A.
mahajans@ornl.gov
Department of Mathematics, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, Minnesota, U.S.A.

Abstract
Precipitation extremes have tangible societal impacts. Here, we assess if current state of the
art global climate model simulations at high spatial resolutions (0.35◦ x0.35◦ ) capture the observed behavior of precipitation extremes in the past few decades over the continental US. We
design a correlation-based regionalization framework to quantify precipitation extremes, where
samples of extreme events for a grid box may also be drawn from neighboring grid boxes with
statistically equal means and statistically signiﬁcant temporal correlations. We model precipitation extremes with the Generalized Extreme Value (GEV) distribution ﬁts to time series of
annual maximum precipitation. Non-stationarity of extremes is captured by including a timedependent parameter in the GEV distribution. Our analysis reveals that the high-resolution
model substantially improves the simulation of stationary precipitation extreme statistics particularly over the Northwest Paciﬁc coastal region and the Southeast US. Observational data
exhibits signiﬁcant non-stationary behavior of extremes only over some parts of the Western
US, with declining trends in the extremes. While the high resolution simulations improve upon
the low resolution model in simulating this non-stationary behavior, the trends are statistically
signiﬁcant only over some of those regions.
Keywords: climate extremes, non-stationarity of extremes, high resolution climate modeling

1

Introduction

With increases in computational power and recent advances in climate modeling, multidecadal
simulations with high resolution global climate models are being integrated more often. Most
signiﬁcant improvements with high resolution models are noted in the realism of reproducing
intense storms and in the simulations of mean climate over regions strongly inﬂuenced by orography [23]. Early analyses of these simulations reveal that while simulated mean precipitation
may improve with increase in resolution [13], the result may be model sensitive [1]. Further,
2178

Selection and peer-review under responsibility of the Scientiﬁc Programme Committee of ICCS 2015
c The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V.

doi:10.1016/j.procs.2015.05.492

Extremes in high resolution global simulations . . .

a.

c.

CPC Gauge Analysis

T85 Model

Mahajan et al.

b.

d.

MERRA Reanalysis

T341 Model

99.9 Precentile Precipitation (mm/day)

Figure 1: Simulation of precipitation extremes. 99.9 percentile of precipitation for (a) gauge
based analysis (CPC, 0.25◦ x0.25◦ ) (b) MERRA reanalysis (0.5◦ x0.67◦ ) (b) a low resolution
(T85, about 1.4◦ x1.4◦ ) model simulation and (c) a high resolution (T341, about 0.35◦ x0.35◦ )
model simulation for the period 1979-2005.

long-standing model biases like the double Inter-Tropical Convergence Zone (ITCZ) over the
tropical Paciﬁc continue to exist in these high-resolution models.
Recent observational studies suggest that there has been a signiﬁcant increase in regional
surface temperature and precipitation extremes over the past few decades [25, 5, 3, 9], with
some studies formally attributing the changes in climate extremes to anthropogenic activities
[5, 18]. Over the US, recent studies have found evidence of increasing extremes of precipitation
averaged over the whole continental US [17, 15], although not all datasets show signiﬁcant
trends. Further, multi-model global climate model projections suggest an increasing trend in
future precipitation extremes [17, 20], but with a large regional ensemble spread, particularly
over the tropics.
However, the observed extremes as well as the trend of extreme precipitation over the
past few decades is not well simulated by typical low resolution global climate models [14].
Recent studies suggest that increase in horizontal resolution can also improve simulations of
extreme precipitation over land [24, 23]. As an example, Figure 1 shows the 99.9 percentile
of precipitation, a familiar metric of extremes, for a high-resolution (0.25◦ x0.25◦ ) gauge based
analysis from the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration’s (NOAA) Climate Pre2179

Extremes in high resolution global simulations . . .

Mahajan et al.

diction Center (CPC), a high resolution reanalysis (0.5◦ x0.67◦ ) from National Aeronautics and
Space Administration (NASA) called the Modern-Era Retrospective Analysis for Research and
Applications (MERRA) and single simulations with a low resolution (1.4◦ X1.4◦ ) and a high
resolution (0.35◦ x0.35◦ ) model version of the Community Earth System Model (CESM1.0).
Distinct improvements with resolution are seen over the Northwest Paciﬁc coast, Sierra Nevada
mountains and the Southeast US, where the spatial pattern and magnitude of precipitation
extremes are much closer to the observed values in the high resolution simulation, as noted in
other model validation studies [24, 23]. High-resolution MERRA, which does not assimilate
gauge data, also captures the extremes over the Western US. However, it fails to capture the
extremes over the Southeastern US, where it is known to exhibit low variance [2].
Here, we assess further if the ﬁdelity of the high resolution CESM1.0 in simulating stationary
and non-stationary precipitation extremes has improved as compared to its inexpensive low
resolution version, using a regionalization framework to quantify extremes. We describe our
simulations and validation data used here in the next Section followed by a description of our
methodology to quantify extremes in Section 3. We present our results in Section 4 and provide
a brief summary and our future plans for the analysis of the simulation of climate extremes in
high resolution global climate models in Section 5.

2
2.1

Experiments and Data
Global Climate Model Simulations

We conduct two sets of experiments with Community Earth System Model (CESM1.0) using
the spectral dynamical core [19] and Community Atmosphere Model 4 (CAM4) atmospheric
physics parameterizations of radiative transfer, moist physics and turbulence conﬁgured to run
with prescribed observed ocean and sea-ice conditions. The two versions of the model simulate
a reasonable climate [7, 12] with the high resolution model also capturing the teleconnections
between the tropical Paciﬁc and Northwest Paciﬁc coast [12]. We conﬁgure the model at two
horizontal resolutions: T85 (1.4◦ x1.4◦ ) and T341 (0.35◦ x0.35◦ ). The model is forced with observed greenhouse gases, aerosols, ozone, sea surface temperatures and sea-ice conditions for
the period 1979-2005. The analysis presented below is based on an ensemble of ﬁve integrations
for each model conﬁguration. Each ensemble member integration starts with a diﬀerent initial
condition of the atmosphere. Previous studies with the T85 model suggest that the model captures the stationary and non-stationary components of extremes in surface temperature fairly
well globally, when compared to MERRA reanalysis [7]. Figure 1c, d show the precipitation
extremes simulated by these two model versions over the US.

2.2

Observational Data for Model Validation

We validate our results with the NOAA CPC gauge analysis product over the US [26]. The
gauge analysis is created using an optimal interpolation method and also corrects for the biases
caused by orographic eﬀects. We also compare CPC data and our model results against the
NASA MERRA reanalysis, which incorporates satellite measurements from the period 1979 to
present including the NASA Earth Observing System (EOS) data, in addition to surface based
observations [21]. It simulates the global hydrologic cycle and the water vapor climatology well,
particularly over the tropical oceans as compared to other reanlysis products [21], but exhibits
biases over land, for example over the Southeast US where it exhibits a low precipitation bias
[2]. An artifact of this bias is also seen in the simulation of extremes over the region (Figure 1).
2180

Extremes in high resolution global simulations . . .

Mahajan et al.

However, it is one of the few observationally based high-resolution products that can be used
to evaluate high resolutions simulations globally.

3
3.1

Methods
Generalized Extreme Value Distribution

We apply Generalized Extreme Value (GEV) distribution as a model of the annual maximum of
daily precipitation extremes at each grid point separately. The time series of annual maximum
daily precipitation (with 27 data points for the period 1979-2005) is used to compute the
parameters of a GEV using the maximum log-likelihood method. The block maximum (annual
maximum in our case) of independently and identically distributed samples, regardless of the
distribution of the population, follow the three parameter GEV distribution, G(μ, σ, ξ), which
is represented as:
G(z) = exp −[1 + ξ(

z − μ −1/ξ
)]
σ

(1)

where μ, σ and ξ represent the location, scale and shape parameter respectively of the
distribution. For situations where ξ = 0, the function is interpreted as the limit of the equation
as ξ → 0 [6]. These parameters can be easily inverted to compute the more familiar return
periods of extremes [6]. Here, we focus only on the location parameter of the GEV model.
Trends in extremes are generally established using non-parametric tests like the MannKendall test [25], bootstrapping [17] or by modeling non-stationary GEV [3]. We use the
latter method here. To represent non-stationarity in extremes in the GEV model of extremes,
we introduce a time dependent term in the location parameter (μ = μ0 + αt) represented
as G(μ0 + αt, σ, ξ), where t represents a time index. The additional parameter, α, is also
estimated with the maximum log-likelihood method along with the other three parameters.
Previous studies have found that the non-stationarity of scale and shape parameters for climate
extremes is not statistically signiﬁcant [3], and we do not explore these here. The approximate
distribution of GEV parameters is multivariate normal [6]. We thus use the standard error
of parameter estimates to establish the signiﬁcance of the linear trend (α) in the location
parameter using the two-tailed Student’s t-test.

3.2

Regionalization Framework

Statistical modeling of extremes suﬀers from small sample size. However, data from surrounding
regions can potentially provide more samples given a homogeneous regional climate. We use
a ﬂexible region of inﬂuence approach as our regionalization method. Such regionalization
frameworks have been used in ﬂood assessment modeling, and have been described in detail in
previous works [4]. Regionalization studies that exploit climate homogeneity to increase their
sample size for precipitation extremes have focused primarily on weather station data [16, 8].
Here, we use a regionalization methodology loosely based on these previous studies but in the
context of gridded model output and reanalysis data, where data from surrounding grid boxes,
which may not be adjacent but with homogeneous climate are pooled with the grid box data
for each year. The annual maximum for that grid point is then computed as the maxima of
that entire pool. Thus, the annual maximum for a grid box with n contributing surrounding
grid boxes is computed as a maximum of nx365 data points instead of just 365 daily values for
2181

Extremes in high resolution global simulations . . .

Mahajan et al.

a non-leap year. A new data pool is generated for each grid box, thus obviating the need for
creating ﬁxed climate zones.
We deﬁne climate homogeneity of two grid boxes based on two metrics. A surrounding grid
box is allowed to contribute to the pool of a grid box if their means are statistically equal (based
on a two-tailed Student’s t-test at the 95% conﬁdence level) and if their daily time series display
a statistically signiﬁcant linear correlation after removal of the annual cycle. Since precipitation
is highly intermittent, we only use days where the precipitation is greater than 0.5mm/day to
compute the mean and the serial correlation. We search for homogenous grid boxes within a
300km radius of the grid box, based on recent studies that suggest that daily precipitation has
a length scale of a few hundred kilometers [11]. It should be noted, however, that individual
intense precipitation events have a much smaller radius of correlation [9], but we here are only
interested in gathering samples of potential extreme events.
High resolution model output of several years of simulation comprises a very large dataset
(>20GB for global daily precipitation from a 25 year simulation). However, the regionalization
framework is easy to execute in parallel as regionalization for each grid point can be conducted
independently. We implemented such an algorithm in Python using the ’mpi4py’ module for the
above computation to eﬀectively use a compute cluster. The GEV parameters were computed
using the ’evd’ package in R.

4
4.1

Results
Stationary Extremes

Figure 2 shows the location parameter (μ) of the GEV distribution for CPC, MERRA, T85
model ensemble mean and the T341 model ensemble mean. The location parameter represents
the center of the GEV distribution from the origin. GEV parameters are estimated separately
for each ensemble member and then aggregated to generate the ensemble mean. The largest
extremes, as represented by the location parameter, are observed over the Northwest Paciﬁc
coast regions, the Sierra Nevada mountains and the Southeastern coastal regions. MERRA
captures the extremes in the Northwest Paciﬁc coast region but also displays larger extremes
inland of the coast. It fails to capture the magnitude of the extremes in the Southeast US, as
also noted in Fig. 1.
The T85 model captures the broad spatial pattern of the location parameters, but severely
underestimates the magnitude of extremes over the Northwestern and Southeastern regions.
The T341 model provides a signiﬁcant improvement over the T85 model in capturing the magnitude of extremes over these regions. While it exhibits stronger extremes in the Northwest
Paciﬁc and Southeast US, it is still weaker than CPC data in some parts of those regions.
Moreover, it is positively biased both inland of the Paciﬁc coast similar to MERRA. It also
overestimates the magnitude of extremes over the eastern half of the US. The overestimate
in precipitation extremes over the eastern half of the US also exists in several high resolution
regional models [22]. A similar bias also exists in a diﬀerent version of the model used here
(CAM5.0) which uses a diﬀerent dynamical core and several diﬀerent sub-grid parameterizations [23], but share the same deep convective precipitation parameterization, which was found
to be over-sensitive to horizontal resolution [23].
The low resolution model represents the spatial average of precipitation over its grid box
which is much larger than the CPC data and T341 model grid box. It thus does not represent
the variability observed in high resolution data, but rather a spatially smoothed variability. Fig.
3 shows the GEV location parameters for the CPC data and T341 model ensemble aggregated
2182

Extremes in high resolution global simulations . . .

a.

c.

CPC Gauge Analysis

Mahajan et al.

b.

d.

T85 Model

MERRA Reanalysis

T341 Model

GEV Location Parameter (mm/day)

Figure 2: GEV location parameter. GEV location parameter for (a) gauge based analysis (CPC,
0.25◦ ) (b) MERRA reanalysis (0.5◦ ) (c) low resolution (T85) model ensemble and (d) high
resolution (T341) model ensemble for the period 1979-2005. GEV parameters are computed
from the annual maximum time series for each grid box from its data pool generated after
regionalization
to the T85 model resolution. We conservatively map the precipitation data to the T85 grid
before computing the GEV parameters. The T85 model captures the aggregated precipitation
over the Northwest Paciﬁc. But, over the Southeastern US the model underestimates the
magnitude. The magnitude of extremes increase in the T341 model, improving on the T85
model over the Southeast but overestimating it over the Northwest, Central and Northeast US.
Previous studies have found that precipitation extremes do not converge even as the resolution
is increased to 0.25km [24], progressively increasing with resolution.

4.2

Non-stationary Extremes

Figure 4 shows the trend in the location parameters represented by α in the GEV model.
For the model ensembles, the ensemble mean of α is shown. The null hypotheses that α is
not signiﬁcantly diﬀerent from zero is tested based on a two-tailed Students t-test, and the
regions where the null hypothesis is rejected at the 95% conﬁdence level are hatched. The CPC
gauge analysis only shows signiﬁcant non-stationarity in the extremes over some regions in the
2183

Extremes in high resolution global simulations . . .
a.

CPC (mapped to T85 grid)

b.

T85 Model

Mahajan et al.
c.

T341 Model (mapped to T85 grid)

GEV Location Parameter (mm/day)

Figure 3: Coarsening to lower resolution. GEV location parameter for (a) CPC gauge based
analysis (b) T85 model ensemble and (c) T341 model ensemble. CPC data and the T341 data
are conservatively mapped to the T85 model grid.
Western half of the US with parts of Nevada, Southern California, Northwest Paciﬁc coastal
regions, central Montana and Southern New Mexico exhibiting a negative trend. Signiﬁcant
positive trend is observed in Northern Idaho and parts of Western California. The MERRA
reanalysis fails to capture the trend observed in the gauge analysis in the Western half of the
US. However, it exhibits signiﬁcant positive trends over large swaths of Central and Eastern
US, where it is negatively biased in the mean as well as the extremes. CPC gauge analysis also
exhibits these trends in most grid boxes, but these trends are not signiﬁcant. A recent study
ﬁnds similar trends in the observations with the eastern half showing largely positive trends
and the parts of Western US showing positive trends [18]. A number of previous studies of
trends in precipitation extremes over the US are largely based on large domain averages, where
the conterminous US is divided into climate regions based on empirical orthogonal functions,
and trends are evaluated based on century long data records. Thus, the results here are not
directly comparable to those studies. On the centennial time-scales, those studies do not ﬁnd a
signiﬁcant trend in the extremes over the Northwest region [10, 17]. However, signiﬁcant trends
were found over the Southern US [10, 17].
The T85 model exhibits weak non-stationarity over the US but does simulate the negative
trend over parts of California and Nevada but these are not signiﬁcant. The T341 model
simulates stronger trends in these regions which are also statistically signiﬁcant, particularly
over Southern California, Southern Nevada and Western Arizona comparing well the CPC gauge
analysis. The T341 model also simulates signiﬁcant positive trends over parts of Texas, where
CPC and MERRA also exhibit a positive trend. Over the Eastern US the model simulates
weak negative trends, where MERRA exhibits signiﬁcant positive trends.

5

Summary and Discussion

We examine the ﬁdelity of high resolution climate models in simulating the extremes of precipitation over the continental US. We use a regionalization framework to compute the annual
maximum precipitation time series for each grid box pooling data from temporally correlated
neighboring grid points that are also statistically similar. Our analysis reveals that high resolution models substantially improves the representation of stationary extremes of precipitation
over the Northwest Paciﬁc and Southeast US, where the coarse resolution model simulates much
weaker extremes than observed. Over the US, the high resolution model captures the declining
2184

Extremes in high resolution global simulations . . .

a.

c.

CPC Gauge Analysis

T85 Model

Mahajan et al.

b.

d.

MERRA Reanalysis

T341 Model

Linear Trend in Location Parameter (_, mm/yr)

Figure 4: Non-stationary extremes. Same as Fig. 2 but for the linear trend in the location
parameter of the non-stationary GEV model. Regions where the trend is statistically signiﬁcant,
based on a two-tailed t-test, are hatched.
trends in the extremes over the Southwest US where the observations also show signiﬁcant
trends. The low resolution model displays weaker trends in the region. When compared to
MERRA globally (not shown), the high resolution model only captures the non-stationarity
over parts of the Indian sub-continent and Northern Australia, where they improve upon the
weak positive trends in the low-resolution model. However, extreme precipitation estimates
from observational data are only reliable for regions with dense station networks, like over the
US.
Several climate phenomenon like El Nino, North Atlantic Oscillation, etc. are statistically
related to remote climate extremes [3]. These teleconnections can be represented in the GEV
distributions. Global climate models have the advantage of explicitly simulating global climate
teleconnections as opposed to downscaling eﬀorts with high resolution regional climate models.
We plan to include indices of various climate phenomenon in the GEV distribution model in
our ﬁdelity examinations of the high-resolution climate models in the future and conduct a
more global analysis using other global observational data like the CPC global data, Tropical
Rainfall Measuring Mission (TRMM) data as well as reanalysis products. Further, threshold
based GEV models also help to increase the extreme sample size as compared to the block
maximum approaches used here. We plan to investigate these models in the future.
2185

Extremes in high resolution global simulations . . .

5.1

Mahajan et al.

Acknowledgments

This work was funded by a grant from the Oﬃce of Science [Biological and Environmental Research (BER)] of the U. S. Department of Energy (DOE) and used resources of the Oak Ridge
Leadership Computing Facility at the Oak Ridge National Laboratory, which is supported by the
Oﬃce of Science of the U.S. Department of Energy under Contract No. DE-AC05-00OR22725.
CPC US Uniﬁed Precipitation data were provided by the NOAA/OAR/ESRL PSD, Boulder, Colorado, USA, and was obtained from their Web site at http://www.esrl.noaa.gov/psd/.
MERRA data have been provided by the Global Modeling and Assimilation Oﬃce (GMAO)
at NASA Goddard Space Flight Center through the NASA GES DISC online archive. The
’evd’ software package in R is created by Alec Stephenson and was obtained from http://cran.rproject.org/web/packages/evd/index.html. The ’mpi4py’ module is created by Lisandro Dalcin
and was obtained from mpi4py.scipy.org.

References
[1] J. Berner, T. Jung, and T. N. Palmer. Systematic model error: The impact of increased horizontal
resolution versus improved stochastic and deterministic parameterizations. Journal of Climate,
25(14):4946–4962, 2015/02/03 2012.
[2] Michael G. Bosilovich. Regional climate and variability of nasa merra and recent reanalyses:
U.s. summertime precipitation and temperature. Journal of Applied Meteorology and Climatology,
52(8):1939–1951, 2015/02/03 2013.
[3] S. J. Brown, J. Caesar, and C. A. T. Ferro. Global changes in extreme daily temperature since
1950. J. Geophys. Res., 113(D5), 03 2008.
[4] Donald H. Burn. Evaluation of regional ﬂood frequency analysis with a region of inﬂuence approach. Water Resources Research, 26(10):2257–2265, 1990.
[5] Nikolaos Christidis, Peter A. Stott, and Simon J. Brown. The role of human activity in the
recent warming of extremely warm daytime temperatures. Journal of Climate, 24(7):1922–1930,
2012/11/20 2011.
[6] S. G. Coles. An Introduction to Statistical Modeling of Extreme Values. Springer, 2001.
[7] Katherine J. Evans, Salil Mahajan, Marcia Branstetter, Julie L. McClean, Julie Caron, Matthew E.
Maltrud, James J. Hack, David C. Bader, Richard Neale, and Juliann K. Leifeld. A spectral
transform dynamical core option within the community atmosphere model (cam4). Journal of
Advances in Modeling Earth Systems, 6(3):902–922, 2014.
[8] L. Ga´
al, J. Kysel´
y, and J. Szolgay. Region-of-inﬂuence approach to a frequency analysis of heavy
precipitation in slovakia. Hydrology and Earth System Sciences, 12(3):825–839, 2008.
[9] Pavel Ya Groisman, Richard W. Knight, David R. Easterling, Thomas R. Karl, Gabriele C. Hegerl,
and Vyacheslav N. Razuvaev. Trends in intense precipitation in the climate record. Journal of
Climate, 18(9):1326–1350, 2015/02/03 2005.
[10] Pavel Ya Groisman, Richard W. Knight, Thomas R. Karl, David R. Easterling, Bomin Sun,
and Jay H. Lawrimore. Contemporary changes of the hydrological cycle over the contiguous
united states: Trends derived from in situ observations. Journal of Hydrometeorology, 5(1):64–85,
2015/02/05 2004.
[11] William J. Gutowski, Steven G. Decker, Rodney A. Donavon, Zaitao Pan, Raymond W. Arritt,
and Eugene S. Takle. Temporal–spatial scales of observed and simulated precipitation in central
u.s. climate. Journal of Climate, 16(22):3841–3847, 2015/02/06 2003.
[12] Tianyu Jiang, Katherine J. Evans, Yi Deng, and Xiquan Dong. Intermediate frequency atmospheric
disturbances: A dynamical bridge connecting western u.s. extreme precipitation with east asian
cold surges. Journal of Geophysical Research: Atmospheres, 119(7):3723–3735, 2014.

2186

Extremes in high resolution global simulations . . .

Mahajan et al.

[13] T. Jung, M. J. Miller, T. N. Palmer, P. Towers, N. Wedi, D. Achuthavarier, J. M. Adams, E. L.
Altshuler, B. A. Cash, J. L. Kinter, L. Marx, C. Stan, and K. I. Hodges. High-resolution global
climate simulations with the ecmwf model in project athena: Experimental design, model climate,
and seasonal forecast skill. Journal of Climate, 25(9):3155–3172, 2015/02/03 2011.
[14] Viatcheslav V. Kharin, Francis W. Zwiers, Xuebin Zhang, and Gabriele C. Hegerl. Changes in
temperature and precipitation extremes in the ipcc ensemble of global coupled model simulations.
Journal of Climate, 20(8):1419–1444, 2015/02/03 2007.
[15] Kenneth E. Kunkel, Thomas R. Karl, Harold Brooks, James Kossin, Jay H. Lawrimore, Derek
Arndt, Lance Bosart, David Changnon, Susan L. Cutter, Nolan Doesken, Kerry Emanuel,
Pavel Ya. Groisman, Richard W. Katz, Thomas Knutson, James O’Brien, Christopher J. Paciorek, Thomas C. Peterson, Kelly Redmond, David Robinson, Jeﬀ Trapp, Russell Vose, Scott
Weaver, Michael Wehner, Klaus Wolter, and Donald Wuebbles. Monitoring and understanding
trends in extreme storms: State of knowledge. Bulletin of the American Meteorological Society,
94(4):499–514, 2015/02/06 2012.
[16] Jan Kysel´
y, Ladislav Ga´
al, and Jan Picek. Comparison of regional and at-site approaches to
modelling probabilities of heavy precipitation. International Journal of Climatology, 31(10):1457–
1472, 2011.
[17] Salil Mahajan, Gerald North, R. Saravanan, and Marc Genton. Statistical signiﬁcance of trends
in monthly heavy precipitation over the us. Climate Dynamics, 38(7):1375–1387, 04 2012.
[18] Seung-Ki Min, Xuebin Zhang, Francis W. Zwiers, and Gabriele C. Hegerl. Human contribution
to more-intense precipitation extremes. Nature, 470(7334):378–381, 02 2011.
[19] R. B. Neale, J. H. Richter, A. J. Conley, S. Park, P. H. Lauritzen, A. Gettelman, D. L. Williamson,
P. J. Rasch, S. J. Vavrus, M. A. Taylor, W. D. Collins, M. Zhang, and S. Lin. Description of the
ncar community atmosphere model (cam4), tech. rep. ncar/tn+str. Technical report, National
Center for Atmospheric Research, Boulder, CO, 2010.
[20] Angeline G. Pendergrass and Dennis L. Hartmann. Changes in the distribution of rain frequency
and intensity in response to global warming. Journal of Climate, 27(22):8372–8383, 2015/02/03
2014.
[21] Michele M. Rienecker, Max J. Suarez, Ronald Gelaro, Ricardo Todling, Julio Bacmeister, Emily
Liu, Michael G. Bosilovich, Siegfried D. Schubert, Lawrence Takacs, Gi-Kong Kim, Stephen Bloom,
Junye Chen, Douglas Collins, Austin Conaty, Arlindo da Silva, Wei Gu, Joanna Joiner, Randal D.
Koster, Robert Lucchesi, Andrea Molod, Tommy Owens, Steven Pawson, Philip Pegion, Christopher R. Redder, Rolf Reichle, Franklin R. Robertson, Albert G. Ruddick, Meta Sienkiewicz, and
Jack Woollen. Merra: Nasa’s modern-era retrospective analysis for research and applications.
Journal of Climate, 24(14):3624–3648, 2012/11/20 2011.
[22] Michael F. Wehner. Very extreme seasonal precipitation in the narccap ensemble: model performance and projections. Climate Dynamics, 40(1-2), 2013.
[23] Michael F. Wehner, Kevin A. Reed, Fuyu Li, Prabhat, Julio Bacmeister, Cheng-Ta Chen, Christopher Paciorek, Peter J. Gleckler, Kenneth R. Sperber, William D. Collins, Andrew Gettelman, and
Christiane Jablonowski. The eﬀect of horizontal resolution on simulation quality in the community
atmospheric model, cam5.1. Journal of Advances in Modeling Earth Systems, 6(4):980–997, 2014.
[24] Michael F. Wehner, Richard L. Smith, G. Bala, and Phillip Duﬀy. The eﬀect of horizontal resolution on simulation of very extreme us precipitation events in a global atmosphere model. Climate
Dynamics, 34(2-3), 2010.
[25] Seth Westra, Lisa V. Alexander, and Francis W. Zwiers. Global increasing trends in annual
maximum daily precipitation. Journal of Climate, 26(11):3904–3918, 2015/02/05 2012.
[26] Pingping Xie, Mingyue Chen, Song Yang, Akiyo Yatagai, Tadahiro Hayasaka, Yoshihiro
Fukushima, and Changming Liu. A gauge-based analysis of daily precipitation over east asia.
Journal of Hydrometeorology, 8(3):607–626, 2015/02/05 2007.

2187

