Procedia Computer Science
Volume 51, 2015, Pages 503–512
ICCS 2015 International Conference On Computational Science

Modeling Temporal Dynamics of User Interests in Online
Social Networks
Bo Jiang1 , Ying Sha1
Institute of Information Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
{jiangbo,shaying}@iie.ac.cn

Abstract
Recent years have witnessed an explosive growth of Online Social Networks (OSNs), which
serve as a fertile ground for research such as, characterizing individual and group behaviors,
identifying information diﬀusion patterns, and building new recommendation system. This
paper explores user interests in social network. While user interests has been extensively studied
as the fundamental solution, it neglects the point that a user may change her interests due to
social status shift over time. In this paper, we explore two main problems: how user interests
change over time and whether user interests have hierarchy. To this end, we ﬁrst formulate the
user interests problem, then adopt semantic enrichment method to determine user interests,
and ﬁnally employ the topic hierarchy tree model to capture user interests change over time
and identify interest hierarchy. Experimental results demonstrate user interests can be divided
into primary interest and secondary interest. the primary interest of user hold stability in a
long-term period; the secondary interest, however, is more likely to keep up with hot topics
or events in the moment. Meanwhile, We also test and compare our model with two existing
systems - Who likes what? and TUMS, the result shows that our model can be proﬁled a more
ﬁne-grained user interests.
Keywords: online social network, user interests, semantic enrichment, time-sensitive

1

Introduction

With the advent of the Internet, mobile platforms, online commerce, and social media services,
the footprints of human behavior are easily recorded in the digital world, generating data on an
extremely large scale. In particular, with the popularity of online social networking platforms
and social computing systems, we have witnessed signiﬁcant growth in generation and usage of
social-enriched data in recent years. Social enriched data are becoming increasingly crucial in
many aspects of our lives. In the scope of personal activities, the data help us to ﬁnd interesting
topics, parties that friends are attending and news that the world have been happening. One
can easily enjoy recommendations and other services tailored for him/her based on the social
information. Empowered with personal activities on daily basis and their social context, such
Selection and peer-review under responsibility of the Scientiﬁc Programme Committee of ICCS 2015
c The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V.

doi:10.1016/j.procs.2015.05.275

503

Modeling Temporal Dynamics of User Interests

B.Jiang, Y.Sha

data can provide an insightful view into trends in user interests and behaviors, thus lead to
better decision making for governments and businesses.
In order to construct a personalized recommendation for a given user, it is ﬁrst necessary
to have some knowledge about that previous user interests and behaviors. The proﬁle of user
interests can be built by considering personal information and contents made by the user. In
early work these interests were constructed using the raw terms of prior the user post content,
usually in the form of language models, however this often proves to be ineﬀective, perhaps
because such a representation of interests is only considered for a static process. In fact,
people’s social status will shift with time, accompanied by, their interests also will change over
time. So, past posts and recently posts are viewed as equal importance which are not necessarily
compatible. In general, the fresh interests seem to better reﬂect current user demands.
In this work, we attempt to address this shortcoming of static interest by providing a
framework for identifying user interests change over time based upon the tweets posted by the
user on Twitter. For example, a user always posted tweets about machine learning in the past,
while he now is interested in deep learning. We can say that his interest is changed. Once
the change is identiﬁed as a new interest, a recommendation system can exploit it combining
with other user’s interests to personalize user experience and recommend content. We take
Twitter as our object due to (i) easy access to data, and (ii) [2, 11] have been concluded that
tweets are a good indicator for proﬁling user interests. For inferring topics of interest of users,
we use external knowledge sources as the knowledge base to construct a Topic Hierarchy Tree
(THT). The inferred user’s interests are proﬁled in a tree form. This proﬁle can be utilized for
personalized recommendation system with ﬂexibility ﬁlter content based on topics of interest
of users.
The major contribution of this paper is summarized as follows:
• We propose a method for creating topic hierarchy tree of user interests using external
knowledge sources. We found that user’s topics of interest are clearly obtained in this
manner.
• We also propose a method for exploiting concepts to represent user interests, scoring
conﬁdence of concepts and ranking the importance of user interests.
• We demonstrate the user interests can be divided into primary interests and secondary
interests. the primary interests of user hold stability over time; the secondary interests,
however, is more likely to keep up with hot topics or events in the moment. We also give
a certain interpretation.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 surveys the previous work on analysis
of user interests in social networks. In section 3, we show the proposed method of generating
user interests using linked data as user interests representation. Section 4 presents the collect
method of dataset and gives an evaluation of user interests change over time. The empirical
experiment results are reported in Section 5. At last, we conclude our work and give the future
research directions in Section 6.

2

Related Works

There has been a number of eﬀorts that study the properties of user interests in OSNs. In light
of user interests modeling, we distinguish between three main groups: approaches exploiting
504

Modeling Temporal Dynamics of User Interests

B.Jiang, Y.Sha

local features, and approaches exploiting the link structure of knowledge sources(eg. dbpedia
or freebase) for semantic linking, and approaches exploiting multiple social networks.
In the ﬁrst class of approaches, Most prior studies attempt to infer topics of interest from
the contents of tweets [3, 5, 7, 18, 19, 20]. Weng et al. [18] collect the tweets published by
Twitter user into a big document and empolyee LDA to discovery his latent topics of interest.
Chen et al. [5] compare two diﬀerent bag-of-words proﬁles for each Twitter user and ﬁnd
that proﬁle built on user’s self-tweets work better than on her followings’ tweets. However,
Bhattacharya et al. [3] propose a novel methodology to infer topics of interests of users in the
Twitter social network. Comparison with topics extracted by content-based techniques reveals
interesting insights, [3] ﬁnds that the tweets which a user receives are a better indicator of her
interests, than the tweets she herself posts. Hong et al. [7] address the problem of predicting
user decisions and modeling user interests by analyzing information gathered from Twitter,
such as tweets, co-followees, co-followers with factorization matrix.
For the second class of approaches, it is interesting to exploit the link structure of knowledge
sources [1, 2, 8, 10, 14, 16]. Abel et al. in their work [1, 2] combine Twitter messages with related
news articles and exploit semantics extracted from news articles to infer and contextualize the
semantic meaning of each of tweets. Tao et al. [16] use the same method to deduce semantic
user interests from tweets, and develop a web serivce’s TUMS system. In those work, Wikipedia
has been widely leveraged for semantics user interests modeling tasks. Kapanipathi et al. [8] has
been utilized Wikipedia graph with an adaptation of spreading activation theory to determine
the hierarchical interests of users based on their tweets. Michelson and Macskassy [10] propose
a model that identiﬁes topics of interest of Twitter users based on their tweets. Their approach
mainly relies on extracting and disambiguating the entities mentioned by a tweet. Finally, each
entity is assigned the most likely topic retrieved by a sub-tree of Wikipedia categories.
Beside, some previous works have also studied cross-OSN user interests [9, 11, 12]. Ottoni
et al. [12] studied the topics of interest for an individual user across Pinterest and Twitter. The
work is merged into a supervised learning context where each topic corresponds to a label of
the corpus in a one-to-one correspondence (e.g., Labeled Latent Dirichlet Allocation [13], which
is a supervised version of LDA) to infer user interests. Orlandi et al. [11] generate semantic
user interests used by the weighting scheme, and provide an aggregated score for concepts from
multiple social networks (Facebook and Twitter) with a temporal decay.
The above idea of using local social feature and content feature of a user with a recommendation engine to infer a user interests has been around for a long time, and there is a few
signiﬁcant improvement in ways that the problem has been tackled. Nonetheless most of the
existing work rely on the assumption that user interests remains static over time and the degree
of importance of each interest is equal. This is not consistent with the actual situation.
Our work is inspired by the second kind of work. Meanwhile, because short-term data is
often too sparse to allow for robust method performance, we thus focus on long-term tweets
data to construct user interests as it provides a richer source of information about the user
interests and preferences. We now present an approach to infer temporal-based user interests
combing semantic technologies and long-term of user behaviors.

3

Building User Interests Model

The objective of this work is to categorize tweets into a Topic Hierarchy Tree (THT) that
constructs a model of user interests by exploiting external knowledge sources. To accomplish
this our model as illustrated in Fig. 1, performs the following steps: (1) construct Topic
Hierarchy Tree (THT) that is employed multiple knowledge sources (2) User Interests Generator
505

Modeling Temporal Dynamics of User Interests

B.Jiang, Y.Sha

(UIG) generates topics of interest of user from the tweets of Twitter user. The module ﬁrst
identify entities that are can be directly extracted from user’s tweets and then scores them to
reﬂect the weight of each topic of interest of user. (3) Each of user’s tweets will be added as
leaf nodes to the Topic Hierarchy Tree by linking to the most likely topic categories.

Figure 1: Framework of user interests generator using linked data

3.1

Topic Hierarchy Tree

We utilize external knowledge sources (eg. dbpedia, freebase, yago, website) as the knowledgebase for construct Topic Hierarchy Tree (THT), as in Figure 2. Topic Hierarchy Tree (THT)
extends to over 1000 topics categories and basically includes all aspects of what people talk
about. This taxonomy deﬁnes contextual topic categories for up to 5 diﬀerent levels. The ﬁrst
level is a broad level category commonly used as a root for either category or page. Level 2
categories and greater are additional categories nested under Level 1 categories. We exploit
Topic Hierarchy Tree to classify user’s tweets into its most likely topic category up to ﬁve levels
deep. Deeper levels allow to classify tweet into more accurate and more ﬁne-grained topic
categories. For instance, an application focused on identifying content discussing personal
lending practices can narrow its classiﬁcation into sub topics (eg. home ﬁnancing, family loans,
personal loans, student loans) that target decisions with ﬁner resolution.

Figure 2: An overview of topic hierarchy tree

3.2

User Interests Generator

To better understand the temporal dynamics of user interests and concern how the topics of
interest of individual user change over time, we propose to model user’s interests on Twitter
506

Modeling Temporal Dynamics of User Interests

B.Jiang, Y.Sha

as a set of weighted concepts where a concept may refer to an arbitrary entity and the weight
indicates how important the concept is for user’s interests.
Deﬁnition 1 (User Interest). The topics of interest of a user u is a set of weighted concepts
where a concept c is represented via a named entity.
I(u, t) = {(c, w(c, t, tweetu ))|c ∈ CE }

(1)

Where w(c, time, tweetu ) is a weight which is computed for the concept c by the given user
u based on tweets tweetu posted by u and based on the given time t. CE is consisted of a set
of entities.
Learning Genuine Interest [6] shows that extracting meaningful concepts only from the
tweets is a relatively diﬃcult task, due to their short, noisy, context dependent, and dynamic
nature. For instance, given a tweet such as ”#Gravity is beautiful http://fb.me/3SkiI5DND” it
is diﬃcult to understand to talk about movie or space. However, the semantics of the tweet can
be understood by following the link posted in the tweet. Therefore, we ﬁrst identify concepts
from a user’s tweets by Named Entity Recognition, and then extend more enrich semantics.
A great deal of Named Entity Recognition techniques and systems have been developed
in tweet [15, 17]. Since our goal is on task of user interests model and not develop entity
recognition method, we ﬁnally employ an existing solution. To this end, we use TwitIE [4] for
our work because the system has relatively superior performance to other services as shown in
Tabel 1.
System
ANNIE
TwitIE
Stanford
Stanford-twitter
Ritter

Precision
47%
77%
59%
54%
73%

Recall
83%
83%
32%
45%
49%

F1
60%
80%
41%
49%
59%

Table 1: Whole-pipeline named entity recognition performance in the Ritter dataset
Then we utilize OpenCalais1 , due to state-of-the-art semantic functionality and a higher
rate limit (50000 per day), which allows for providing unique URIs for the topics so that the
meaning of such concepts is well deﬁned.
Scoring User Interests Once the user genuine interest are identiﬁed, we then will score
them to ﬁnd the weight of topics of interest of user across diﬀerent entities. The process
is very important as the scores of user’s interests will be utilized to decide the appropriate
interests distribution for the user. We employ a frequency-based and conﬁdence-based scoring
mechanism. We again use OpenCalais to perform the task.
Deﬁnition 2 (Tweet Score). The topic score of each tweet T, posted by given a user u, can
be measured by frequency and conﬁdence for a entity e, where a tweet t is represented via a
set of entities E.
n

S(u, T ) =

f ei c ei

where

f ei ∈ F E , c ei ∈ C E

(2)

i=1

Here, FE is a set of frequency with E and CE is a set of conﬁdence with entity e for the
given user u.
1 http://www.opencalais.com/

507

Modeling Temporal Dynamics of User Interests

B.Jiang, Y.Sha

Finally, each of user’s tweets with the weight score are added as leaf nodes to the THT by
linking to their appropriate categories.

4
4.1

Experiments
Preparing the datasets

To evaluate our proposed method on real-world data, we collect Twitter information streams
of 5,140 randomly selected users over a 3 month period from March to May, 2014. Due to
the restriction enforced by Twitter API, for users who have more than 3200 tweets, we could
retrieve only 3200 per user. Finally, we obtain more than 10 million tweets published by these
people. The results of our measurements show that the number of Twitter messages posted per
user follows a power-law distribution. As far as we know, it is ample dataset of suﬃcient size
to perform our analysis.
As we are interested in analyzing a long-term temporal characteristics of user interests, we
ﬁrst select those users which produced more than 1,000 tweets (no spam) that guarantee activity
of user and a long-term post behavior. We process each tweet via the semantic enrichment
component of our user interests model framework to identify topics and concepts mentioned in
the tweets. Table 2 shows ﬁnally the selected user statistics, the volume of tweets and number
of entities identiﬁed in the tweets.

Total
Average

Users
23

Tweets
56678
2464

Concepts
34088
1482

Distinct Concepts
10908
474

Table 2: Counts and statistics for the tweet dataset used for experimentation

4.2

Evaluation methodology

Our main goal is to analyze and compare how the topics of interest of Twitter user change over
time. So we select cosine similarity to evaluate the diﬀerences of current-based interests and
past-based interests.
As we described in the previous section, tweets are classiﬁed into a predeﬁned set of topic
categories in THT, C = {c1 , c2 , · · · , cn }, including ”education”, ”ﬁnance”, and ”science”, etc.
In our tweets analysis, we computed the topics distribution of interest of user over the set of
topic categories for individual user as well as all of users in the sample dataset. First, we select
each month of last year(Jan 1th - Dec 31st, 2013) as a time unit. Then, for each user u, we
computed the distribution of her interests in every month m, D(u, m), represented as a vector
over the set of topic categories:
D(u, m) = (

N c1 N c2
Nc
,
,··· , n )
N N
N

where

N=

N ci

(3)

i

Nci is the number of tweets classiﬁed into category ci published by user u in a given month
m. N is the total number of tweets posted by the user in the time period. Thus, D(u,m)
represent the proportion of tweets made by the user publishing about each topic category and
also reﬂect the importance of each of interests.
508

Modeling Temporal Dynamics of User Interests

B.Jiang, Y.Sha

Deﬁnition 3 (Interest Similarity). Given a user u interests vector D(u, m1 ) at time m1 and
D(u, m1 ) at time m2 (m1 < m2 ), which are represented via topics distribution of interests using
the same vector representation that is used for a given user interests, the similarity algorithm
ranks user interests change degree according to their cosine similarity.
simI (D(u, m1 ), D(u, m2 )) =

D(u, m1 ) · D(u, m2 )
D(u, m1 )
D(u, m2 )

(4)

Here, if the value of simI is low, it indicates the interests of same user has a large change
over time. It is possible reason that the user change his job or admit to university. On the
contrary, the user has a steady habit of interests.
To further examine the performance of those models in inferring user interests, we also select
two representative the ranking system of user interests (detailed in Section 5.3) and compute
the top interests for them by using the three models.

5

Results

5.1

User Interests Distribution

Twitter, one of the most popularity of social network, relies on the idea that anyone can
contribute and discuss her opinion about all kind of topics. Therefore, we employ our proposed
THT to generate topic-based user interests proﬁle. The proﬁle features 23 diﬀerent dimensions
that correspond to broad topics like technology or education.
0.4

business
politics
news
home
art
society
sports
travel
education
fashion
science
careers
religion
technology
food
health
pets
family
estate
automotive
finance
shopping
hobbies

0.35

0.3

0.25

0.2

0.15

0.1

0.05

0

Figure 3: The screenshot of the pie chart
of users interests in the dataset

user A

user B

user C

Figure 4: The distribution of topics of interests of users

Figure 3 gives the pie chart visualization of topic-based interests on our constructed dataset,
we can see about which topics has been published most in Twitter. The result shows that 13.5%
of tweets are concerned with technology. This observation is in line with the reports we got
from categorization of Twitter users2 . Through the pie chart, we can moreover compare this
interest with interests for other topics. For example, we observe that 9.0% of users is interested
in ”health” more than interested in education or shopping.
Figure 4 plots the topic distribution of interests discussed by 3 users who are randomly
selected. For the clarity of the ﬁgure, all of topic categories are shown in the ﬁgure. We can see
2 http://www.beevolve.com/twitter-statistics/

509

Modeling Temporal Dynamics of User Interests

B.Jiang, Y.Sha

that the distribution of each of user interests has a greater diﬀerence. In general, as humans,
we have limited knowledge and limited time and limit attention. Thus, the user interests can be
divided into primary topics of interest and secondary topics of interest. Intuitively, the primary
interest of user hold stability over time; the secondary interest, however, is more likely to keep
up with hot topics or events in the moment. We will explore this issue in the next section.

5.2

Change of User Interests over Time

If a user’s interests are stable, her interests distributions in each month should be stability over
time. Particularly, we are interested in hierarchy of needs of user interests. To accomplish the
task, for each Twitter user, we compared her interests distribution of the most recent month to
her interests distributions of all the previous months (Jan/1/2013 - Dec/31/2013). To validate
our hypothesis mentioned the above section, we randomly selected 10 users from user set and
applied diﬀerent strategies to create semantic user interests from their Twitter messages.

1

1
TopicSim
ConceptSim
EntitySim

0.9

0.9
0.8

Proportion of Interests

Similarity to Current Interests

0.95

0.85
0.8
0.75

0.7

business
society
sports
technology
health

0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3

0.7
0.2
0.65
0.6

0.1
Jan−13 Mar−13 May−13 Jul−13 Sep−13 Nov−13 current
Time Span

Figure 5: Similarity of user interests between current month and previous months

0

Jan−13

Mar−13

May−13 Jul−13
Time Span

Sep−13

Nov−13

Figure 6: Temporal evolution of top 5 topics of interest of a Twitter’s user

Figure 5 depicts the three diﬀerent type of similarity of the user current interests with the
interests of the same users created based on Twitter activities performed in a certain month
in the past. We can see the similarity of current interests with the corresponding interests
generated at the beginning of our observation period is the lowest while the similarity of current
interests with interests computed last month is the highest. The comparison demonstrates fresh
interest proﬁles better suit user current demands. Furthermore, Entity-based interests exhibit
the weakest changes over time as the average similarity to the current interest is constantly
lower than for the topic-based and concept-based interests.
We also explore whether user’s interests have hierarchy or not. The result is illustrated in
Figure 6. Due to the limit space, we only show top 5 topics of interests of a user change over
time, other users haves the similar case. From the ﬁgure, we conclude that the user interests can
be divided into primary interest (corresponding to the upper half part) and secondary interest
(corresponding to the lower half part). The primary interest of user is an original inherent
preferences, such as programmers like eﬃcient algorithm or lawyers like debate, and thus keep
higher ratio and hold stability in a long-term period. However, the secondary interest is an
amateur demand and more likely to closely follow the tracks of hot topics or events in the
moment. This is a good evidence that can be answered the mentioned problem in Section 5.1.
510

Modeling Temporal Dynamics of User Interests

5.3

B.Jiang, Y.Sha

Comparative Evaluation

The state-of-the-art web service of user’s interests that has been proﬁled is two systems which
called Who likes what? [3] and TUMS [16]. The ﬁrst system generates general interests and
niche interests as user interests from received tweets. The second system generates semantic
user interests from tweets. Table 3 shows the declared interests for three users (as given in their
description) and the top topics of interest inferred by the three models.
Self-description
of user
user A: develop extra
income without any
ﬁnacial risk
user B: passionate parent,
education nonproﬁt exec,
mom congress delegate,
foodie/techie’s wife
user C: data recovery,
computer forensics,
investigations,
data conversion,
disaster recovery

Top topics of interest, inferred by diﬀerent models
Who likes what?
TUMS
Our Model
law crime,
bankruptcy,
marketing,business,
business ﬁnance,
remote access,
social media,world,
entertainment culture, dramas,
internet
technology internet
oil and gas prices
education,
education,
babies,
news,
human interest,
school,
media,
hospitality recreation, arts education,
parenting
social issues
candy and sweets,
datarecovery,
technology internet,
computer certiﬁcation,
business,
law crime,
hardware,smart phones,
social media,
entertainment culture,
business plans,
marketing,
human interest,
isps
bloggers
business ﬁnance

Table 3: Examples of top topics of interests of user inferred by the three models, for some
Twitter users who proﬁle their interests in their self-description.
In Table 3 we summarize the user interests obtained by each of the above models. As we can
see the the ﬁrst two model mostly accurately captured their broad interests, yet the interests
were sometimes too general. Our model exhibit a ﬁner resolution of topics of interest of Twitter
user on our proposed Topic Hierarchy Tree. The results of our analysis can be provided more
precise directions for personalization recommended system to improve performance.

6

Conclusions and Future Work

In this paper we developed a user interests modeling framework for Twitter to analyze timesensitive characteristics of user interests. The temporal analysis thus revealed two important
observations. First, user interests change over time: fresh interest proﬁles seem to better suit
user current demands. Second, user interests have the characteristic of hierarchy of needs.
In future work we will further research the problem of multi-sources user interests using
semantic technologies. The same user is more possible proﬁle overall interests via multiple
social networks. Therefore we plan to explore whether multi-sources user interests can further
leverage personalization quality for recommender system.

Acknowledgement
This work was supported by National Key Technology R&D Program(No.2012BAH46B03),
and the Strategic Leading Science and Technology Projects of Chinese Academy of Sciences(No.XDA06030200).
511

Modeling Temporal Dynamics of User Interests

B.Jiang, Y.Sha

References
[1] Fabian Abel, Qi Gao, Geert-Jan Houben, and Ke Tao. Analyzing temporal dynamics in twitter
proﬁles for personalized recommendations in the social web. In WebSci, page 2. ACM, 2011.
[2] Fabian Abel, Qi Gao, Geert-Jan Houben, and Ke Tao. Semantic enrichment of twitter posts for
user proﬁle construction on the social web. In ESWC, pages 375–389. Springer, 2011.
[3] Parantapa Bhattacharya, Muhammad Bilal Zafar, Niloy Ganguly, Saptarshi Ghosh, and Krishna P
Gummadi. Inferring user interests in the twitter social network. In RecSys, pages 357–360. ACM,
2014.
[4] Kalina Bontcheva, Leon Derczynski, Adam Funk, Mark A Greenwood, Diana Maynard, and Niraj
Aswani. Twitie: An open-source information extraction pipeline for microblog text. In RANLP,
pages 83–90, 2013.
[5] Jilin Chen, Rowan Nairn, Les Nelson, Michael Bernstein, and Ed Chi. Short and tweet: experiments on recommending content from information streams. In CHI, pages 1185–1194. ACM,
2010.
[6] Leon Derczynski, Diana Maynard, Giuseppe Rizzo, Marieke van Erp, Genevieve Gorrell, Rapha¨el
Troncy, Johann Petrak, and Kalina Bontcheva. Analysis of named entity recognition and linking
for tweets. Information Processing & Management, 51(2):32–49, 2015.
[7] Liangjie Hong, Aziz S Doumith, and Brian D Davison. Co-factorization machines: modeling user
interests and predicting individual decisions in twitter. In WSDM, pages 557–566. ACM, 2013.
[8] Pavan Kapanipathi, Prateek Jain, Chitra Venkataramani, and Amit Sheth. User interests identiﬁcation on twitter using a hierarchical knowledge base. In ESWC, pages 99–113. Springer, 2014.
[9] Samamon Khemmarat, Sabyasachi Saha, Han Hee Song, Mario Baldi, and Lixin Gao. On understanding user interests through heterogeneous data sources. In PAM, pages 272–274. Springer,
2014.
[10] Matthew Michelson and Sofus A Macskassy. Discovering users’ topics of interest on twitter: a ﬁrst
look. In AND, pages 73–80. ACM, 2010.
[11] Fabrizio Orlandi, John Breslin, and Alexandre Passant. Aggregated, interoperable and multidomain user proﬁles for the social web. In I-SEMANTICS, pages 41–48. ACM, 2012.
[12] Raphael Ottoni, Diego Las Casas, Joao Paulo Pesce, Wagner Meira Jr, Christo Wilson, Alan
Mislove, and Virgilio Almeida. Of pins and tweets: Investigating how users behave across imageand text-based social networks. 2014.
[13] Daniel Ramage, David Hall, Ramesh Nallapati, and Christopher D Manning. Labeled lda: A
supervised topic model for credit attribution in multi-labeled corpora. In EMNLP, pages 248–256.
Association for Computational Linguistics, 2009.
[14] Krishnan Ramanathan and Komal Kapoor. Creating user proﬁles using wikipedia. In ER, pages
415–427. Springer, 2009.
[15] Alan Ritter, Sam Clark, Oren Etzioni, et al. Named entity recognition in tweets: an experimental
study. In EMNLP, pages 1524–1534. Association for Computational Linguistics, 2011.
[16] Ke Tao, Fabian Abel, Qi Gao, and Geert-Jan Houben. Tums: twitter-based user modeling service.
In ESWC, pages 269–283. Springer, 2012.
[17] Marieke Van Erp, Giuseppe Rizzo, and Rapha¨el Troncy. Learning with the web: Spotting named
entities on the intersection of nerd and machine learning. In # MSM, pages 27–30. Citeseer, 2013.
[18] Jianshu Weng, Ee-Peng Lim, Jing Jiang, and Qi He. Twitterrank: ﬁnding topic-sensitive inﬂuential
twitterers. In WSDM, pages 261–270. ACM, 2010.
[19] Ryen W White, Peter Bailey, and Liwei Chen. Predicting user interests from contextual information. In SIGIR, pages 363–370. ACM, 2009.
[20] Zhiheng Xu, Rong Lu, Liang Xiang, and Qing Yang. Discovering user interest on twitter with a
modiﬁed author-topic model. In WI-IAT, volume 1, pages 422–429. IEEE, 2011.

512

