Procedia Computer Science
Volume 51, 2015, Pages 1219–1228
ICCS 2015 International Conference On Computational Science

Numerical simulation of the ﬂow in the fuel injector
in the sharply inhomogeneous electric ﬁeld
Vladimir S. Nagorny1 , Alexander A. Smirnovsky1,2∗, Alexander S. Tchernysheﬀ2 ,
and Dmitriy Yu. Kolodyazhny1
1

St.Petersburg Polytechnic University, St.Petersburg, Russia
2
Ioﬀe Institute, St.Petersburg, Russia

Abstract
The results of detailed numerical simulation of the ﬂow in an injector including electrohydrodynamic interaction in sharply inhomogeneous electric ﬁeld formed by electrode system closed
to the needle-plane type are presented. The aim of the simulation is to estimate the charge
rate ﬂow at the fuel injector outlet. The results were obtained using the open-source package
OpenFOAM in which the corresponding models of electrohydrodynamics were added. The parametric calculations were performed for axisymmetric model using RANS k − ω SST turbulence
model. Due to swirl device in fuel injector the ﬂow is strongly swirling. To obtain parameters
for axisymmetric ﬂow calculations the 3D simulation was performed for the simpliﬁed injector
model including swirl device and without electrodes.
Keywords: Electrohydrodynamics, numerical simulation, swirling ﬂow, turbulence

1

Introduction

Applying electric charge to the outcoming fuel ﬂow through the fuel-injector nozzle could be
eﬀective way to improve atomization quality [1]. Such method of atomization control seems
promising and there are experimental and theoretical investigations of electrodynamic interaction of charged jets with electric ﬁeld [2, 3]. It was shown that numerical methods are capable
to adequately predict charged jet motion [4]. Atomization process is strongly dependent on the
ﬂow inside fuel-injector nozzle, thus such a ﬂow should be thoroughly analyzed.
Liquid motion inside a fuel-injector nozzle is a particular case of swirling ﬂows. Experimental investigations of such ﬂows are widely presented in the literature, some of them are
mentioned in [5, 6, 7]. It should be pointed out that swirling ﬂow could be modeled under
axisymmetric approximation assuming that ﬂow is close to axisymmetric near inlet and entire
geometry has axisymmetric shape. Also it is known [8] that ﬂow from a swirler has turbulent
structure. Therefore, mathematical model should have capabilities to resolve turbulent motion.
∗ Corresponding

author: smirnovskysaha@gmail.com

Selection and peer-review under responsibility of the Scientiﬁc Programme Committee of ICCS 2015
c The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V.

doi:10.1016/j.procs.2015.05.300

1219

Numerical simulation of the ﬂow . . .

Nagorny, Smirnovsky, Tchernysheﬀ and Kolodyazhny

Due to signiﬁcant computational expenses of LES and DNS methods, two-parameter turbulence
models based on Reynolds-averaged Navier-Stokes equations could be used (see [8, 9]). Comparisons with experimental data [9] as well as with simulation results obtained with the help
of LES [8] have shown that two-parameter models adequately describe swirling ﬂows. Usually
diﬀerent variants of k- model are applied as more frequently used and widespread model in
engineering applications but in the case when ﬁne resolution of boundary layer is required the
k − ω SST model is more preferable. It is worth noting that, as shown in [10], open-source
computational code OpenFOAM are capable of obtaining both qualitatively and quantitatively
correct solutions for both 3D and 2D axisymmetric ﬂows.
Thus, in spite of slight discrepancy in prediction of radial component of velocity near axis of
symmetry, two-parameter model under axisymmetric assumption correctly predicts ﬂow structure near walls and axial velocity distribution and could be used in calculations. Open-source
software OpenFOAM is a good alternative to the commercial CFD solvers and correctly and
adequately predicts ﬂow structure.
Electrohydrodynamic interaction could be taken into account by the means of electrostatic
approximation (i. e. neglecting currents induced by magnetic ﬁeld due to small value of that
currents) for medium with low conductance, which includes liquid dielectrics, like fuel [11, 12].
Such approach is reasonable and is used in the presented paper for numerical modeling of
electrohydrodynamic eﬀects.
In the paper the results of the numerical simulation of the ﬂow in fuel injector including electrohydrodynamic eﬀects due to sharply inhomogeneous electric ﬁeld are presented. The main
aim of the simulation is to estimate carrying-out of the charge at the outlet as compared with
charge injection from the active electrode. Due to complicated physical model including electrohydrodynamics the simulations were performed in axisymmetric model without swirling device.
For accounting eﬀects of the swirling nature of the incoming ﬂow the additional simulation in
3D-model with swirling device but without electrohydrodynamics was performed and obtained
velocity ﬁeld behind the swirler was used for inlet boundary conditions in axisymmetric model.

2

Mathematical model and numerical method

Electrohydrodynamics equations for unsteady turbulent ﬂow of isothermal dielectric ﬂuid can
be written as follows [12]:
∇·V =0
(1)
ρ

∂V
+ ρ∇ · (V V ) = −∇p + ∇ · τ + q E
∂t

(2)

∂q
+ ∇ · (q V + bi q E − DΣ ∇q) = 0
∂t

(3)

∇2 φ = −

q

E = −∇φ

0

(4)
(5)

Here V is the ﬂuid velocity, ρ is the ﬂuid density, p is the static pressure, τ is the stress
tensor (both viscous and turbulent), q is the space charge density, E, φ are the electric ﬁeld and
electric potential, bi is the ion mobility, DΣ is the total diﬀusion coeﬃcient (both for ions and
turbulent), is the relative electric permittivity, 0 is the electric constant.
1220

Numerical simulation of the ﬂow . . .

Nagorny, Smirnovsky, Tchernysheﬀ and Kolodyazhny

For Newtonian ﬂuid and using Boussinesq approximation for Reynolds stresses the total
stress tensor τ can be written in the following form:
2
τ = 2(μ + μt )S˙ − ρkI
3

(6)

where μt is the turbulent viscosity, I is the tensor unit, k is the turbulence kinetic energy, S˙ is
the strain rate tensor.
The total diﬀusion coeﬃcient DΣ includes the ion diﬀusivity Di and the turbulent diﬀusivity
written through turbulent Schmidt number Sct :
DΣ = Di +

μt
ρSct

(7)

The value of Sct for ion transport is unknown and for its determining we use the analogy
between ion transport and specie transport and choose Sct = 0.9.
The boundary conditions for the ﬂuid ﬂow in numerical simulations are standard: the ﬂuid
velocity at the inlet, the pressure at the outlet and the no-slip condition at the walls. At
the electrodes the values of electric potential are set. In the case of the charge injection into
non-conducting ﬂuid the injection current density should be speciﬁed on the surface of the
active electrode and the condition of the charge loss should be set on the counter electrode. To
describe the injection current, one can use the dependence of the Fowler-Nordheim equation
kind
jinj = A0 exp −

B0
E

(8)

However, this condition can be rewritten in simpler linear form which is suitable for the
used operating range of electric ﬁeld:
jinj = max(AE − B, 0)

(9)

The constants A0 , B0 , A and B should be speciﬁed from an experiment but there are no
suitable experiments for the ﬂuid of interest so the constants for the transformer oil were chosen.
It should be noted that for the purposes of the investigation the precise constants values are not
so valuable as far as we want to estimate carrying-out of the charge at the outlet as compared
with charge injection from the active electrode.
For the boundary condition at the opposite electrode we assume that all charge is lost so:
jloss = bi qEn − Di

∂q
∂n

(10)

For the turbulence we use RANS k − ω SST model [13].
For the numerical solution of the equation set (1) — (5) we use free and open-source package
OpenFOAM 2.3 and unsteady pisoFoam solver in which the electrohydrodynamics equations
were implemented. For the convective terms in all equation except momentum the ﬁrst-order
upwind scheme was chosen whereas for the momentum equation the second-order SFCD scheme
was used. The time derivative in all equations is approximated with second-order backward
scheme.
In all computations the following fuel parameters are used: ρ = 780 kg/m3 , μ = 1.014 · 103
P a · s. For the electric parameters we use the next: = 2.2, bi = 108 m2 /(V · s), Di = 2.5 · 1010
m2 /s, A = 6.409 · 1010 C/(V · m · s), B = 3.204 · 103 C/(m2 · s).
1221

Numerical simulation of the ﬂow . . .

3

Nagorny, Smirnovsky, Tchernysheﬀ and Kolodyazhny

3D simulation of ﬂow through the injector swirling device

For the sake of possibility to simulate the swirling ﬂow including electrohydrodynamics in
axisymmetric model, the 3D simulation of the ﬂow through the injector swirl device was performed and corresponding velocity inlet conditions for axisymmetric model were obtained. The
simpliﬁed axisymmetric model is more suitable for parametric calculations including electrohydrodynamic eﬀects in case of limited computational resources.
Since used swirling device consists of three identical parts in azimuthal direction, the computational domain geometry can be simpliﬁed and considered as rotationally periodic with period
of 120 degrees (see Figure 1). Thus this is a sector of 120 degrees cut along injector axis, the
side boundaries are rotationally periodic. A part of the axial swirling device is represented
by the narrow channel which is located in such a way that the jet from it has both axial and
azimuthal velocity components.

Figure 1: Computational domain geometry (in mm): 1 — inlet domain in front of swirling
device, 2 — swirling device, 3 — main fuel injector channel
At the inlet boundary the axial velocity component is ﬁxed so that the volumetric ﬂow rate
is equal to 40 liters per second. The turbulence intensity at the inlet is about 3%.
The unsteady RANS simulation was performed and the averaged in time ﬂow ﬁelds were
computed. It should be noted that averaged in time solution is not fully axisymmetric but it
becomes axisymmetric quite far from the swirling device. So averaging in azimuthal direction
was also performed. As an example the azimuthally and temporal averaged velocity magnitude
is presented in Figure 2.
Obtained averaged velocity ﬁelds were used for extracting the proﬁles near swirling device
outlet to employ its in axisymmetric model. The extraction section is located by 0.06 mm from
swirling device outlet. In Figure 3 corresponding velocity proﬁles are shown. Analyzing the
ﬁgure one can see that the axial velocity component is far from zero only in small region near
Y = 2 mm and its distribution is close to normal. Thus we can suppose that the jet from a
swirling device spreads only in small region near to Y = 2 mm. Azimuthal velocity component
also has a peak near Y = 2 mm and looks like Gaussian. Radial velocity component is not equal
to zero near Y = 2 mm but ﬁrstly it is smaller than other and secondly performed additional
1222

Numerical simulation of the ﬂow . . .

Nagorny, Smirnovsky, Tchernysheﬀ and Kolodyazhny

Figure 2: Magnitude of velocity averaged both in time and azimuthal direction
investigation shows that its value not so important thus we can nullify it.
Below the regression analysis results for azimuthal and axial velocity components are presented.
(R − 2.06 · 10−3 )2
10−7

(11)

(R − 2.06 · 10−3 )2
7 · 10−8

(12)

Vφ (R) = 2 + 5.6 exp −
Vz (R) = 1.8585 exp −

Figure 3: The proﬁles of velocity components near swirling device outlet
1223

Numerical simulation of the ﬂow . . .

4

Nagorny, Smirnovsky, Tchernysheﬀ and Kolodyazhny

Numerical simulation of the ﬂow in the axisymmetric
model including electrohydrodynamic eﬀects

The main aim of the axisymmetric simulation is to estimate carrying-out of the charge at the
outlet as compared with charge injection from the active electrode. The domain geometry is
presented in Figure 4. Here the coordinate R is radial, Z is axial. The Z axis is the symmetry
axis. The active electrode has the form of the needle with the tip curvature radius of 1 μm.
The opposite electrode has the curvature radius of 1 mm. Thus we have the electrode system
close to the needle-plane type which is desirable for the unipolar charge injection only from
one (active) electrode. The other boundaries shown in ﬁgure (except inlet and outlet) are the
dielectric walls and we assume that its electric permittivity is big enough to ignore the electric
ﬁeld penetration into the walls.

Figure 4: Computational domain geometry for the axisymmetric model
The velocity boundary condition at the inlet is speciﬁed by the proﬁles (11) and (12). At
the outlet the constant static pressure is posed. The electric potential at the active electrode
is equal to 15 kV whereas the opposite electrode is neutral. At the active electrode the ion
injection current density is speciﬁed according to (9). At the opposite electrode the condition
of the charge loss (10) is posed. The turbulence parameters at the inlet are set as follows:
kin = 0.22 m2 /s2 , ωin = 20000 1/s.
Computational mesh was built using the open source platform SALOME. It consists of
about 105 cells (most of them are hexahedral) and has strong clustering in the region between
electrodes and near the wall. Also the region near active electrode tip has the very ﬁne mesh
to predict better the electric ﬁeld distribution. The mesh near electrode system is shown in
Figure 5.
The unsteady RANS simulation of the ﬂow was performed using modiﬁed OpenFOAM solver
pisoFoam in which the equations for the electric properties were added. For the convective
terms in all the equations except momentum the upwind numerical scheme was used, for the
momentum equation the SFCD scheme was used.
In Figure 6 the velocity components in the monitoring points as a functions of time are
presented. The monitoring points were chosen as follows: point 1 — in the inlet domain near
the axis (Z=1 mm, R = 0.1 mm), point 2 — in the channel below the second electrode (Z=5
mm, R = 2 mm), point 3 — near the outlet (Z = 14 mm, R = 0.5 mm). One can see that in
the inlet region the ﬂow is almost steady. The ﬂow near the electrodes has strong twist (the
1224

Numerical simulation of the ﬂow . . .

Nagorny, Smirnovsky, Tchernysheﬀ and Kolodyazhny

Figure 5: The part of the computational mesh
azimuthal velocity component is almost ten times more than axial). At the outlet the ﬂow
accelerates due to the channel narrowing.
The instantaneous velocity ﬁeld are shown in Figure 7. The jet from the inlet slows down
quite fast and the ﬂow has mostly small axial velocity but the azimuthal component is always
big enough. We should note that some instabilities arise in the boundary layer along the second
electrode and the following wall. The nature of these instabilities is not quite clear but it seems
to be due to the centrifugal instabilities similar to Goertler-Taylor vortices [14].
In Figure 8 the magnitude of the electric ﬁeld and its lines are presented. One can see
that the maximums of the electric ﬁeld have place near the active electrode tip and near the
dielectric corner. The electric ﬁeld magnitude achieves the value of 3.86 · 108 V /m near the tip.
Now let us consider the peculiar properties of the charge transfer (see Figure 9). Due to
turbulent mixing the charge injected from the active electrode spreads over the all computational
domain but the charge maximum is located near the active electrode tip; also the big charge
concentration is observed near the second electrode.
As we noted above the model of charge injection from the active electrode is not enough
accurate. So the main favor of the investigation is to determine the quantity of the charge
which leaves the domain through the outlet as compared to the quantity of injected charge. So

Figure 6: The velocity components in the monitoring points
1225

Numerical simulation of the ﬂow . . .

Nagorny, Smirnovsky, Tchernysheﬀ and Kolodyazhny

Figure 7: Instantaneous velocity component distributions: above — axial, below — azimuthal

Figure 8: The electric ﬁeld distribution (the scale is logarithmic)
we can introduce relative charge current through the surface as:
I=

j · ndS
jinj · ndS

where jinj is the injection current density averaged in time and j is the instantaneous current
density through selected surface (active electrode, second electrode or outlet). In Figure 10 the
relative current densities at the diﬀerent surfaces as a functions of time are shown.
One can observe that the quantity of carrying-out charge is big enough: it achieves about
1226

Numerical simulation of the ﬂow . . .

Nagorny, Smirnovsky, Tchernysheﬀ and Kolodyazhny

Figure 9: The space charge density distribution in logarithmic scale

Figure 10: The relative current through the surface (injected from the active electrode, lost at
the second electrode and at the domain outlet)
80% of the charge injected. So we may conclude that suggested ﬂow scheme is almost desirable.
However such result can be connected with used RANS approach for turbulence modeling which
is enough rough. So for the model veriﬁcation the further investigations should be performed
with diﬀerent approaches including LES or hybrid LES/RANS.

5

Summary

Numerical simulations of the fuel ﬂow through the fuel-injector nozzle with and without taking
into account electrohydrodynamic interaction were perfomed. Based on the literature data
analysis shows that the simulation method is quite adequate for modeling and for estimating
of the electric charge carrying-out at the nozzle outlet.
During the investigations the following results were obtained:
1. The 3D simulations of turbulent ﬂow in the nozzle with regard to swirl (but without
electrohydrodynamics) with the aim of obtaining the reference data when setting the input boundary conditions for axisymmetric calculations without swirling device (including
1227

Numerical simulation of the ﬂow . . .

Nagorny, Smirnovsky, Tchernysheﬀ and Kolodyazhny

electrohydrodynamics) were performed. It is shown that the velocity proﬁles directly
behind the swirl can be approximated by the Gaussian curves.
2. The numerical calculation of the ﬂow in the nozzle in the axisymmetric approximation
taking into account the charge transfer was performed. It is shown that even when using
this model, the ﬂow is unsteady. Due to the intensive turbulent transfer the current
density at the outlet reaches about 80% of charge injected from the active electrode. For
a more accurate description of the charge transfer processes further investigations should
be performed using diﬀerent turbulence models.

Acknowledgments
The investigations were performed with the ﬁnancial support of the Ministry of education and
science, Russia, unique identiﬁer is REMEFI57714X0087.

References
[1] E. Esmaeilzadeh A. Khoshnevis, S.S.H. Tsai. Electric ﬁeld induced sheeting and breakup of
dielectric liquid jets. Physics of Fluids, 26:012103, 2014.
[2] J. W. Daily B. Van Poppel, O. Desjardins. Simulating electrohydrodynamic atomization for fuel
injection. In ILASS-Americas 22nd Annual Conference on Liquid Atomization and Spray Systems,
Cincinnati, OH, May 2010.
[3] C. Louste P. Traor, M. Daaboul. Numerical simulation and piv experimental analysis of electrohydrodynamic plumes induced by a blade electrode. Journal of Physics D: Applied Physics,
43(22):225502, 2010.
[4] G. Biswas G. Tomar, D. Gerlach et al. Two-phase electrohydrodynamic simulations using a
volume-of-ﬂuid approach. ournal of Computational Physics, 227(2):1267–1285, 2007.
[5] E.W. Grandmaison A. Pollard, H.L.M. Ozem. Turbulent, swirling ﬂow over an axisymmetric,
constant radius surface. Experimental Thermal and Fluid Science, 29:493–509, 2005.
[6] J. Jiao Z. Liu and Y. Zheng. Study of axial velocity in gas cyclones by 2d-piv, 3d-piv, and
simulation. China Particuology, 4:204–210, 2006.
[7] Y. S. Kozorezov S. V. Alekseenko, V. M. Dulin and D. M. Markovich. Eﬀect of axisymmetric
forcing on the structure of a swirling turbulent jet. International Journal of Heat and Fluid Flow,
29:1699–1715, 2008.
[8] N. Midoux R. Hreiz, C. Gentric. Numerical investigation of swirling ﬂow in cylindrical cyclones.
Chemical Engineering Research and Design, 89:2521–2539, 2011.
[9] R. Kumar A. Gupta. Three-dimensional turbulent swirling ﬂow in a cylinder: Experiments and
computations. International Journal of Heat and Fluid Flow, 28:249–261, 2007.
[10] M.R. Lecic A. S. Cocic and S.M. Cantrak. Numerical analysis of axisymmetric turbulent swirling
ﬂow in circular pipe. Thermal Science, 18(2):493–505, 2014.
[11] Zhakin A.I. Electrohydrodynamics. Phys. Usp., 55:465–488, 2012.
[12] Y. K. Stishkov V. A. Chirkov. Currenttime characteristic of the transient regime of electrohydrodynamic ﬂow formation. Journal of Electrostatics, 71(3):484–488, 2013.
[13] R. Langtry F. R. Menter, M. Kuntz. Ten years of industrial experience with the sst turbulence
model. Turbulence, heat and mass transfer, 4:625–632, 2003.
[14] D.H. Wood S.G. Koh, P.D. Clausen. The phase-dependence of a swirling, turbulent boundary layer.
In Proc. 10th Australasian Fluid Mech. Conf, pages 7.5–7.8, Melbourne, Australia, December 1989.

1228

