Procedia Computer Science
Volume 51, 2015, Pages 2734–2738
ICCS 2015 International Conference On Computational Science

A multiscale model for the feto-placental circulation in
monochorionic twin pregnancies
Ilaria Stura1 , Pietro Gaglioti2 , Tullia Todros2 , and Caterina Guiot1

2

1
University of Turin, Neuroscience Dept.
ilaria.stura@unito.it, caterina.guiot@unito.it
University of Turin, Surgical Sciences Dept., Materno-Fetal Unit, O.I.R.M. S. Anna Hospital,
Turin, Italy

Abstract
We developed a mathematical model of monochorionic twin pregnancies to simulate both the
normal gestation and the Twin-Twin Transfusion Syndrome (TTTS), a disease in which the
interplacental anastomose create a ﬂow imbalance, causing one of the twin to receive too much
blood and liquids, becoming hypertensive and polyhydramnios (the Recipient) and the other
to become hypotensive and oligohydramnios (the Donor). This syndrome, if untreated, leads
almost certainly to death one or both twins.
We propose a compartment model to simulate the ﬂows between the placenta and the fetuses
and the accumulation of the amniotic ﬂuid in the sacs.The aim of our work is to provide a simple
but realistic model of the twins-mother system and to stress it by simulating the pathological
cases and the related treatments, i.e. aminioreduction (elimination of the excess liquid in the
recipient sac), laser therapy (removal of all the anastomoses) and other possible innovative
therapies impacting on pressure and ﬂow parameters.
Keywords: obstetrics, pregnancy, TTTS, mathematical model

1

Introduction

The Twin-Twin Transfusion Syndrome (TTTS), also known as Feto-Fetal Transfusion Syndrome (FFTS) and Twin Oligohydramnios - Polyhydramnios Sequence (TOPS), is a complication of monochorionic (one single placenta) twins pregnancy and it is diagnosed prenatally
by ultrasound imaging. It consists in an alteration of the fetal circulation that results in an
unequal distribution of the amount of blood from the placenta to twins: one of the fetuses
(the Recipient or the Polyhydramnios) receives a lot of liquids, the other (the Donor or the
Oligohydramnios) has a deﬁciency of them. Contrary to what someone could think, the more
disadvantaged twin is the Recipient, in fact he/she suﬀers from hypertension, polyuria, circulatory overload and heart failures, diseases which could lead quickly to death; the Donor will
suﬀer from anemia, hypotension, growth restriction and renal failures but he/she could survive
2734

Selection and peer-review under responsibility of the Scientiﬁc Programme Committee of ICCS 2015
c The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V.

doi:10.1016/j.procs.2015.05.409

A multiscale model for TTTS . . .

Stura, Gaglioti, Todros and Guiot

longer than the other twin.
Although being quite common (one case every 45 monochorionic twin pregnancies, about 6000
per year only in the USA), very few human data are available for mathematical models; in
literature we found data from mammals (especially sheep, then dogs and monkeys) and some
measurements on human fetuses in single [8] or twin [6]-[7] pregnancies.
The mathematical models proposed up to now to simulate the course of this disease are based
on the hemodynamic and on the Windkessel ones. Many interesting simulations were published
by Umur and Van Gemert [3] using data about the amniotic ﬂuid volume, the blood pressure
and the urine production. Their models produce very accurate results, but they needs a lot of
input parameter values and measurements and they can not be used to study changes in time
scale of minutes but only of weeks. The Windkessel model describes the interaction between
the stroke volume and the compliance of the aorta and large elastic arteries: the total body
circulation or, in this case, the system mother-fetuses, could be modeled by series of simple
Windkessel circuits [5]. This model simulates accurately the changes in pressure and ﬂow of
the fetus in a time scale of seconds, but it could be computationally heavy if used to study the
whole pregnancy.
The aim of our work is to create a multiscale model that could grasp the changes on a small
time scale (minutes-hours), but that also allow to simulate long periods of time (weeks-months).
In the section 3 we show our compartments model, in which the two fetuses are modeled as
two compartments interacting with two distinct sources (the placenta); a discussion about the
parameters is provided. In the section 4 some preliminary results, implemented in MATLAB
(MATLAB and Statistics Toolbox 7.0, The MathWorks, Inc., Natick, Massachusetts, United
States.) are shown.

2

Clinical deﬁnitions

The TTTS is characterized by anastomoses, links between blood vessels or leaf veins. Anastomoses are of three types: Arterio-Venous (AV), Venous-Venous (VV) and Arterio-Arterial
(AA). The ﬁrst one causes a unidirectional inter-twin transfusion because a placental cotyledon
receives its arterial blood from one twin but drains its venous blood to the other: when one of
the twin has a higher arterial (or venous) pressure than the other, this type of anastomoses may
cause the TTTS. The other two types (AA and VV) directly link the two arterial or venous
circulations and they are not strictly related to the TTTS.
Unfortunately, there is no primary prevention for TTTS; it could be diagnosed in diﬀerent
stages of the pregnancy and it could have dramatic modiﬁcations during time, e.g. the reverse
of the twins (the Donor becomes Recipient and vice versa). Without therapies, the mortality
for at least one of the fetuses for this disease is very high (more than 90%), but actually there
are many ways to control and cure this syndrome. In particular, two therapy are now available
and long experienced: the laser therapy and the amnioreduction. The amnioreduction is a
symptomatic therapy consisting in a remotion of amniotic ﬂuid (about 1.5-3 liters) from the
Recipient sac. It is made puncturing the sac with the needle of a syringe and checking the
fetus with the scanner. This technique should be repeated during the pregnancy and it is only
a palliative, in fact it reduces the amount of the liquid in the Recipient but it does not act on
the causes of the syndrome.
The laser therapy is the interruption of the connections of the placental vessels (the anastomoses) using laser. It is best used for moderate to severe (stages III and IV) TTTS, or twin size
diﬀerences (discordance) of 40% or more, because there are procedure-related risks. However,
it has the best probability of success: 55% of the birth of the two fetuses and 97% of the birth
2735

A multiscale model for TTTS . . .

Stura, Gaglioti, Todros and Guiot

of at least one.

3

The compartmental model

The aim of our work is to create a model which could link the amniotic volume information (and
consequently fetus size) with the cardiac output of the fetus. We chose a compartment model
in which the parameters are time-dependent and could vary rapidly in case of a perturbation
of the system, e.g. the change of ﬂow (laser therapy) or pressure in the umbilical cord.
At this stage, the model uses lumped parameters and steady-state values can be estimated
while the time scale of the fetal heart rate (< 1s) is disregarded. We made some hypothesis:
the ﬁrst one is that the fetuses are fed by diﬀerent part of the same placenta and in the healthy
case there are no connections between them or there is a balance of the ﬂow in the anastomoses.
The second hypothesis is that, for simplicity, the two part of the placenta which serve the two
twins are considered ’inﬁnite’ sources; this means that the ﬂow from the mother is constant
and it always could compensate the demand for blood of the fetus. As concern the input and
output ﬂows between the fetuses and the mother, we consider two distinct types: the venous
ﬂow, from the mother to the fetus, that depends on the diﬀerence of their pressures and to the
resistance of the vases; the arterious ﬂow, from the fetus to the mother, that depends on the
pressure generated by the fetal heart.
To ease the notation, we introduce also the quantities Π∞ as the total carrying capacity of the
sources Π1 and Π2 , V∞ as the total carrying capacity of the two amniotic volumes V1 and V2 ,
1
k = ΠΠ∞
as the percentage of liquid given by the ﬁrst source and 1 − k as the percentage of the

(t)
as the percentage of liquid of the amniotic sac of the ﬁrst twin and
second one, h1 (t) = VV1∞
h2 (t) the percentage of liquid of the second twin. The carrying capacities are introduced both
to properly size the system and to limit the maximum volumes of liquids in play. Obviously, in
this ﬁrst model the carrying capacity of the sources makes little sense, in fact they are assumed
constants, but they will assume greater signiﬁcance in future models in which sources will have
more complex expressions.
The ODE system becomes:

⎧
dV1 (t)
⎪
⎨
= Qv1 (t)k − Qa1 (t)h1 (t)
dt
⎪
⎩ dV2 (t) = Q (t)(1 − k) − Q (t)h (t)
v2
a2
2
dt

(1)

where Qv. are the venous ﬂows and Qa. the arterious ﬂows (in day−1 ).
In this case the two twins are not linked and they will develop separately (no TTTS is implemented). As concern the ﬂow parameters, the arterious one is simply deﬁned by the arterial
pressure and it could be estimated using data from literature. The venous ﬂow is more complicated to calculate, in fact previous works (see [1] for details) showed that it is related to the
pressure of the mother and the fetus and also to the resistance of the vessels between them;
moreover, this resistance varies with the gestation time and depends on the section and the
length o the vessel (we used mean values from the literature). RF is the resistance which varies
throughout pregnancy.
PΠ − PF
Qv. =
(2)
RF
where PΠ and PF are the pressures of the placenta and the fetus respectively, RF the resistance
of the fetus.
2736

A multiscale model for TTTS . . .

Stura, Gaglioti, Todros and Guiot

To model the TTTS, we inserted a new parameter that we called Q12 , the unbalanced ﬂow
from the ﬁrst fetus to the second. It is a (ﬁxed) quantity that must be added (or subtracted)
to the venous ﬂows. The system (1) becomes:
⎧
dV1 (t)
⎪
⎨
= (Qv1 + Q12 )k − Qa1 h1 (t)
dt
(3)
⎪
⎩ dV2 (t) = (Q − Q )(1 − k) − Q h (t)
v2
12
a2 2
dt
Note that, as shown in (2), the changes of the parameters, without therapies, take place few
times during the pregnancy (weeks time scale): in each period the parameters could be supposed
as constants. Supposing Qv. and Qa. constants, the system could be studied analytically; the
solutions are:
⎧
Qa1
Qv1 + Q12
Qv1 + Q12
⎪
⎪
kV∞ + (V1 (0) −
kV∞ )e− V∞ t
⎨ V1 =
Qa1
Qa1
(4)
Qa2
Q
Qv2 − Q12
−
Q
⎪
v2
12
− V∞
t
⎪V =
⎩
V∞ (1 − k) + (V2 (0) −
(1 − k)V∞ )e
2
Qa2
Qa2
The more complicated case, with ﬂow and carrying capacity parameters time-dependent, is not
so easy to manage and it is not the aim of this our ﬁrst work to ﬁnd its analytical solutions.

4

Simulations of the treatments

The model presented in the previous section reproduces satisfactory the healthy case comparing
our results with data from literature [3]-[5]. As concern therapies, we simulated both laser and
amnioreduction with constants parameters: the amnioreduction was simulated changing the
initial conditions at the time of the treatment, the laser therapy posing to zero the Q12 term.
In recent times some clinicians combine the two therapies to improve and accelerate the result
of the laser therapy. All the simulations are provided in Fig. 1.
As shown in literature, the amnioreduction does not cure the syndrome: it temporarily reduces
the volume of liquids in the Recipient sac but the Donor twin does not beneﬁt from the treatment. The laser therapy, instead, help both twins which tend to the healthy situation. The
combination of both therapies seems to give an added beneﬁt to the Recipient twin, although
in our simulation this beneﬁt is not greatly appreciable. The simulation of the complete model
Figure 1: Simulation of the three possible therapies. 1) single amnioreduction: the liquid of
the Recipient twin decrease but it regrows rapidly in few days. The Donor twin has no beneﬁts
from the therapy, 2) laser therapy: the Q12 term becomes null after the surgery and both twin
tend to the normal situation; 3) laser therapy combined with an amnioreduction: the Recipient
twin has an additional beneﬁt to reach the healthy situation.
with time dependent parameters is in development; we are working also on simulations of new
therapies. In particular we are interested in to study how the system could evolve in case of
fetal pressure perturbations.

5

Conclusion

We proposed a new model to simulate the healthy and the pathological case of a monochorionic
twin pregnancy. Using a compartment model, we tried to combine the positive aspects of
2737

A multiscale model for TTTS . . .

Stura, Gaglioti, Todros and Guiot

both model types we reported in section 1, minimizing the criticalities. Obviously it is only a
preliminary work that we would like to expand and deepen in the next future.
A distributed model may be devised as further step to account for the actual time dependent
of the ﬂows on shorter scales. This will allow for a more deﬁned simulation of the heart pump
and, moreover, will be able to simulate the ﬂow waveforms, which can be clinically validated
by Doppler ﬂowmetry monitoring.

References
[1] Guiot C, Pianta PG, Todros T. Modelling the feto-placental circulation: 1. A distributed network
predicting umbilical haemodinamics throughout pregnancy. Ultrasound in Med & Biol 1992; 18:535544
[2] Guiot C, Pianta PG, Todros T. Modelling the feto-placental circulation: 1. a continuous approach
to explain normal and abnormal ﬂow velocity waveforms in the umbilical arteries. Ultrasound in
Med & Biol 1992; 18:545-551
[3] Umur A, Van Gemert MJC, Ross MG. Amniotic ﬂuid and hemodynamic model in monochorionic
twin pregnancies ant twin-twin transfusion syndrome. Am J Physiol Regulatory Integrative Comp
Physiol 2001; 280:R1499-R1509
[4] Jeroen P. H. M. van den Wijngaard, Asli Umur, Michael G. Ross and Martin J. C. van Gemert.
Twintwin transfusion syndrome: mathematical modelling. Prenat Diagn 2008; 28: 280291.
[5] Jeroen P. H. M. van den Wijngaard, Michael G. Ross and Martin J. C. van Gemert. TwinTwin
Transfusion Syndrome Modeling. Ann. N.Y. Acad. Sci. 2007; 1101: 215234.
[6] Sonesson SE, Fouron JC, Leduc I,Lessard M, Grignon A. Reference values fordiﬀerences between
cardio-circulatory variables of normal twin fetuses. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 2000; 15:407-412.
[7] Zanardini C, Prefumo F, Fichera A, Botteri E, Frusca T. Fetal cardiac parameters for prediction
of twin-to-twin transfusion syndrome. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 2014; 44:434-440.
[8] Turan OM,Turan S,Sanapo L,Wilruth A,Berg C,Gembruch U,Harman CR,Baschat AA. Reference ranges for ductus venosus velocity ratios in pregnancies with normal outcomes. J Ultrasound
Med.2014 Feb;33(2):329-36
[9] Senat MV, Deprest J, Boulvain M, Paupe A, Winer N, Ville Y. Endoscopic laser surgery versus
serial amnioreduction for severe twin-to-twin transfusion syndrome. N Engl J Med 2004; 351:136-44.

2738

