Procedia Computer Science
Volume 51, 2015, Pages 346–355
ICCS 2015 International Conference On Computational Science

Multi-Objective Genetic Algorithm for Variable Selection
in Multivariate Classiﬁcation Problems: A Case Study in
Veriﬁcation of Biodiesel Adulteration
Lucas de Almeida Ribeiro1 , Anderson da Silva Soares1 , Telma Woerle de Lima1 ,
Carlos Antˆonio Campos Jorge1 , Ronaldo Martins da Costa1 , Rogerio Lopes
Salvini1 , Clarimar Jos´e Coelho2 , Fernando Marques Federson1 , and Paulo
Henrique Ribeiro Gabriel3
1

3

Instituto de Inform´
atica, Universidade Federal de Goi´
as, Goiˆ
ania, Goi´
as, Brasil
anderson@inf.ufg.br
2
Departamento de Ciˆencia da Computa¸c˜
ao, Pontif´ıcia Universidade Cat´
olica de Goi´
as, Goiˆ
ania,
Goi´
as, Brasil
Faculdade de Computa¸c˜
ao, Universidade Federal de Uberlˆ
andia, Uberlˆ
andia, Minas Gerais, Brasil

Abstract
This paper proposes multi-objective genetic algorithm for the problem of variable selection
in multivariate calibration. We consider the problem related to the classiﬁcation of biodiesel
samples to detect adulteration, Linear Discriminant Analysis classiﬁer. The goal of the multi-objective algorithm is to reduce the dimensionality of the original set of variables; thus, the
classiﬁcation model can be less sensitive, providing a better generalization capacity. In particular, in this paper we adopted a version of the Non-dominated Sorting Genetic Algorithm
(NSGA-II) and compare it to a mono-objective Genetic Algorithm (GA) in terms of sensitivity
in the presence of noise. Results show that the mono-objective selects 20 variables on average
and presents an error rate of 14%. One the other hand, the multi-objective selects 7 variables
and has an error rate of 11%. Consequently, we show that the multi-objective formulation
provides classiﬁcation models with lower sensitivity to the instrumental noise when compared
to the mono-objetive formulation.
Keywords: Genetic Algorithm, Variable Selection, Linear Discriminant Analysis

1

Introduction

Chemometrics can be deﬁned as the application of mathematical and statistical methods in
chemical data [13]. In this context, a possible application of chemometric methods consists of
determining or classifying elements of interest in a given sample using indirect measurements
by signal instrumental analysis [2, 21].
346

Selection and peer-review under responsibility of the Scientiﬁc Programme Committee of ICCS 2015
c The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V.

doi:10.1016/j.procs.2015.05.254

Multi-Objective Genetic Algorithm for Variable Selection . . . Ribeiro, Soares, Lima, Coelho and Jorge

One characteristic of nowadays instrumental methods is the ability to generate several variables from a single sample [18]. One example is the absorption intensity of thousands wavelengths that can be recorded in a single spectrum [17]. The spectra are the results of the
application of energy into matter. The study of this interaction is called spectroscopy. Energy
can be absorbed by matter and the amount of absorption dependents on the type of the compound [23]. However, not all the measured variables are related to the compound of interest.
The use of selection algorithms to determine an appropriate subset of variables is essential for
the task of determining compounds. This determination can be made through multivariate
techniques such as Discriminant Analysis [30].
Discriminant Analysis is a statistical technique for discrimination and classiﬁcation of elements in groups previously known [4]. Thus, given the variables of a sample, one can allocate it
in its corresponding class through an association rule [16]. In this context, Discriminant Analysis uses a subset with multivariate observations whose classiﬁcation is already known (called
sample or training group) and, from this subset, an association rule (or classiﬁcation) function
is applied for the entire collection, based on the probability theory [7].
One of the most used methods to perform the classiﬁcation, using Discriminant Analysis, is
the Linear Discriminant Analysis (LDA), which uses an inverse of co-variance matrix to classify
elements [31]. LDA method, however, presents some problems related to matrix inversion,
such as collinearity and nearly collinearity of columns of the co-variance matrix, used in this
technique [20, 21]. A usual way to reduce the number of collinear variables is by removing
them from the model through a variable selection technique. According Kira and Rendell [12],
variable selection (or feature selection) looks for a small subset of features that, ideally, is
necessary and suﬃcient to describe the target concept used in classiﬁcation problems. Dash
and Liu [5] deﬁne feature selection as a function that attempts to select the minimum-sized
subset of features; thus the classiﬁcation accuracy signiﬁcantly is not signiﬁcantly decreased, in
comparison to larger subsets.
Several algorithms have been adopt for feature selection, including Genetic Algorithms
(GAs) [15, 24], Successive Projections Algorithm [25] and the Stepwise Algorithm [24].
GAs have been applied for several variable selection problem, such as the classiﬁcation of
blue ink pens into types and brands by using the LDA combined to reﬂectance spectroscopy
and Fourier transform [24]. In addition, they were also applied to selection of variables obtained
by Raman spectroscopy for wood classiﬁcation [15].
Although these implementations have reached satisfactory results, they use a single objective
approach, in which the only aspect analyzed is the model quality designed by the variables
selected. Thus, for maximizing the gain with respect to the intended objective, these algorithms
can include a growing number of variables without considering the possibility of models with a
smaller number and similar discriminant power. Consequently, these algorithms do not satisfy
the goals of feature selection [5] nor ﬁnd the ideal solution subset [12].
To overcome this drawback, this paper proposes the use of a multi-objective formulation
of the algorithm for variables selection for LDA in multivariate classiﬁcation problems. In
particular, we applied the Non-dominated Sorting Genetic Algorithm (NSGA-II) [6] to select
variables using two objectives: i) minimizing the classiﬁcation error; and ii) minimize the
number of variables used.
With the addition of this second objective, the ﬁnal model presents a better generalization
ability when compared to the traditional nono-objective approach. As a case study, we consider
a real-world problem related to the classiﬁcation of mixtures of diesel fuel/biodiesel to discover
adulteration. Results conﬁrm the proposed formulation reduces the number of selected variables
at the same time that reduce the error rate.
347

Multi-Objective Genetic Algorithm for Variable Selection . . . Ribeiro, Soares, Lima, Coelho and Jorge

2
2.1

THEORETICAL BACKGROUND
DISCRIMINANT ANALYSIS

The Discriminant Analysis is a supervised technique of pattern recognition, in which the density
of probabilities of a object belongs to a class is modeled as multivariate normal distributions.
Assuming the same probability a priori for all considered classes, the classiﬁcation is given by
calculating the probability for each class; thus, the class with the highest probability is assumed
to be the class to in which the element belongs [28].
To make the classiﬁcation, the inverse of the co-variance matrix of classes is used. Assuming
the same co-variance matrix for all classes, the region of separation is given by Equation (1) [14].
(x − μj1 )T Σ−1 (x − μj1 ) = (x − μj2 )T Σ−1 (x − μj2 )

(1)

The geometric term (x)T Σ−1 (x) becomes independent of the class, creating a linear surface
of decision hyperplanes in k . The classiﬁcation process is associated with the concept of
Mahalanobis distance, which is deﬁned by component r of Equation (2) [14].
r2 (x, μj )T = (x − μj )T Σ−1 (x − μj )

(2)

This distance is constant in class j and μj is the mean vector for class j. Note that r is unique
for all classes and can be estimated from the co-variance matrices of all classes. To calculate the
distance, we use the weighted average of the co-variance matrices of each individual class [14].
Thus, to classify the element x, we ﬁnd the Mahalanobis distance in each class, and classify x
in the class that obtains the lowest value. If the homoscedasticity is satisﬁed, the LDA will be
optimum for this classiﬁcation, minimizing errors [14].
Note that the computation of the Mahalanobis distance depends on the stability of the
computation of the inverse of the covariance matrix. Therefore, it is necessary that the variables
considered do not possess collinearity among each other; otherwise we cannot compute the
inverse or it will be bad conditioned. Thus, an algorithm for variable selection, such as a Genetic
Algorithm, can be modeled to select variables representing the problem with low collinearity
among each other [14].

2.2

GENETIC ALGORITHM

Genetic Algorithms (GAs) are computational methods which may be deﬁned as a search technique based on a metaphor of the biological process of natural evolution [19]. GAs can also be
deﬁned as heuristic-based techniques for global optimization, diﬀerent from methods such as
gradient, which follows the derivative of a function to ﬁnd its maximum and may be restricted
to local maxima [1].
A GA is designed assuming that the solution of the problem can be modeled by a set of
parameters using, in general, a binary notation. These parameters are organized as genes in a
chromosome and a ﬁtness function is applied over this chromosome. The ﬁtness function gives a
phenotypic characteristic to a set of genes. Individuals, or points, of a generation with the best
ﬁtness values (best phenotypic characteristics) should be prioritized to reproduce and create a
new generation [10].
Usually, a GA has the following steps: computation of the ﬁtness value for the current
population; the choice of the best individuals; the choice of individuals that will compose the
new population; and the use of selected individuals to create the new population. This process
348

Multi-Objective Genetic Algorithm for Variable Selection . . . Ribeiro, Soares, Lima, Coelho and Jorge

is repeated for a ﬁxed number of generations or until obtaining individual(s) with the desired
characteristic [19].
The ﬁtness function is designed according to the problem, i.e., the value of this function is
inherent to the considered problem. A generation can originate another one via two genetic
operators: crossover and mutation. In crossover, parts of the chromosome from a individual
(parent) is combined with parts of the chromosome from another individual, in order to create
a new individual (oﬀspring). The mutation, on the other hand, is the process of changing
the value of elements of a gene [19]. GAs try to provide better solutions to each generation;
consequently, a GA is strongly associated with optimization problems [19].

2.3

MULTI-OBJECTIVE GENETIC ALGORITHMS

Real-world problems may require a simultaneous optimization of multiple objectives [11]. In
problems with a single goal (mono-objective), optimization algorithms look for the best solution
in the search space, or in a set of solutions. On the other hand, in multi-objective problems,
there may not be an optimal solution for all objectives. In this case, in a multi-objective
problem there exists a subset in the search space which is better than the rest of the solution.
This subset is known as Pareto optimal solutions or non-dominated solutions [3].
The choice of a unique solution in the collection of Pareto optimal solutions depends on
the knowledge of problem characteristics, and a solution in a particular model may not be the
best in another model or environment. Thus, the multi-objective analysis should make using
alternative metrics over the collection of Pareto optimal solutions [27].
The Non-dominated Sorting Genetic Algorithm (NSGA-II) implements the concept of dominance and classiﬁes a population into boundaries according to their level of dominance. In each
generation, best solutions are allocated at the ﬁrst frontier, and the worst ones are allocated
in last frontier. The allocation process ﬁnishes when all individuals are allocated within their
respective frontiers. After the this process, the ﬁrst-frontier individuals are not dominated by
any other individual; however, they dominate the second frontier. Thus, individuals of the i-th
frontier dominate individuals of the (i + 1)-th frontier [6].
Figure 1 shows how NSGA-II sorts a population of individuals. Individuals which are not
dominated are classiﬁed into frontiers (F 1, F 2, F 3). Thus, individuals are sorted according
to these frontiers. The sorting process looks for individuals with lower similarity among them
to maintain a more heterogeneous population this heterogeneity is maintained by the sorting
process crowding. Individuals that are above the limit of a generation are rejected.

Figure 1: Fast non-dominated and crowding distance sorting process crowding.
from [6]

Adapted

349

Multi-Objective Genetic Algorithm for Variable Selection . . . Ribeiro, Soares, Lima, Coelho and Jorge

3
3.1

METHODS AND MATERIALS
DATASET

The data set considered in this paper is a multivariate calibration data obtained by Near InfraRed spectroscopy (NIR). In this paper, we consider samples of biodiesel blends that are
divided into four distinct classes: i) free-biodiesel diesel and raw vegetable oil (D); ii) mixtures containing diesel, biodiesel and raw vegetable oil (OBD); iii) mixtures of diesel and raw
vegetable oil (OD); and iv) blends containing diesel and 5% biodiesel required by the Law [22].
NIR method was adopted because the European standard for evaluating the biodiesel quality
(EN 140678) considers that the carbonyl absorption in the mid-infrared region (MIR) in a nonvariable method in 1745 cm−1 . This is same region of absorption of carbon groups present in
raw vegetable oils; consequently, an adulteration in vegetable oils may not be detected from
the European standard and, therefore, several studies are looking for other absorption regions
for detection. The problem of adulteration with raw vegetable oils is cause of engine problems
such as: carbon deposits, injection blocking, incomplete combustion (due to its viscosity), low
volatility, and gum formation, which is characteristic of oxidation and polymerization [22].
The considered data set consists of 32 samples for validation, 76 training samples and 32
samples for testing. Each sample has 1296 variables, which are the wavelengths analyzed.
Data were collected in the following regions: 1.0 mm (8814 - 3799) cm−1 . Theses spectra
were previously treated with the Savitzky-Golay ﬁrst derivative procedure with a second-order
polynomial (7-point window) and, then, organized on these three sets using the KennardStone (KS) algorithm [22].
Table 1 shows the allocation of samples in each class and data set. Mixtures were prepared
using diﬀerent vegetable oils, animal fats and their esters. Pure biodiesel and oil samples were
purchased from the market, the source of many industries, all following Brazilian standards [22].

Training
Validation
Testing

D
19
8
8

OBD
20
9
9

OD
19
8
8

B5
18
7
7

Table 1: Class Allocation of Samples

3.2

MONO-GA-LDA

The mono-objective implementation of the genetic algorithm, denoted MONO-GA-LDA, for
variable selection was performed with the binary notation for the choice of variables. Each
chromosome is constituted of 1296 variables. Initially, a maximum of 32 variables were chosen,
because this is the number of samples of the validation set. Elitism was chosen as the method
of choice of parents for the next generation, privileging best individuals to the next generation.
The ﬁtness function computes the number of classiﬁcation errors in the validation set. The
number of generations was set at 100, the mutation probability was 0.1% for each gene, and the
number of individuals in each population was limited to 80. We adopted the uniform crossover
operator [29, 26]. The matching pool subset (parent subset) was created selecting the 20 best
individuals. The crossover operator applied between the best individual of the parent subset
with the worst, the second best with the second worst and so on.
The algorithm MONO-GA-LDA is shown as pseudo-code in Algorithm 2.
350

Multi-Objective Genetic Algorithm for Variable Selection . . . Ribeiro, Soares, Lima, Coelho and Jorge

Let P the random initial population, conf the mutation settings, f the number of parents,
and gen the number of generations;
for all p ∈ P do
pf ← functionFitness(p);
end for
SORT(P );
Pp ← ELIT ISM (P, f );
for i ← 1togen do
Ps ← GEN ET IC − OP ERAT ORS(Pp , conf );
for all p ∈ Pp do
pf 1 ← functionFitness(p);
P ← P ∪ B;
SORT(P );
Pp ← ELIT ISM (P, f );
end for
end for
Algorithm 1: Pseudo-code of MONO-GA-LDA

3.3

MULTI-GA-LDA

The multi-objective implementation of the genetic algorithm, denoted MULTI-GA-LDA, was
modeled in the same way that the mono-objective approach. However, we consider two ﬁtness
functions: i) minimization of errors; and ii) minimization of the number of variables. The
algorithm MULTI-GA-LDA is shown as pseudo-code in Algorithm 2.
Let P the random initial population, conf the mutation settings, f the parent number and
gen the number of generations;
for all p ∈ P do
pf 1 ← functionFitness1(p);
pf 2 ← functionFitness2(p);
end for
NON-DOMINATED-SORT(P );
Pp ← BIN ARY − T OU RN EY (P );
for i ← 1 to gen do
Ps ← GEN ET IC − OP ERAT ORS(Pp , conf );
for all p ∈ Pp do
pf 1 ← functionFitness1(p);
pf 2 ← functionFitness2(p);
P ← P ∪ B;
NON-DOMINATED-SORT(P );
Pp ← BIN ARY − T OU RN EY (P );
end for
end for
Algorithm 2: Pseudo-code of MULTI-GA-LDA
The number of generations and the size of the population was the same that the monoobjective approach. The mutation probability was set to 50% for individuals and 0.2% for each
351

Multi-Objective Genetic Algorithm for Variable Selection . . . Ribeiro, Soares, Lima, Coelho and Jorge

gene. We adopted the uniform crossover operator [29, 26]. The selection of parents for a new
generation was done by binary tournament [9].

4

RESULTS AND DISCUSSIONS

Tables 2 and 3 present the results for 40 executions of the MONO-GA-LDA and MULTI-GA-LDA algorithms, respectively. Both tables show the number of variables selected and the
amount of errors obtained by the corresponding algorithm.
o

N Var
N o Errors

Max
32
11

Min
6
0

Mean
19.85
4.5

Standard Deviation
6.72
1.9

Table 2: Results for MONO-GA-LDA algorithm.

N o Var
N o Errors

Max
17
10

Min
4
0

Mean
6.82
3.65

Standart Deviation
3.19
2.31

Table 3: Results for MULTI-GA-LDA algorithm.
According to Tables 2 and 3, we observe that the number of errors is similar. However,
when the multi-objective formulation is considered (Table 3), the number of variables used in
the classiﬁer is substantially smaller; indeed, this number is in the order of three times smaller,
on average.
In addition to these results, we also compare the best chromosome obtained by the MULTIGA-LDA, i.e., the chromosome with the smallest error rate, with the best chromosome obtained
by MONO-GA-LDA. Figure 2 shows the variables that compose each chromosome. It is possible
to observe, in this ﬁgure, the diﬀerence in between the number of variables selected by both
algorithms.
0.2

0.2
Sample1
Selected Sample

0.1

0.1

0.05

0.05

0
−0.05

0
−0.05

−0.1
−0.15
0

Sample 1
Selected Variable

0.15

dA/dλ

dA/dλ

0.15

−0.1
200

400

600
800
Variable Index

(a) MULTI-GA-LDA

1000

1200 1296

−0.15
0

200

400

600
800
Variable Index

1000

1200 1296

(b) MONO-GA-LDA

Figure 2: Variables that compose the chromosome with the best rate of error in the classiﬁcation
of samples of testing set
Figure 3 shows the dispersion of the samples of the classiﬁcation test using the two variables of discriminability measured by Fisher coeﬃcient [8]. Note that, using the selected variables by MULTI-GA-LDA (Figure 3(a)), the separation between samples becomes clearer when
352

Multi-Objective Genetic Algorithm for Variable Selection . . . Ribeiro, Soares, Lima, Coelho and Jorge

compared to the dispersion of the samples using the selected variables by MONO-GA-LDA
(Figure 3(b)). This result suggest that the classiﬁer is more eﬃcient to new samples.

0.014

−5

x 10
3
D
OBD
OD
B5

0.013
0.0125

D
OBD
OD
B5

2
Variable 318

Variable 759

0.0135

0.012

1
0
−1

0.0115
0.011
7.5

−2
5.5

6

7

4

6.5

−3

x 10

5

2
6

−5

x 10

0

Variable 1124

Variable 336

0
4.5

−3

x 10

−2
4

(a) MULTI-GA-LDA

−5

−4
3.5

Variable 1120

−6

x 10
Variable 281

(b) MONO-GA-LDA

Figure 3: Dispersion of the samples using the two most discriminant variables selected by
MULTI-GA-LDA e MONO-GA-LDA.
Finally, we also perform a study of sensibility to noise instrumental considering the best
chromosome obtained in each approach. This study consists of to contaminate the independent
variables with a random white noise. Figure 4 shows the relation between the number of errors
in the classiﬁer through the increase of white noise rate. The Y -axis shows the number of
errors found, on an average of 50 classiﬁer executions due to random errors, within an artiﬁcial
contamination environment. The X-axis shows the maximum noise, which were randomly
generated, to the maximum percentage presented.
25

20

ERROR

15

10

5

0
0

MONO−GA−LDA
MULTI−GA−LDA

2

4

6
8
10
NOISE RATE(%)

12

14 15

Figure 4: Error Rate as a function of noise
As observed in this section, the model obtained by the proposed multi-objective approach
(MULTI-GA-LDA) has lower sensitivity to the presence of instrumental noise, when compared
353

Multi-Objective Genetic Algorithm for Variable Selection . . . Ribeiro, Soares, Lima, Coelho and Jorge

to the mono-objective algorithm (MONO-GA-LDA). Based on this, we conclude multi-objective
formulation leads to more robust models, not only in terms of numbers of variables but also in
terms of robustness.

5

CONCLUSION

This paper has proposed the use of a multi-objective formulation for the variable selection problem in Linear Discriminant Analysis (LDA). In particular, we adopted the NSGA-II algorithm
to simultaneously minimize the number of classiﬁcation errors and the number of variables used
to build the classiﬁer. As a case study, we consider the veriﬁcation problem of biodiesel adulteration from data obtained by a spectrophotometer. Results showed that the multi-objective
formulation presented a performance similar to mono-objective formulation, but with a substantially smaller number of variables. In addition we study the sensitivity to noise by using
the chromosome with the best error rate obtained in the test collection of classiﬁcation of each
implementation. From this result, we observed that the classiﬁcation model obtained from the
multi-objective formulation has greater robustness to the presence of instrumental noise.

6

ACKNOWLEDGMENT

The authors would like to thank CAPES and FAPEG (Foundation for Research Support of the
State of Goias) for the ﬁnancial support to this project.

References
[1] P. Bajpai and M. Kumar. Genetic algorithm-an approach to solve global optimization problems.
Indian Journal of computer science AND engineering, 1(3):199–206, 2010.
[2] R. G. Brereton. Applied chemometrics for scientists. John Wiley & Sons, 2007.
[3] V. Chankong and Y. Haimes. Multi-objective optimization: Pareto optimality. Concise Encyclopedia of Environmental Systems. Pergamon Press, UK, pages 387–396, 1993.
[4] D. Coomans, D.L. Massart, and L. Kaufman. Optimization by statistical linear discriminant
analysis in analytical chemistry. Analytica Chimica Acta, 112(2):97 – 122, 1979.
[5] M. Dash and H. Liu. Feature selection for classiﬁcation. Intelligent data analysis, 1(3):131–156,
1997.
[6] K. Deb, A. Pratap, S. Agarwal, T. Meyarivan, and A. Fast. A fast and elitist multiobjective
genetic algorithm: Nsga-ii. IEEE transactions on Evolutionary Computation, 6(2):182–197, 2002.
[7] P. Filzmoser, K. Joossens, and C. Croux. Multiple group linear discriminant analysis: robustness
and error rate. In Compstat 2006-Proceedings in Computational Statistics, pages 521–532. Springer,
2006.
[8] R. A. Fisher. The precision of discriminant functions. Annals of Eugenics, 10(1):422–429, 1940.
[9] D. E. Goldberg and K. Deb. A comparative analysis of selection schemes used in genetic algorithms.
Urbana, 51:61801–2996, 1991.
[10] J. H. Holland. Adaptation in natural AND artiﬁcial systems: an introductory analysis with applications to biology, control AND artiﬁcial intelligence. MIT press, 1992.
[11] B. Kernan and J. Geraghty. A multi-objective genetic algorithm for extend. In Proceedings of the
First Irish Workshop on Simulation in Manufacturing, Services AND Logistics, Limerick, Ireland,
2004.

354

Multi-Objective Genetic Algorithm for Variable Selection . . . Ribeiro, Soares, Lima, Coelho and Jorge
[12] K. Kira and L. A. Rendell. The feature selection problem: Traditional methods and a new
algorithm. In AAAI, pages 129–134, 1992.
[13] B. R. Kowalski and M. Seasholtz . Recent developments in multivariate calibration. Journal of
Chemometrics, 5(3):129–145, 1991.
[14] W.J. Krzanowski, P. Jonathan, W.V. McCarthy, and M.R. Thomas. Discriminant analysis with
singular covariance matrices: methods and applications to spectroscopic data. Applied Statistics,
44:101–115, 1995.
[15] B. K. Lavine, C. Davidson, A. J. Moores, and P. Griﬃths. Raman spectroscopy and genetic
algorithms for the classiﬁcation of wood types. Applied Spectroscopy, 55(8):960–966, 2001.
[16] T. Li, S. Zhu, and M. Ogihara. Using discriminant analysis for multi-class classiﬁcation: an
experimental investigation. Knowledge AND information systems, 10(4):453–472, 2006.
[17] Howard Mark. Chemometrics in near-infrared spectroscopy. Analytica chimica acta, 223:75–93,
1989.
[18] Robert R. Meglen. Chemometrics: Its role in chemistry and measurement sciences. Chemometrics AND Intelligent Laboratory Systems, 3(1):17 – 29, 1988. Proceedings of the Workshop in
Chemometrics, Sponsored by the Environmental Protection Agency.
[19] M. Mitchell. An introduction to genetic algorithm. massachussetts, 1997.
[20] A. Mkhadri, G. Celeux, and A. Nasroallah. Regularization in discriminant analysis: an overview.
Computational Statistics AND Data Analysis, 23(3):403–423, 1997.
[21] T. Næs and B.-H. Mevik. Understanding the collinearity problem in regression and discriminant
analysis. Journal of Chemometrics, 15(4):413–426, 2001.
[22] M. J. C. Pontes, C. F. Pereira, M. F. Pimentel, F. V. C. Vasconcelos, and A. G. B. Silva. Screening
analysis to detect adulteration in diesel/biodiesel blends using near infrared spectrometry and
multivariate classiﬁcation. Talanta, 85(4):2159–2165, 2011.
[23] F. Rossi, D. Fran¸cois, V. Wertz, M. Meurens, and M. Verleysen. Fast selection of spectral variables
with b-spline compression. Chemometrics AND Intelligent Laboratory Systems, 86(2):208–218,
2007.
[24] C. S. Silva, F. de S. L. Borba, M. F. Pimentel, M. J. C. Pontes, R. S. Honorato, and C. Pasquini.
Classiﬁcation of blue pen ink using infrared spectroscopy and linear discriminant analysis. Microchemical Journal, 2012.
[25] U. T. C. P. Souto, M. J. C. Pontes, E. C. Silva, R. K. H. Galv ao, M. C. U. Ara´
ujo, F. A. C.
Sanches, F. A. S. Cunha, and M. S. R. Oliveira. Uvvis spectrometric classiﬁcation of coﬀees by
spalda. Food Chemistry, 119(1):368 – 371, 2010.
[26] W. M. Spears and K. D. De Jong. On the virtues of parameterized uniform crossover. Technical
report, DTIC Document, 1995.
[27] N. Srinivas and K. Deb. Muiltiobjective optimization using nondominated sorting in genetic
algorithms. Evolutionary computation, 2(3):221–248, 1994.
[28] N. Srinivas and K. Deb. Multiobjective Optimization Using Nondominated Sorting in Genetic
Algorithms. Evolutionary Computation, 2(3):221–248, Fall 1994.
[29] G. Syswerda. Uniform crossover in genetic algorithms. In Proceedings of the 3rd International
Conference on Genetic Algorithms, pages 2–9, San Francisco, CA, USA, 1989. Morgan Kaufmann
Publishers Inc.
[30] Z. Xiaobo, Z. Jiewen, M. J. Povey, M. Holmes, and M. Hanpin. Variables selection methods in
near-infrared spectroscopy. Analytica chimica acta, 667(1):14–32, 2010.
[31] J. Ye. Least squares linear discriminant analysis. In Proceedings of the 24th international conference
on Machine learning, ICML ’07, pages 1087–1093, New York, NY, USA, 2007. ACM.

355

