Procedia Computer Science
Volume 51, 2015, Pages 1603–1612
ICCS 2015 International Conference On Computational Science

Inﬂuence of the External Environment Behaviour
on the Banking System Stability
Valentina Y. Guleva1 and Alexey Dukhanov2
1
2

ITMO University, Saint-Petersburg, Russia
valentina.gul.va@gmail.com
ITMO University, Saint-Petersburg, Russia
dukhanov@niuitmo.ru

Abstract
There are plenty of researches dedicated to ﬁnancial system stability, which takes signiﬁcant
place in prevention of ﬁnancial crisis and its consequences. However banking system and external environment interaction and customers behaviour inﬂuence on the banking system stability
are poorly studied. Current paper propose agent-based model of banking system and its external environment. We show how customers behaviour characteristics aﬀect a banking system
stability. Optimal interval for total environmental funds towards banking system wealthy is
performed.
Keywords: banking system, modelling, stability, external environment, customers

1

Introduction

Financial systems fragility can lead to crises that adversely aﬀect quality of life and cause panic.
That changes in turn aggravate the crises [9]. A lot of papers are devoted to investigating
fragility reasons and try to ﬁnd a way to optimize ﬁnancial systems policy. The main trends of
these studies are showed below (Fig. 1).
The ﬁrst approach concerns the managing single bank policy based on balance sheet information analysis. As a single institute is an inner element of the ﬁnancial system, we can think
that the optimization of each network’s institute policy would lead us to whole ﬁnancial system
robustness. However, optimization for itself can make the system more fragile [9]. At the same
time research of the balance sheet requirements and single bank policy inﬂuence is an actual
problem which captures many researchers’ attention [3, 11]. In 1979 the CAMELS rating system was implemented, in 1988 the Basel Accord introduced minimum capital requirement, in
90s the Kromonov method of the ﬁnancial institute reliability assessment was suggested. These
three systems use balance sheet information for assumption of bank robustness. In [3, 11] bank
portfolios inﬂuence is also considered.
Selection and peer-review under responsibility of the Scientiﬁc Programme Committee of ICCS 2015
c The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V.

doi:10.1016/j.procs.2015.05.292

1603

Environment Inﬂuence on the Banking System Stability

Guleva and Dukhanov

Figure 1: Areas of a banking system stability research. Inﬂuence of external environment,
which can be presented with some processes or bank customers, depends on customers’ amount
and their behaviour. Big circles correspond to banking system agents, arrows correspond to
shock contagion direction. Network structure implies edges existence or absence and properties
connected with it.

The second approach is to choose features that occur at bankruptcy and classify, if the bank
looks like close to bankruptcy or not [8, 12, 15]. Gordini [8] used info from database containing
bank accounts records for one, two, and three years before bankruptcy. Division to bankrupt
and non-bankrupt cases was done for the same year. Trabelsi [15] also used database info and
examined the impact of cut-oﬀ points choosing and sampling procedures. Jeong [12] used a set
of balance sheet samples for bankrupt and non-bankrupt organizations and applied the general
additive model to select useful and less redundant variables for classiﬁcation. All of the papers
described above compared diﬀerent classiﬁers and their combinations to predict bankruptcy
with chosen features.
An inﬂuence of the network structure is explored by the third approach, which illustrate how
concentration, complexity, clustering, connectivity and other features of the network structure
description aﬀect the network fragility. They do the shock propagation and introduce measure
of contagion (Contagion Index, for example [6]) to ﬁnd more robust structure. Georg [7] showed
that centralised banking system is more stable in crises than a random one, whereas in non-crises
time structure does not matter. Nier [13] also showed that more capitalised systems are more
resilient to contagion. Increase in the degree of connectivity implies absorbing shocks, whereas
when it takes small values the opposite eﬀect occurs. In modelling authors either emulate an
existing banking system or use random graphs of Erdos-Renyi [5] or Barabasi-Albert [1].
Stress-testing concerns to all network components described above: micro stress tests for
individual portfolios and macro stress tests for ﬁnancial institute groups. Stress test purpose is
to detect vulnerabilities and to provide management scenarios for crisis situations [2].
The last approach for ﬁnancial system stability studying concerns external environment.
Environment allows banks to get proﬁt and can bring troubles with their behaviour. Therefore
the banking system has to satisfy its environment needs and to be resistant to its behaviour
1604

Environment Inﬂuence on the Banking System Stability

Guleva and Dukhanov

changing not to fail. It means that the policy should be as ﬂexible as necessary to continue
getting proﬁt (or not to loose) when situation has changed. Robertson [14] oﬀers agent-based
toolkit for strategic-management. His model contains turbulent environment, where customers
have a satisfaction level. The satisfaction is deﬁned as the Euclid distance between a customer
and its bank in the strategy space. Each bank and customer strategy is performed by ncomponent vector: a component for each space dimension. Customers try to minimize their
satisfaction level and change the bank if it’s not optimal. Turbulence mean that customers
change their policy in a random way therefore the bank should tune their policy according to
it.
Current research is close to the last ﬁfth direction because of importance of customerbank interaction in banking system fragility prediction and because this question is poorly
studied. We introduce banking system model with external environment. Banks have their
“save” strategy of behaviour. The “safety” concept is deﬁned in the work (it was not been
deﬁned in the above papers). The external environment is presented with customers, who
interact with the banking system. It is shown how the current model stability depends on the
customers behaviour parameters.
Structure of the paper is the following: in the section 2 we describe our model arrangement;
in the 3 one we present our experiment results. Finally, there is conclusion and future work
description in the section 4.

2

Model description

Our model is a multi-agent system, consisting of a banking network, where agent is a bank, and
external environment, where agent is a customer. Every bank has a strategy of behaviour which
prohibits insecure deals and promote borrowing action when bank fails. That borrowing action
involves other banks to improve bankrupt’s status. If it doesn’t help, bankrupt is excluded from
the system.
Banking network is represented as a multi-graph where nodes are associated with banks and
edges correspond to interbank lending. Customers interact with banks and stimulates interbank
activity. As banks do not want to lose customers, they try to satisfy customers’ requests even in
loss of funds. Therefore banks interact with other banks to provide “safety” of customer-bank
deal. “Safety” concept will be introduced further in the paper (section 2.2.2).

2.1

Network structure

As in papers [13, 4, 10] our banking system is initialised as the random Erdos-Renyi graph [5],
which is initialized with input parameters: N for number of nodes, p for probability of edge
existence. Each edge contents information about model time when it was created, investment
size, interest rate, index of bank it was assigned to and term of repayment.
Multi-edges are obtained on the next steps of modelling, when two interconnected banks
creates next link with other investment size, or date of creation, or something else.

2.2
2.2.1

Agents: structure and behaviour
Structure

Each network agent condition is determined by its balance sheet (Fig. 2). Also there is
OperatingCost (OC) value which subtract available funds and performs casual consumption
for each iteration.
1605

Environment Inﬂuence on the Banking System Stability

Guleva and Dukhanov

Figure 2: Balance sheet structure for each agent. Columns’ height ratios correspond to ratios
of components’ size
Assets are the funds agent invests somewhere for getting proﬁt in the future. Liabilities
provide investments which do not carry active proﬁt but bring real money for usage. The
more liabilities the more available funds. The more assets — the more net worth is. The both
assets and liabilities are divided into two groups: external and interbank. External assets and
liabilities correspond to relations between the bank and a customer. We will use the following
notation for these balance sheet components:
N W — the net worth,
AF — available funds,
A — all banks’ assets,
EA — external assets,
IA — interbank assets,
L — all banks’ liabilities,
EL — external liabilities,
IL — interbank liabilities,
OC — operating costs.
Then by deﬁnition the next relations are hold:
A = EA + IA;
L = EL + IL;
N W = A − L;

(1)
(2)
(3)

AF = IF − A + L;

(4)

where IF is some initial fund, which is assigned to each bank after formation.
We have analysed a number of year reports of Russian banks (“OTP”1 , “Rusﬁnance”2 ,
“VTB24”3 , “Svyaz-bank”4 , “Sberbank”5 ) and got the next average relations for their balance

1 http://www.otpbank.ru/f/about/akcyy/last_year_reports/annual_report_2013g.pdf

(in Russian)
(in Russian)
3 http://www.vtb24.ru/about/info/results/Documents/vtb24_accounting_report_2012.pdf (in Russian)
4 http://www.sviaz-bank.ru/files/images/2013.pdf (in Russian)
5 http://www.sberbank.ru/common/img/uploaded/files/pdf/yrep/Annual_report_ru_2013.pdf (in Russian)
2 http://www.rusfinancebank.ru/file/doc/msfo/RFB_IFRS_FS_13_rus.pdf

1606

Environment Inﬂuence on the Banking System Stability

Guleva and Dukhanov

sheet parameters:
EA = 0.8 · A;
L = 0.86 · A;
EL = 0.59 · L;
N W = 0.13 · A;

(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)

OC = 2.08 · N W.

(9)

Since these relations can not be achieved for all network agents simultaneously and in view
of initialization as the Erdos-Renyi random graph we used the next consequence of relations
(M — incidence matrix, mi,j — size of funds which were sent from i-th to j-th bank; edge
weight is in [0; p] segment).
N

IA =

mi,j · 1000;

(10)

EA = 4 · IA;

(11)

A = 5 · IA;
L = 0.86 · A;

(12)
(13)

i=1

N

IL =

mi,j · 1000;

(14)

EL = L − IL;
OC = 2.08 · N W ;

(15)
(16)

j=1

Since the ﬁrst step of the model initialization is interbank lending creation, IA and IL —
are the ﬁrst balance sheet components we can get. Formulae (11) and (12) follow from (5) and
(1). Finally, formula (15) follows from (2). As far as interbank assets can be zero, liabilities
may be also equal to zero. In this case we assign zero to external liabilities, and use deﬁnition
for liabilities assignment.
As mi,j ∈ [0; p] ⇒ EA = 4 · 1000 · mi,j ⇒ EA ∈ [0; 4000 · p · N ]. Therefore we deﬁned the
desirable amount of external assets. Number of customers per bank then depends only on the
loan size.
2.2.2

Agent behaviour

Each agent in the banking system can perform the following actions:
1) get proﬁt (get its assets back with percentage which date of repayment corresponds to
current time in the model),
2) pay liabilities (return liabilities with percentage);
3) pay operating costs;
4) satisfy customer request;
5) satisfy other bank request;
6) request other banks for loans or deposits to provide customers requests or to improve the
situation when the liquidity is lost;
1607

Environment Inﬂuence on the Banking System Stability

Guleva and Dukhanov

(c) The corresponding interac(a) The example of interactions (b) Relative investment sizes tions after bankrupt elimination
before bankrupt elimination
before bankrupt elimination

Figure 3: The bankrupt elimination scheme
7) eliminate bankrupt agent from the system and clearing the balance with minimizing the
connected banks’ losses.
We say the bank is liquid if its net worth and available funds are not-negative. Action is
“safety” then and only then when it do not lead to the loss of liquidity. If customer or other
bank request is not “safety” it will not be satisﬁed.
The two latter points implementation we will discuss in more detail.
Borrowing from the network As was mentioned above the bank is liquid while its net
worth and available funds are not negative. We also used the more wide liquidity notion which
takes into account instant, current and long-term liquidity coeﬃcients which are used by Russian
central bank6 . If the bank has lost its liquidity, it tries to rise up assets or liabilities depending
on reason of liquidity loss (namely if the net worth is negative then rising up assets, otherwise —
liabilities). We know the size of the maximum available loan and deposit for each agent. So
one can summarize the maximum available loan or deposit for the whole network. Also the
necessary fund size to improve the bankrupt situation is known. Rising assets or liabilities of
bankrupt is accompanied with creating links and is continued while the bank is not liquid. If
the network does not contain the necessary fund amount, the bankrupt is eliminated from the
network as described in paragraph below.
When a customer’s request can lead to bank’s liquidity loss then the similar situation occurs.
If the network does not contain enough funds, then customer’s request is ignored. Otherwise,
an additional interaction between the system agents is initiated.
The bankrupt eliminating When the bank has lost its liquidity and there is not enough
funds to rise it up, bankrupt is eliminated from the network. The ﬁgure 3a reﬂects bankrupt
and its neighbour interactions before elimination. All interbank assets and liabilities are sorted
for the date of repayment and assigned as displayed in the ﬁgure 3c. Links repartition occurs
until the both lists (asset list and liability list) are not empty.
If the bankruptcy was caused by the negative net worth then summarized liabilities quantity
is more than the similar for assets. Therefore residual liabilities will not be considered. Thus,
the network agents lose funds and disrupt the network stability. If the negative available funds
6 http://base.garant.ru/12127405/

1608

(in Russian)

Environment Inﬂuence on the Banking System Stability

Guleva and Dukhanov

were a reason of bankruptcy, assets remain unaccounted. That assets are added to other banks’
available funds and settle there. It does not deteriorate neither the single bank condition nor
the whole network.

2.3

External environment

Customers of the banks are present the external environment. This is the force that provides
an opportunity of getting proﬁt for the banking system. At the same time their behaviour can
instigate interbank activity and losses.
Customers do not have restrictions on their account capacity. On each iteration each customer randomly choose a bank and asks for loan or for request. Choosing of the request kind
occurs randomly. Loan probability is equals to 0.62 because of relations in formula (5–7).

3
3.1

Experiments
Feature isolation

As edges contribute shock contagion we created banking system without initial interbank borrowings (edges). Thus, interbank activity impact on systemic stability is minimized and other
features inﬂuence can be explored more accurately. According to each bank policy edges will
appear when the liquidity is lost or if an agent can not provide a customer’s request, but whole
network can.
Number of banks was 25. Erdos-Renyi probability was 0. Number of customers was varied
from 100 to 2000 with step of 100, and in several experiments it was 3000, 5000, and 8000
customers. The loan request size stayed constant. We took loan frequency as 62% of all
requests to ensure the equations 5 and 7.
It was empirically observed that increase of the request size negatively aﬀects system stability. When the customers’ request size was 26, there were no bankrupts and no interbank
links were created (because interaction was quite impossible in the beginning and became not
useful, when banks already could allow themselves interbank borrowing). At the same time,
after rising the request size upto 100, number of bankrupts become 25 during the 589 “days”,
and after rising request upto 1000 time of life for 25 banks decreases to 110 “days” (ﬁg. 5).
Thus, one can clearly see that banking system stability depends on the ratio of available
funds to the customers request. Figure 6 reﬂects this result. We took AF = 2500 · size, where
size is customer’s request size. Number of bankrupts we got was quiet similar for launches with
20, 40, 60, 80, 100 size of request: about 4 bankrupts for 600 “days” of modelling.
In fact, number of customers does not matter in this experiment set conﬁguration because
of zero operating costs. In the case of non-zero initial probability p we get two more parameters
of inﬂuence: operating costs and number of customers. Their ratios signiﬁcance is described
below.

3.2

Non-zero initial probability

When initial probability do not equals zero, each iteration accompanied with subtracting operating costs from available funds. Thus, for each bank its operating costs should be less than
proﬁt. Thereby on the one hand number of customers should be not very small to provide
necessary proﬁt, and on the other hand it should not be too enormous not to be destructive.
Presently we are interested in both: number of customers and their request size relation.
1609

Environment Inﬂuence on the Banking System Stability

(a) 100 customers

(b) 1000 customers

Guleva and Dukhanov

(c) balance sheet components
changing for the single bank

Figure 4: Net worth changing in launch with no initial interbank borrowing, size of request
is 26. The ﬁgure 4a shows the net worth rises until some treshold, which is diﬀerent for each
bank. After it the net worth value is stabilized. This is caused by loss of net worth in the very
beginning, so many customers requested can’t be satisﬁed. When number of customers rises,
stabilisation becomes later and maximal net worth value is higher. At the same time speed of
net worth increasing fails for banks had better rate in the beginning. This is due to available
funds come close to zero therefore request for loan have to be rejected (see in detail the ﬁg. 4c).

(a) Net worth changing dynamics

(b) Interbank liabilities changing dynamics

Figure 5: Launch with 1800 customers and request size 1000. Number of bankrupts: 25 for 110
“days”

We have seen that there is no matter of number of customers and request size interrelation.
Summarized funds of all customers for each iteration has value. Therefore we explore ratio of
this summarised value to operating costs.
The experiment below is also launched for a network with 25 nodes and probability p =
0.1287 — this probability is chosen as a treshold for 25-node graph to be connected. Initial size
for available funds is assigned with 1500 · OC, as it give a little time for stabilizing. When the
constant is less then 1500, the very beginning proﬁt is not enough because of initial terms of
repayment. Number of customers is constant and equalled to 180. We vary size of customers’
request to get range, which is suitable for current model parameters.
Figure 7 displays experiment results. Set of experiments showed that according to the
request size banking system has stable or not number of bankrupts. Thus request size axis can
1610

Environment Inﬂuence on the Banking System Stability

(a) Size of request is 40, initial
available funds are 100 thousand

(b) Size of request is 60, initial
available funds are 150 thousand

Guleva and Dukhanov

(c) Size of request is 80, initial
available funds are 200 thousand

Figure 6: Available fund dynamics for the case that AF = 2500 · size. Each line for each bank
in the system.

Figure 7: Number of bankrupts intervals according to size of request. Number of customers
is 180. Number of bankrupts is quiet similar when size of request is 50–200, that is 9000–36000
summarized environmental funds.

be divided for zones where number of bankrupts is quite similar or it ﬂuctuate from very good
to unusable.
In accordance with this the range from 9000 to 36000 units for all customers in system
provides the most stable number of bankrupts (60–75% for 600 iterations). When funds for all
customers are less than 900 or more than 40000 number of bankrupts rises over 90%.

4

Conclusion and future work

In this paper we have proposed the banking system model with external environment represented with customers. The experiments with banking system having no initial links let us
isolate interbank activity inﬂuence and explore environmental inﬂuence more accurately. It
let us show that systemic stability can be broken not so with number of customers rising as
with rising the request size. Also it is shown that unevenness of customers’ bank choices can
1611

Environment Inﬂuence on the Banking System Stability

Guleva and Dukhanov

destabilize the system with regular initial parametrization for all its agents.
We show how the number of customers and their request characteristics aﬀect the banking system stability. Optimal interval for total environmental funds towards banking system
wealthy is evaluated. This results can be improved with varying inﬂuence of other environment
characteristics. We are to enrich customers’ behaviour strategies and explore how a single bank
default depends on its interaction with external environment.

5

Acknowledgements

This paper is supported by Russian Scientiﬁc Foundation, grant #14–21–00137 “Supercomputer simulation of critical phenomena in complex social systems”. The research is done in
Advanced Computing Lab (ITMO University), which is opened in frame of 220 Decree of Russian Government, contract #11.G34.31.0019

References
[1] Albert-L´
aszl´
o Barab´
asi and R´eka Albert. Emergence of scaling in random networks. Science,
286(5439):509–512, 1999.
[2] Claudio Borio, Mathias Drehmann, and Kostas Tsatsaronis. Stress-testing macro stress testing:
does it live up to expectations? Journal of Financial Stability, 12:3–15, 2014.
[3] Mark Carey. A guide to choosing absolute bank capital requirements. Journal of Banking &
Finance, 26(5):929–951, 2002.
[4] Mario Eboli. Systemic risk in ﬁnancial networks: a graph theoretic approach. Universita di Chieti
Pescara, 2004.
[5] Paul Erd˝
os and Alfr´ed R´enyi. On random graphs. Publicationes Mathematicae Debrecen, 6:290–
297, 1959.
[6] Prasanna Gai, Andrew Haldane, and Sujit Kapadia. Complexity, concentration and contagion.
Journal of Monetary Economics, 58(5):453–470, 2011.
[7] Co-Pierre Georg. The eﬀect of the interbank network structure on contagion and common shocks.
Journal of Banking & Finance, 37(7):2216–2228, 2013.
[8] Niccol`
o Gordini. A genetic algorithm approach for smes bankruptcy prediction: Empirical evidence
from italy. Expert Systems with Applications, 41(14):6433–6445, 2014.
[9] Andrew G Haldane et al. Rethinking the ﬁnancial network. Speech delivered at the Financial
Student Association, Amsterdam, April, pages 1–26, 2009.
[10] Andrew G Haldane and Robert M May. Systemic risk in banking ecosystems. Nature,
469(7330):351–355, 2011.
[11] Patricia Jackson, William Perraudin, and Victoria Saporta. Regulatory and economic solvency
standards for internationally active banks. Journal of banking & ﬁnance, 26(5):953–976, 2002.
[12] Chulwoo Jeong et al. A tuning method for the architecture of neural network models incorporating
gam and ga as applied to bankruptcy prediction. Expert Systems with Applications, 39(3):3650–
3658, 2012.
[13] Erlend Nier, Jing Yang, Tanju Yorulmazer, and Amadeo Alentorn. Network models and ﬁnancial
stability. Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control, 31(6):2033–2060, 2007.
[14] Duncan A Robertson. Agent-based models of a banking network as an example of a turbulent
environment: the deliberate vs. emergent strategy debate revisited. Emergence, 5(2):56–71, 2003.
[15] Samir Trabelsi et al. A comparison of bayesian, hazard, and mixed logit model of bankruptcy
prediction. Computational Management Science, 12(1):81–97, 2015.

1612

