Procedia Computer Science

Large Scale Comparative
Visualisation of Regulatory
Volume 51, 2015, Pages 713–724
Networks with TRNDiff
ICCS 2015 International Conference On Computational Science
1
2
2,*

Xin-Yi Chua , Lawrence Buckingham , James M. Hogan and Pavel
Novichkov3
1

QFAB Bioinformatics, Institute for Molecular Biosciences, UQ, Brisbane, Australia
2
School of EECS, QUT, Brisbane, Australia
3
Lawrence Berkeley Laboratories, Walnut Creek, CA., USA.

xinyi.chua@qfab.org, l.buckingham@qut.edu.au, j.hogan@qut.edu.au, psnovichkov@lbl.gov

Abstract
The advent of Next Generation Sequencing (NGS) technologies has seen explosive growth in genomic
datasets, and dense coverage of related organisms, supporting study of subtle, strain-specific variations
as a determinant of function. Such data collections present fresh and complex challenges for
bioinformatics, those of comparing models of complex relationships across hundreds and even
thousands of sequences. Transcriptional Regulatory Network (TRN) structures document the influence
of regulatory proteins called Transcription Factors (TFs) on associated Target Genes (TGs). TRNs are
routinely inferred from model systems or iterative search, and analysis at these scales requires
simultaneous displays of multiple networks well beyond those of existing network visualisation tools
[1]. In this paper we describe TRNDiff, an open source system supporting the comparative analysis
and visualization of TRNs (and similarly structured data) from many genomes, allowing rapid
identification of functional variations within species. The approach is demonstrated through a small
scale multiple TRN analysis of the Fur iron-uptake system of Yersinia, suggesting a number of
candidate virulence factors; and through a larger study exploiting integration with the RegPrecise
database (http://regprecise.lbl.gov; [2]) - a collection of hundreds of manually curated and predicted
transcription factor regulons drawn from across the entire spectrum of prokaryotic organisms.
Availability: TRNDiff is presently available in two versions, as a single client js script allowing
browser based visualization of data files (here denoted V1) and as a scalable Node.js application with
web service integration to RegPrecise (The QCloud Regulon Browser or V2). Information on
TRNDiff ma be found at the dedicated site http://trndiff.org, which includes example data, short
tutorials and links to demonstration installations of both the stand-alone system and the integrated
regulon browser. Additional views from the standalone client, and support for clustering and touchbased interactivity are being incorporated into the Node.js version. Source code for both versions is
freely available under a non-restrictive Apache 2.0 licence from the authors’ repository at
http://bitbucket.org/biovisml, and contributions and feature requests are encouraged.
Keywords: Bioinformatics, Visualisation, Transcription, Regulatory Networks

*
Corresponding author. Support from Microsoft Research (Redmond) and NecTAR (http://nectar.org.au/) is gratefully
acknowledged.

Selection and peer-review under responsibility of the Scientiﬁc Programme Committee of ICCS 2015
c The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V.

doi:10.1016/j.procs.2015.05.189

713

Large Scale Comparative Visualisation of Regulatory
Xin-Yi Networks
Chua, Lawrence
with TRNDiﬀ
Buckingham and James Hogan

1 Introduction
Graph-based representations of biological systems have a long and successful history. Within the
narrower domain of regulatory relationships, applications have included the analysis of a genome’s
regulatory topology; identification of global regulators; and uncovering sub-network motifs and
studying cross-species regulatory evolution [3-8]. The majority of these studies can be supported by
existing network visualisation tools based on the display of a single network graph, but the bulk of
these systems do not readily support comparative analysis of a large collection of such networks. Our
concern here is not with the complete description of a single complex network, but rather with the
complexity which emerges as a very large number of simpler networks are considered together.
Transcriptional Regulatory Networks (TRNs) provide a compact description of the relationships
between one or more regulatory proteins called transcription factors (TFs) and the set of target genes
(TGs) whose expression they control. TRNDiff was introduced to address the challenge of exploring
variations in the action of particular TFs across large numbers of organisms – whether closely or
distantly related – which share a common regulatory apparatus: similar TFs, mostly similar TGs, but
variations in wiring that may have considerable functional significance. As the number of genomes
increases, so too does the need for multiple network displays. Yet scale brings with it constraints on
the individual network. Complex displays, encoding all the information available about a particular set
of relationships, are less suitable for large scale comparative analysis, and some compromise is
required. A simplified representation which effectively presents a subset of the network properties is
potentially more valuable than one whose scope is more ambitious.
The TRNDiff system addresses these challenges through consideration of a Transcription Factor
and a universal set of regulated Target Genes (and their orthologues) drawn from across the organism
set, representing these relationships through the wagon wheel diagram explained below. A reference
organism – perhaps constructed through aggregation from actual genomes, but usually one chosen as a
basis for computational inference - shows the possible associations; individual variations are seen in
contrast to this superset. Positions of orthologous genes (nodes) in a particular genome are placed to
correspond to those of the reference genes from the reference genome. Edges denote the presence or
absence of a Transcription Factor Binding Site (TFBS) prediction. Using these visual aids, the user
can rapidly assess regions of similarity or difference among the multiple structures in a study.
Analysis is also supported through features such as set operations and user-defined groupings.
TRNDiff is intended primarily for the comparative study of TRNs, but may readily be applied to
related network visualisation tasks, showing for example the relationships in protein-protein
interaction data, or constituent matches across metagenomic data sets.
The use of numerous concurrent displays with careful alignment of node positions allows for ready
comprehension of static TRN relationships. While these snapshots are an essential tool, transcriptional
networks are necessarily dynamic, adjusting in response to environmental conditions – often through
the action of additional transcription factors – and undergoing more fundamental topological changes
over evolutionary timescales through one or more re-wiring events. These ideas are well explored in
[9]. The wagon wheel diagrams characteristic of TRNDiff (see Fig 1) provide a natural frame for
sequential animation, and this application is limited only by the availability of data. If the network is
modelled for different environmental conditions, it is then a straightforward matter to construct the
‘movie’, although this is not yet automated. At present, our primary concern is effective comparison
with increasing scale.
This paper is organized as follows. In section 2, we consider the structure of the TRNDiff
diagrams and data sources in more detail, introducing in section 2.1 the V2 Node.js implementation
which supports the far richer, curated data sources of the RegPrecise project. Section 3 describes two
case studies – one at modest scale, illustrating the canonical usage of the system, while the other draws
upon the RegPrecise dataset for the hexR regulon. In Section 4, we consider variations on the

714

Large Scale Comparative Visualisation of Regulatory
Xin-Yi Networks
Chua, Lawrence
with TRNDiﬀ
Buckingham and James Hogan

approach, evaluation and the development of touch and very large scale deployments of the system,
before concluding in section 5.

2 The TRNDiff System
We begin this section with an overview of the structure of the wagon wheel diagrams, and of the
operations and general data requirements of the system. More specific discussion is given in the
context of the case studies considered below, but in general terms the tool requires a simple grammar
describing potential node relationships, with a single real value indicating the strength of each link.
While this paper examines a number of possible applications of TRNDiff, the name itself suggests the
comparison of transcriptional regulatory systems, and our discussion will focus on this problem. The
approach is best understood if one assumes a well-studied model system, such as the Fur regulon in
Escherischia coli K12, for which the set of target genes for the transcription factor has been well
established through experiment. We are then concerned with the comparable regulon in other
genomes, where relationships are inferred from orthology of transcription factor and target genes in
the new system with those of the model, usually via the Regulog approach [10, 11] or some related
method. Many such cases are available via integration with the RegPrecise data sources [2].
TRNDiff follows conventional regulatory diagrams in adopting a circular structure (see Fig 1) with
nodes representing transcription factors and target genes. Each single ‘wagon wheel’ is assumed to
represent a regulon governed by a single transcription factor; this single TF node is displayed at the
hub of the wheel, while the associated TGs reside on the circumference, eliminating crossover of
edges. It is common to visualise regulatory interactions through a directed edge between the
transcription factor and the associated target gene: 7)ĺ7*. Here the presence of a TG node on the
wheel surface indicates that there is some evidence (usually via Regulog) that a relationship might
exist; a relationship confirmed – through experiment or by computational detection of a binding site –
is then represented by a solid spoke in the wheel, where the direction of the relationship is implied by
the structure. Extensions of the approach to more complex systems exhibiting control by multiple TFs
is in principle straightforward, but a careful balance is required: the focus on individual regulatory
systems is intended as a deliberate counterpoint to spaghetti network diagrams.
Usage of the diagrams depends on the nature of the input data, but the existence of a link reflects
some confidence in the relationship – based on the statistical significance of a computational binding
site prediction or experimentally measured expression level. The canonical usage of TRNDiff is then
to compare these ‘incomplete’ networks with the model, and to identify structural variation –
especially that consistent across a group, such as a set of known pathogens – which may be
functionally significant. This is accomplished simply, through the use of side by side, overlay and
multiple network displays (best seen in the Fur case study of Fig 4 and 5) and through more complex
analyses involving Boolean operations (pairwise intersection, union and XOR) (Fig 2; currently
limited to V1) and (shortly) a histogram display.
At an operational level, the tool allows analysis at multiple scales, from the forest of network
diagrams of Fig 4 and Fig 6 through to the pair-wise diagrams of Fig 2. In this way, trends may
emerge at the group level, such as in the pathogenic vs non-pathogenic strains of the first case study,
leading to targeted investigation of smaller sets of systems. Gene and transcription factor metadata is
presented in response to a mouse-over event. Specific functional annotations can be highlighted from a
drop-down menu: Fig 3 shows TGs from a small group of hexR systems implicated in glycolysis, and
similar functionality may be observed in Fig 4 for Ybt (see section 3.1).

715

Large Scale Comparative Visualisation of Regulatory
Xin-Yi Networks
Chua, Lawrence
with TRNDiﬀ
Buckingham and James Hogan

Figure 1: TRNDiff (V2) display showing the reference transcriptional regulatory network on the left and the
inferred regulatory network on the right. The transcription factor resides in the centre of each graph and is
surrounded by the regulated target genes. A solid line in the inferred network denotes an identified transcription
factor binding site, a dotted line its absence.

Figure 2: Direct Boolean comparison of two Yersinia strains, showing AND, OR and XOR operations (V1).

716

Large Scale Comparative Visualisation of Regulatory
Xin-Yi Networks
Chua, Lawrence
with TRNDiﬀ
Buckingham and James Hogan

2.1 Integration with RegPrecise
TRNDiff uses a novel wagon-wheel visualisation to provide a highly effective mechanism for
biologists to visually explore the evolutionary relationships between gene regulatory networks across
species. However, in order to use V1 and earlier versions of the tool, a researcher must create an input
document which uses JavaScript Object Notation (JSON) to express the hierarchical relationship
between organism, transcription factors and the genes regulated by each transcription factor. While the
JSON format employed in the original is moderately convenient as a machine-readable serialization
mechanism, the notation is inconvenient and prone to error when used by non-programmers without
access to a JavaScript-aware text editor. A further obstacle confronting would-be users of the tool is
the need to either manually or programmatically transform data from other sources to the prescribed
TRNDiff format prior to use.
Recently, TRNDiff has been comprehensively re-engineered to achieve compatibility with the
Lawrence Berkeley Laboratories RegPrecise data set [2] and to provide improved mechanisms for
preparation and maintenance of local datasets. In addition to these improvements, infrastructure has
been put in place to support the integration of TRNDiff with other standard bioinformatics tools such
as NCBI Blast [12] and sequence comparison tools such as MEME [13], BioPatML [14] and
MUMmer [15]. The system is implemented as a client-server web application with a
HTML5+JavaScript user interface which targets modern web browsers running on desktop machines
and tablets. The server presence is provided by a compact, self-contained web server which runs under
Node.js [16] and is capable of deployment into environments where a web server such as Apache or
Internet Information Services is not installed. TRNDiff can be installed on a web server as a traditional
web application or copied to a user’s desktop computer and executed as a local desktop application.
The latter scenario is supported by inclusion of a stand-alone copy of the Node.js executable as part of
the distribution. The use of JavaScript to implement both client and server permits substantial sharing
of code between client and server.
We now consider the case studies chosen to illustrate the capabilities of TRNDiff. The first is a
novel analysis of the Fur iron uptake system in Yersinia, part of a more extensive study of this
regulon across a number of species [17]. This is intended to show the core visualisations of TRNDiff
and to illustrate their utility in identifying candidate virulence factors. The second of these studies
demonstrates the integration of the system with RegPrecise [2] as described above.

Figure 3: HexR systems highlighting genes implicated in glycolysis (V1). Annotations in V2 are sourced
automatically from the RegPrecise database (see Fig 4A).

717

Large Scale Comparative Visualisation of Regulatory
Xin-Yi Networks
Chua, Lawrence
with TRNDiﬀ
Buckingham and James Hogan

3 Case Studies
3.1 Determining putative virulence factors in the Yersinia Fur regulon
Regulation of iron uptake is a critical system in bacteria: iron starvation is a classical immune
response from an infected host; yet high iron levels are also toxic. Successful pathogens have
developed a range of iron-uptake systems to assimilate iron from different environmental conditions.
For instance, Yersinia pestis, which is the causative agent of plague, has at least eight known ironuptake systems: Ybt, Yfe, Yfu, Hmu, Has, Yiu, Iuc and Fhu. Two of these, the Ybt and Yfe systems,
have been identified as prerequisites for full virulence in bubonic plague [18, 19]. Many studies have
focused on the three human pathogens, overlooking the eight pathogenic to other species [20].
Iron uptake systems regulated by the Fur transcription factor were here investigated across 20
Yersinia genomes from 11 species, comprising 12 pathogenic and 8 non-pathogenic strains. The
experimentally determined Yersinia pestis CO92 Fur regulon, established through microarray and
electrophoretic mobility shift assays (EMSA) [18], was taken as the reference TRN. The Y. pestis
CO92 network was used to infer putative relationships using the classical regulog method [10, 11].
Orthology was established through a bi-directional best hit (BDBH) approach using BLAST [12]
searches with an e-value < 1.0×10í5 and a coverage of 65% † . Operon structures were predicted
based on a combination of the intergenic distances – similar to the approach used in [21,22] – and
confidence scores from OperonDB [23], where the score indicates the probability that two adjacent
genes belong to the same operon. Network inference is completed through de novo search using
MEME [13] upstream of the first gene in the identified operons containing the target gene orthologue,
accepting the most statistically significant predictions consistent with TFBS search parameters as
confirmation of the binding site. In the absence of a significant binding site prediction, the relationship
is held to be unconfirmed and a dotted link is shown.
Substantial variations between pathogens (Fig 4A) and non-pathogens (Fig 4B) are immediately
observable in the TRNs inferred from the model CO92 system. Even within these groups, slight
variations may be observed, suggesting detailed investigations of the role of Ybt (unexpectedly absent
in three of the pathogenic species), Yiu (arguably a candidate virulence determinant), and of the
yfeABCD operon in the non-pathogenic strains ‡.
Overall, we conclude that the pathogens show substantially greater conservation with respect to the
(pathogenic) model network CO92 than the non-pathogenic set. While the non-pathogen TRNs appear
noticeably less connected, many interactions are conserved, suggesting these regulatory interactions
may be involved in the basic survival of these organism, and are unlikely to be implicated as a
determinant of virulence. The more limited connectivity of the non-pathogenic strain TRNs also
suggests an alternative set of iron-uptake systems, which can be confirmed by a genome wide scan for
putative Fur binding sites. Such hypotheses arose directly from consideration of TRNDiff diagrams,
and would not easily have emerged from more conventional network views.

†
Given a query gene, q, from genome X that has a best scoring hit, p, from genome Y : if the best hit for p in genome X is
q, then (q; p) is a BDBH pair for the genomes X; Y .
‡
See [17] for a detailed discussion of these issues.

718

Large Scale Comparative Visualisation of Regulatory
Xin-Yi Networks
Chua, Lawrence
with TRNDiﬀ
Buckingham and James Hogan

Figure 4: The reconstructed Fur regulon across 20 Yersinia strains over 11 species. The experimentally
verified Fur regulon from Y. pestis CO92 [13] was used as the model network. [A] There were 11 pathogenic
strains in three species and [B] 8 non-pathogenic strains. At this resolution, we may only observe the general
differences in connectivity pattern, but nevertheless, the distinction across groupings is clear.

Figure 5: The QCloud Regulon Browser (TRNDiff V2) showing regulon selection according to taxonomic
group. Note the alternatives of browsing according to genome and loading from an external file.

719

Large Scale Comparative Visualisation of Regulatory
Xin-Yi Networks
Chua, Lawrence
with TRNDiﬀ
Buckingham and James Hogan

3.2 Analysis of hexR Systems
This second case study, based on the HexR regulon [24] across multiple species, is intended to
illustrate the TRNDiff V2 integration with RegPrecise, and to set the scene for the discussions of
sections 4 and 5. Fig 5 shows the TRNdiff V2 web interface for browsing and selecting regulon
collections, organized on a taxonomic basis. As can be seen from the highlighted buttons, we are here
selecting from the RegPrecise regulog collections. The alternative of browsing and selecting according
to genome is also available, as is the option of local file display, the approach used to create Fig 4. Fig
6 shows the wagon wheel display of HexR regulons for 16 Shewanella species. Once again, we are
able immediately to examine substantial variations such as the loss of the respiratory chain function in
Shewanella denitrificans OS217 and Shewanella woodyi ATCC 51908 (obscured). Although
orthologues of genes involved in glycine cleavage were identified in both species, there appears to be
a loss of direct transcriptional regulation, a functional re-wiring which is not apparent from examining
phylogenetic similarity. A similar analysis for the metJ system over some 192 species [25] (not
included in this paper for reasons of clarity) shows that the system allows the researcher to partition
the strains into distinct groupings according to function, as identified through their regulatory systems.

Figure 6: The HexR regulog across the Shewanellaceae. Note in particular the deletions immediately
apparent in Shewanella denitrificans OS217 (second from left, row 2).

As can be seen from the regulon browser of Fig 5, the user now has the capacity to examine these
diagrams for any of numerous taxonomic groups for which data is available, and to identify the
resulting similarities and differences as they occur within and across taxonomic groups. However, the
richness of the data sources available, and developments in the scale and interactivity of display
hardware, offer very profitable avenues for investigation and development, and these are considered in
the following section.

720

Large Scale Comparative Visualisation of Regulatory
Xin-Yi Networks
Chua, Lawrence
with TRNDiﬀ
Buckingham and James Hogan

4 Evaluations and Enhancements
TRNDiff was initially developed as a browser-based system implemented in the Microsoft
Silverlight environment, and subsequently ported to Javascript to enable broader uptake of the system.
A number of features discussed earlier – notably the use of pairwise Boolean operations, and display
of annotations – were included with this revision and are gradually being migrated to the integrated
V2 system. Two additional approaches have been explored: regulatory tree displays, in which
phylogenetic relationships are organized according to the Hamming distance between each wagon
wheel § (Fig 7); and animations of network state through wagon wheels based on observations under
different experimental condition (Fig 8). These are explained briefly in the associated captions.

Figure 7: Comparison of the phylogenetic and regulatory trees for the HexR regulons in 16 Shewanella
species using the original TRNDiff system. Variations correspond to those discussed above but use different node
ordering. [A] Phylogenetic tree generated using 16S rDNA from [24]; [B] shows the phylogenetic tree based on
the HexR orthology and [C] shows the HexR regulatory tree generated based on the degree of shared interactions
present in the regulatory networks. Deviations from the standard phylogenetic structure may suggest rewiring
events.

The system is currently under evaluation as part of an ongoing PhD project through open ended
interview based assessments with students and active researchers in molecular biology. While these
results are preliminary, there is a strong interest in greater interactivity, in particular through the ability
to select actively from the displays and to group sets of wagon wheels according to observations. A
touch based version of the system implementing this functionality, together with the option of guided
automatic grouping based on Hamming similarity, is under active development and will be trialed in
the first half of 2015. The other main limitation is imposed by the display hardware available to most
researchers. We are presently developing a version of this system to run on QUT’s Cube visualization
facility (www.thecube.qut.edu.au) a very large facility comparable to an IMAX in size, and coupled
§

Each wagon wheel is here represented as a high dimensional binary vector, with bit values of one for each realised
connection, and zero otherwise. Hamming distances then take the place of scores resulting from sequence comparison.

721

Large Scale Comparative Visualisation of Regulatory
Xin-Yi Networks
Chua, Lawrence
with TRNDiﬀ
Buckingham and James Hogan

with large multitouch screens to support interactivity. Experiments in a student project indicate that
commercial browsers such as Chrome can support in excess of 800 wagon wheels of this type without
significant degradation of performance, and it is expected that we will be able to trial this system at
very large scale in the coming months.

5 Conclusion
In this paper we have introduced a novel, modular approach to the visualisation of transcriptional
regulatory networks, where the focus lies on the direct comparison of individual regulons across
populations. The approach is carefully selected to address the problem of very large scale comparison
of regulatory systems across organisms. The approach is general and supports the visualisation of
datasets with similar characteristics, such as those from protein-protein interactions and some types of
metagenomic data. In the present work, we have shown its effectiveness in identifying candidate
virulence factors in the Fur regulon of the Yersiniae, and in elucidating the regulatory evolution of
hexR (and metJ) in proteobacteria. Integration with the RegPrecise respository provides a compelling
use case for the system, and datasets of sufficient richness and scale as to justify very large scale
investigations. The system is presently being evaluated using structured task based open ended
interviews, allowing active biologists to assess its usability and our project team to measure their
effectiveness in uncovering relationships within the data. Interactive and display wall versions of the
system will be developed over the course of 2015.

Figure 8: [A] The dynamic genome-scale transcriptional regulatory network of Saccharomyces cerevisiae
[9]. Edges are coloured, based on the number of different conditions in which the transcription factor is found
active. [B] A TRNDiff view providing a TF-centre complement of the Abf1p transcription factor starting with the
static network; sub-networks across the five different conditions and a summary graph indicating the degree of
activeness of the interactions. Edges are coloured according to the target gene chromosome location.

722

Large Scale Comparative Visualisation of Regulatory
Xin-Yi Networks
Chua, Lawrence
with TRNDiﬀ
Buckingham and James Hogan

References
[1] Gehlenborg N, O’Donoghue SI, Baliga NS, Goesmann A, Hibbs MA, Kitano H, Kohlbacher O,
Neuweger H, Schneider R, Tenenbaum D, Gavin AC: Visualization of omics data for systems biology.
Nature Methods 2010, 7(3):S56.
[2]Pavel S. Novichkov, Olga N. Laikova, Elena S. Novichkova, Mikhail S. Gelfand, Adam P. Arkin,
Inna Dubchak, and Dmitry A. Rodionov (2010) “RegPrecise: a database of curated genomic
inferences of transcriptional regulatory interactions in prokaryotes.” Nucleic Acids Res. 2010
January; 38(Database issue): D111–D118
[3] Albert R: Scale-free networks in cell biology. Journal of Cell Science 2005, 118:4947–4957.
[4] Balazsi G, Barabasi AL, Oltvai ZN: Topological units of environmental signal processing in the
transcriptional regulatory network of Escherichia coli. PNAS 2006, 102(22):7841–7846.
[5]Babu MM, Teichmann SA, Aravind L: Evolutionary Dynamics of Prokaryotic Transcriptional
Regulatory Net- works. J. Mol. Biol. 2006, 358:614–633.
[6]Ma HW, Buer J, Zeng AP: Hierarchical structure and modules in the Escherichia coli
transcriptional regulatory network revealed by a new top-down approach. BMC Bioinformatics 2004,
5(199).
[7] Ma HW, Kumar B, Ditges U, Gunzer F, Buer J, Zeng AP: An extended transcriptional
regulatory networks of Esherichia coli and analysis of its hierarchical structure and network
motifs. Nucleic Acids Research 2004,32(22):6643–6649.
[8] Milo R, Shen-Orr S, Itzkovitz S, Kashtan N, Chklovskii D, Alon U: Network Motifs: Simple
Building Blocks of Complex Networks. Science 2002, 298:824–827.
[9] Luscombe NM, Babu MM, Yu H, Snyder M, Treichmann SA, Gerstein M: Genomic analysis of
regulatory network dynamics reveals large topological changes. Nature 2004, 431:308–312.
[10] Babu MM, Teichmann SA, Aravind L: Evolutionary Dynamics of Prokaryotic Transcriptional
Regulatory Networks. J. Mol. Biol. 2006, 358:614-633.
[11] Lozada-Chavez I, Janga SC, Collado-Vides J: Bacterial regulatory networks are extremely
flexible in evolution. Nucleic Acids Research 2006, 34(12):3434-3445.
[12] Stephen Altschul, Warren Gish, Webb Miller; Eugene Myers, David Lipman (1990). “Basic local
alignment search tool.” Journal of Molecular Biology 215 (3): 403–410.
[13] Timothy L. Bailey and Charles Elkan (1994). “Fitting a mixture model by expectation
maximization to discover motifs in biopolymers.” Proceedings of the Second International Conference
on Intelligent Systems for Molecular Biology, pp. 28-36, AAAI Press, Menlo Park, California.
[14] Michael W.Towsey, James M. Hogan, Sarah A. Mathews, Peter Timms. (2007) “The In Silico
Prediction of Promoters in Bacterial Genomes.” In Ng, See-Kiong, Mamitsuka, Hiroshi, & Wong,
Limsoon (Eds.) Genome Informatics Workshop 2007, 3rd - 5th December 2007, Singapore.
[15] Stefan Kurtz, Adam Phillippy, Arthur L Delcher, Michael Smoot, Martin Shumway, Corina
Antonescu and Steven L Salzberg. (2004) “Versatile and open software for comparing large
genomes.” Genome Biology 5:R12
[16] Node.js. http://nodejs.org/
[17] Chua XY: Prediction of transcriptional regulatory interactions in bacteria: a comparative
genomics approach. PhD thesis, Queensland University of Technology 2012.
[18] Gao H, Li Y, Guo Z, Han Y, Song Y, Zhai J, Du Z, Wang X, Lu J, Zhou D, Yang R: The ironresponsive Fur regulon in Yersinia pestis. J. Bacteriol. 2008, 190(8):3063-3075.
[19] Carniel E: The Yersinia high-pathogencity island: an iron-uptake island. Microbes and Infection
2001, 3(7):561-569.
[20] Sulakvelidze A: Yersiniae other than Y. enterocolitica, Y. pseudotuberculosis, and Y. pestis: the
ignored species. Microbes and Infection 2000, 2(5):497-513.

723

Large Scale Comparative Visualisation of Regulatory
Xin-Yi Networks
Chua, Lawrence
with TRNDiﬀ
Buckingham and James Hogan

[21] Hoon MJLD, Imoto S, Kobayashi K, Ogasawara N, Miyano S: Predicting the Operon Structure
of Bacillus subtilis Using Operon Length, Intergene Distance, and Gene Expression Information. Pac
Symp BioComput 2004, 9:276-287.
[22] Salgado H, Moreno-Hagelsieb G, Smith TF, Collado-Vides J: Operons in Escherichia coli:
Genomic analyses andpredictions. PNAS 2000, 97(12):6652-6657.
[23] Pertea M, Ayanbule K, Smedingho_ M, Salzberg SL: OperonDB: a comprehensive database of
predicted operonsin microbial genomes. Nucleic Acids Research 2008, 37(Database issue):D479D482.
[24] Leyn SA, Li X, Zheng Q, Novichkov PS, Reed S, Romine MF, Fredrickson JK, Yang C,
Osterman AL, Rodionov DA: Control of Proteobacterial Central Carbon Metabolism by the HexR
Transcriptional Regulator. Journal of Biological Chemistry 2011, 286(41):35782–35794.
[25] Augustus AM, Spicer LD: The MetJ regulon in gamma proteobacteria determined by
comparative genomics methods. BMC Genomics 2011, 12(588).

724

