Procedia Computer Science
Volume 51, 2015, Pages 2869–2877
ICCS 2015 International Conference On Computational Science

WebGL based visualisation and analysis of
stratigraphic data for the purposes of the mining
industry
Adrian Kopeü, Justyna Bała 1and Anna PiĊta 1
1

The University of Science and Technology, Kraków, Poland.
Poland
jbala@agh.edu.pl, apieta@geol.agh.edu.pl

Abstract
In recent years the combination of databases, data and internet technologies has greatly enhanced the
functionality of many systems based on spatial data, and facilitated the dissemination of such
information. In this paper, we propose a web-based data visualisation and analysis system for
stratigraphic data from a Polish mine, with visualisation and analysis tools which can be accessed via
the Internet. WWW technologies such as active web pages and WebGL technology provide a userfriendly interface for browsing, plotting, comparing, and downloading information of interest, without
the need for dedicated mining industry software.
Keywords: WebGL, databases, 3D visualisation

1 Introduction
The mining production process is unique to each mine. Repeatable production conditions are rare
compared to other industries. The geology of deposits, which is always recognized with established
accuracy, is not the only factor of uncertainty and risk. Mining in general, and in particular underground
mining, is characterized by complex mining technology, poor and limited visibility, difficult working
conditions and frequent geological incidents. Therefore, an inevitable trend in the mining industry is the
introduction of innovative modern technologies in order to counteract these problems.
There are several projects (KĊsek, 2010; Sarkka, 2008; Magda, WoĨny, Głodzik, & Jasiewicz, 2008;
Brzychczy & Mieszaniec, 2011) related to the issue of the so-called Intelligent Mine, both worldwide
and in Poland. These projects explore the use of advanced information systems, both in underground
mining and in quarrying. The basic elements of such systems system include:
Databases for design and production planning, including geological, mining, technical and
financial data,
Selection and peer-review under responsibility of the Scientiﬁc Programme Committee of ICCS 2015
c The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V.

doi:10.1016/j.procs.2015.05.450

2869

WebGL based visualisation and analysis ...

A. Kopec, J. Bala, A.Pieta

System modelling, including simulation and optimization of the proposed mining works,
Systems for visualizing mining in time and space, with projections of the figures and
parameters observed.
In practice, the implementation of advanced software is an extremely difficult process which is often
limited by high purchase and implementation costs, the resistance of workers to new solutions, the belief
that the current system works and there is no need for change, the need to purchase new hardware, and
the complicated structure of new solutions. This situation often leads to intermediate solutions within
the process of mine computerization. Such solutions involve the use of various types of methods and IT
tools at different stages of the design and monitoring of the mining process. These solutions are used,
for example, while collecting, analyzing and carrying out data visualization. Databases related to
information on deposits are particularly important here since they store a number of parameters assigned
to coordinates in a dimensional structure. Available spatial database systems offer the required storage
capacity for this type of information (Lisowski, Krawczyk, & Porzycka-Strzelczyk, 2014; Płuciennik &
Płuciennik, 2014; Kulesza & Wójcik, 2014). In addition, databases should store information about mine
workings and other facilities which should be included in the model, and also keep information about
previous mining activities.
The visualization of collected data seems to be an important element of software in this field. There
are, of course, various types of specialized software used in the mining industry at various stages of
mine design, data analysis and visualization (Sypniewski, 2011).
There are several specialized systems such as Surpac, MineSched, Datamine Studio, Vulcan,
MineScape and RockWare that can perform the wide range of tasks necessary in the mining industry.
These systems are used not only for collecting data both from borehole investigations and underground
mining, but also in geological model construction processes. They can also conduct basic statistical
analysis in order to choose the best method of interpolation used in generating maps and geological
cross-sections. The results obtained by the aforementioned software are largely similar, however the
processing stages and algorithms used may be different. Computer programs such as Surfer, AutoCAD,
ArcGIS and Statistica are also used for visualization and basic data analysis. However, the use of these
systems often involves high purchase costs and the need for qualified personnel.
'This solution presented in this paper focusses on using modern technologies with free software
licenses so as to be easily modifiable and easily accessible to a wide range of users, including
administrators and clients. Another advantage of the proposed solution is the on-line access which can
be used for monitoring and making changes to the analyzed area. Furthermore, the presented system can
be adapted and even expanded to the individual requirements of any given mine.
This paper presents the preliminary version of the STRATOS system for collecting, analyzing and
visualizing mine data. The current version of the database holds 3D information relating to the
geological model of the analyzed mine, focusing mainly on the 3D visualization of the collected data
set. For this purpose, the WebGL library has been applied. This library is widely used in the fields of
visualization, 3D modelling and computer games. A multiplayer game website is shown in the paper
(Bijin & Zhiqi, 2011) using the WebGL and WebSockets libraries for communication. Another potential
use of WebGL is 3D modelling, for example the Tinkercad project, (Tinkercad, n.d.) which allows users
to draw Tinkercad 3D models inside a web browser and send them to any printer. The third way to use
WebGL is for the visualization of complex data that requires 3D presentation. One such project is
described in the article (Congote, 2011), which uses WebGL for imaging medical applications. Another
example is the project (Lecocq, 2010) which demonstrates the ability to quickly view mathematical
premises in a browser. In (Krooks, et al., 2014) a novel concept for processing and analyzing geospatial
data sets was introduced, and WebGL technology was applied for visualization the resulting 3D
environmental models.
WebGL performance is very promising when compared to Flash (Zvonkov, 2012). However, poor
support on the side of the browser is currently still a big problem when the application needs to be
available to multiple users. Hopefully, wider use of the WebGL library will improve this situation.

2870

WebGL based visualisation and analysis ...

A. Kopec, J. Bala, A.Pieta

2 Description of the data model
This paper presents the use of a database for developing a 3D geological model which can be
obtained only with the use of stratigraphic profiles or with data obtained during different measurements
such as seismic, radar or electrical surveys. The precision of the model is dependent on the quantity of
data that is available. The geological model presented in this paper was created on the basis of
stratigraphic profiles obtained from lithological and petrographic surveys. The data used for the model
comes from the actual data used in a Polish mine.
The data obtained from the stratigraphic wells include geological layers going down to a depth of a
maximum average of 1000 m below ground level. These wells penetrate geological layers beginning in
the Quaternary and finishing in the Paleozoic layers (Fig.1a). The subsurface layers were constructed
by utilising interpolation techniques (Fig 1b).

Figure 1: Geological layers in the data

3 Implementation of the STRAROS system
3.1 System Architecture
The presented system for gathering, analysis, and visualisation has a typical client-server
architecture. Data is stored on a server to which clients have access from remote stations. Fig. 2 shows
a diagram of the STRATOS system. The program is written in Microsoft Visual Studio 2010, using ASP
.NET Framework in C #. The MVC design pattern was used to organise the structure of the application.
The Telerik Extensions are responsible for the presentation layer, allowing the creation of tables,
windows and charts, and simplifying the building of web applications. The WebGL Library was used
2871

WebGL based visualisation and analysis ...

A. Kopec, J. Bala, A.Pieta

to create the 3D visualisations and provide access to the 3D programming interface in a web browser.
In order to facilitate the manipulation of HTML elements the JQuery library was used as it allows
complicated scripts to be replaced with equivalent methods from its library. The free Express-C version
of the IBM DB2 relational data server is responsible for storage of data. Access to data is achieved with
LINQ, which is part of .NET technology and enables a SQL-like syntax. For object-relational mapping
the Fluent nHibernate library was used.
.
Web

JQuer

Telerik

LINQ

RDLC

nHibernate

IBM DB2

Presentati
on layer

Data access
layer

Data stores

Figure 2: STRATOS system diagram

3.2 Database Scheme
Databases and computer systems based on databases have become an indispensable part of almost
every area of human activity. They are used, for example, in the design process of modern scientific
experiments (Gaj & KwiecieĔ, 2009; BaliĞ, et al., 2011; Chuchro, Lupa, PiĊta, Piórkowski, & LeĞniak,
2015; PiĊta, Chuchro, Lupa, Piórkowski, & LeĞniak, 2014) and for collecting and analysing results and
measurements from experiments. The database structure and algorithms used to optimise database
operations are highly dependent on the specific issues of the scientific or experimental research for
which they are designed (Kowalski & HarĊĪlak, 2011; Kulesza & Wójcik, 2014).
The data obtained from the stratigraphic measurements was stored using an IBM DB2 database
management system, with the lithological data mapped into a single table. The attributes of the table
contained a measurement identifier representing the source of the geological data, the source’s
coordinates, and the value where a particular geological layer level was measured (Fig. 3).

Figure 3. Lithological data table

2872

WebGL based visualisation and analysis ...

A. Kopec, J. Bala, A.Pieta

The only group of data in the database is geological, represented by a single table scheme. This kind
of a database construction allows easy addition of other measurements, for example geotechnical or
geophysical data. The entity-relationship diagram presented below shows the possibility of expanding
the database with other groups of data (Fig.4).

Figure 4. The entity-relationship diagram with the possibility of expanding the database
The database project shown in the figure above allows the database to be easily enriched with
measurement results obtained for the same physical value and new groups of physical parameters
measured for the area. Not only does it allow the storing of data related to monitoring changes in the
given region of research, but it also provides easy access to this data for further analysis.
The table contains stratigraphic data, and with code selection allows the entering of new values of
the position of the ceiling of geological layers. It is extremely important to take into consideration the
specific nature of the area for which the database was created due, for example, to the likelihood of
physical phenomena associated with mineral exploration.
Apart from objects in the database which store data about the analysed area, there are also objects
responsible for data analysis and visualisation. The profile tables are an example of one such object and
are responsible for collecting the data necessary to create geological profiles and the layerpoint table,
which is used to create 3D sections.

2873

WebGL based visualisation and analysis ...

A. Kopec, J. Bala, A.Pieta

3.3 System operation scheme
The general scheme of the work flow of the STRATOS system is shown in Fig. 5.









login

data import
data editing
graphs profiles

3D
cross-sections
RDLC reports

Figure 5. Work Flow Diagram
Access to this system is possible after logging in with a username and password. In order to create a
new user account users simply complete the 'Add user' form with the appropriate information. There is
also some basic account management functionality which allows administrators to view, edit and delete
existing accounts. Each user can choose a custom stylesheet which defines the look of the page.
The first step which is necessary to perform the first login is to enter information on stratigraphic
profiles. The data may be entered manually or imported from a file stored on the user's hard drive. The
correct format for input data is a text file in which each profile is stored on a separate line with a tab
character separating the parameters. The values in a row are respectively: ordinal number, type of
profile, OG, hole number, X, Y, Z coordinates, and 18 values representing the distance between the
ceilings of the individual layers of the land surface and the depth of the hole calculated from the surface.
The data obtained in this way is permanently stored in the database and available for subsequent logins
to the system.
The imported information is presented in a table in a window and can be edited directly. New records
can be added, existing records can be checked or deleted and a comment can be assigned to each row.
The user interface for this application is based on Telerik windows, making it possible to hide and move
individual elements. An effect similar to a desktop application is achieved, and the need to reload the
page content is eliminated.
Each column has grouping and sorting functions. In the illustration the data is sorted by year (Fig.6).
Profile data can be displayed in a graph which shows the distribution of the measurement points
(Fig.6).
Information about each imported profile can be presented in a graphical RDLC report. The thickness
of the layers is presented using the difference in the level lines, while signature marks and colours are
chosen according to geological structure. The generated graphs can be exported to four types of
document: PDF, TIF, MS Word and MS Excel.

2874

WebGL based visualisation and analysis ...

A. Kopec, J. Bala, A.Pieta

Figure 6. Data presentation and the distribution of measurement points

3.4 3D Visualization
The main advantage of the system is the ability to create 3D visualisations of imported data (Fig. 7).
A 3D model is displayed based on a grid of points generated from the data in the database. Calculating
the coordinates of the model for all the points is a time-consuming process, and therefore does not take
place each time the model is displayed. The data is interpolated and extrapolated into a rectangle
covering all profiles stored in the program and then stored in a database table.
The algorithm calculates the point positions of the displayed model and takes a list of coordinates
describing the analysed layer as a parameter. The input data obtained from mine differs from well to
well, and there is a lack of information about different stratigraphic well depths. To deal with the
problem of missing data, a method providing missing information on the basis of the coordinates of the
closest layer above was used. This method can result in unnatural arrangement, especially in deeper
layers where the amount of missing data is highest. All such anomalies can be corrected from the data
editing window.

Figure 7. 3D visualisation of the imported data.

2875

WebGL based visualisation and analysis ...

A. Kopec, J. Bala, A.Pieta

The resulting model is simplified in relation to the amount of input data due to the limitations of the
technologies used. Too much information sent from the controller to the view affects page load times in
the browser. On the other hand, the number of points drawn on a WebGL canvas significantly influences
the performance of the computer when the application is open. For these reasons, it is not possible to
display 3D models in a higher resolution.
From the tool window (Fig.7) the model can be rotated around two axes: Horizontally on the Y-axis
passing through the centre of the model and the perpendicular line of the model base, and vertically on
the X axis. Rotation on the Z axis has not been implemented as the other two rotation axes are enough
to sufficiently manipulate the model, giving the possibility to rotate it to almost any angle. The "Increase
spacing between the layers" slider allows for a smooth change of the distance between successive layers.
The ability to generate cross sections was also implemented, allowing the model to be cut
perpendicularly along the X or Y-axis.
The cross sections are displayed in the same window as the 3D visualisation, and switching between
the 3D version and the cross section is carried out with the checkbox controls in the tools window. This
allows cross-sections to be manipulated in the same way as the 3D model, with rotations, transfers, and
the hiding of selected layers.

4 Conclusions and further work
We present a system for collecting, analysing and visualising 3D stratigraphic data. The developed
web application gathers information in a database and uses it to generate RDLC reports with 2D
visualisations and display 3D models using WebGL.
3D visualisation with the presented system requires relatively substantial hardware resources such
as RAM and a powerful graphics card, but the goal has been achieved giving users a functional and
relatively easy to use application. The results of the applied system and its smooth operation have been
achieved through simplification of the model displayed because too much information affects page load
time in browsers. On the other hand, the number of points drawn using the WebGL library significantly
affects computer performance and efficiency while the application is open. For these reasons, it is not
possible to display a 3D model in a higher resolution.
The system meets expectations. Future development will likely be focussed on highly improved
performance, in particular improved 3D graphics and faster program start up time, which is dependent
on the amount of data sent from the server.
Currently work is underway which aims to collect data related to the construction of the mine itself
and place it in the STRATOS database system. The main objective for the future is the possibility to use
the system not only to collect and visualise, but also to track the changes and expansion of a mine.

Acknowledgments. This work was support by the AGH - University of Science and Technology,
Faculty of Geology, Geophysics and Environmental Protection, as a part of statutory project.

References
BaliĞ, B., Kasztelnik, M., Bubak, M., Bartynski, T., Gubała, T., Nowakowski, P., & Broekhuijsen, J.
(2011). The urbanflood common information space for early warning systems. Procedia
Computer Science 4, pp. 96–105.

2876

WebGL based visualisation and analysis ...

A. Kopec, J. Bala, A.Pieta

Bijin, C., & Zhiqi, X. (2011). A framework for browser-based Multiplayer Online Games using WebGL
and WebSocket. In: International Conference on Multimedia Technology, IEEE, (pp. 471474).
Brzychczy, E., & Mieszaniec, J. (2011). The use of information systems to support organizational
innovation in mining enterprises - in Polish. Mining News 6, 647-651.
Chuchro, M., Lupa, M., PiĊta, A., Piórkowski, A., & LeĞniak, A. (2015). A Concept of Time Windows
Length Selection in Stream Databases in the Context of Sensor Networks Monitoring. In: New
Trends in Database and Information Systems II, ADBIS 2014, AISC, vol. 312 (pp. 173–183).
Springer International Publishing.
Congote, J. (2011). Interactive visualization of volumetric data with WebGL in real-time. Web3D 11
Proceedings of the 16th International Conference on 3D Web Technology, (pp. 137-146).
Gaj, P., & KwiecieĔ, B. (2009). The General Concept of a Distributed Computer System Designed for
Monitoring Rock Movements. Computer Networks, CCIS, vol. 39 (pp. 280–291). Springer
Publishing.
KĊsek, M. (2010). Numerical deposit model as a part of integrated management system for coal mines.
Computer integrated management (strony 655–660). Opole.
Kowalski, P., & HarĊĪlak, K. (2011). Data Replication Methods in Distributed Sale Systems. ManMachine Interactions 2, Advances in Intelligent and Soft Computing, vol. 103, (pp. 403-413).
Krooks, A., Kahkonen, J., Lehto, L., Latvala, P., Karjalainen, M., & Honkavaara, E. (2014). WebGL
Visualisation of 3D Environmental Models Based on Finnish Open Geospatial Data Sets.
ISPRS - International Archives of the Photogrammetry, Remote Sensing and Spatial
Information Sciences, vol. XL-3, (pp. 163-169).
Kulesza, P., & Wójcik, M. (2014). Platform for Storing and Searching Different Formats of Spatial
Data. Beyond Databases, Architectures, and Structures, Communications in Computer and
Information Science, (pp. 444-453).
Lecocq, D. (2010). High-Performance Visualization in the Browser. Proceedings of International
Conference on Computer Graphics and Interactive Techniques, (pp. 4503-4503).
Lisowski, P., Krawczyk, A., & Porzycka-Strzelczyk, S. (2014). Possibilities of 3D data storage in spatial
databases. Studia Informatica, vol 35 no 2, pp. 101-110.
Magda, R., WoĨny, T., Głodzik, S., & Jasiewicz, J. (2008). Data management for the mine production
planning and design. Mineral Resources Management - vol 24 no 4/2, pp. 119-131.
PiĊta, A., Chuchro, M., Lupa, M., Piórkowski, A., & LeĞniak, A. (2014). A Model of a System for
Stream Data Storage and Analysis Dedicated to Sensor Networks of Embankment Monitorin.
In K. Saeed, & V. Snasel, Computer Information Systems and Industrial Management, LNCS,
vol. 8838 (pp. 514-525). Springer Berlin.
Płuciennik, T., & Płuciennik, E. (2014). Path Features in Spatial Data Generation. Beyond Databases.
In: Architectures, and Structures Communications in Computer and Information Science, vol.
424, (pp. 465-471).
Sarkka, P. (2008). Intelligent Mine Implementation. 21 World Mining Congress & Expo 2008, New
Challenges and Vision for Mining. London, Leiden, New York, Philadelphia, Singapore: CRC
Taylor & Francis Group.
Sypniewski, S. (2011). IT solutions for mining. Materials and Construction Equipment vol 5, 22-27.
Tinkercad. (n.d.). Retrieved from http://tinkercad.com/
Zvonkov, A. (2012). WebGL and its applications. Seminar on Media Techology, T-111, (p. 5502).

2877

