Procedia Computer Science
Volume 51, 2015, Pages 2878–2882
ICCS 2015 International Conference On Computational Science

Modeling and Simulation of Masticatory Muscles
Eduardo Garcia, M´arcio Moura Leal, and Marta Becker Villamil
Universidade do Vale do Rio dos Sinos, S˜
ao Leopoldo, Rio Grande do Sul, Brazil
{edueduardogarcia, mr.leal}@gmail.com mbvillamil@unisinos.br

Abstract
Medical simulators play an important role in helping the development of prototype prostheses,
pre-surgical planning and in a better understanding of the mechanical phenomena involved
in muscular activity. This article focuses in modeling and simulating the activity of the jaw
muscular system. The model involves the use of three-dimensional bone models and muscle
modeling based on Hill type actuators. Ligament restrictions to mandible movement were taken
into account in our model. Data collected from patients were used to partially parameterize
our model so that it could be used in medical applications. In addition, the simulation of
muscles employed a new methodology based on insertion curves, with many lines of action for
each group of muscles. A simulator was developed, which allowed real time visualization of
individual muscle activation under each correspondent simulation time. The model derived
trajectory was then compared to the assembled data, remaining mostly within the convex hull
of the mandible motion curves captured. Furthermore, the model accurately described the
desired border movements.
Keywords: Masticatory Muscles, Simulation, Medical Images

1

Introduction

Medical simulators have been widely used for diagnostic purposes, for representing medical
concepts and have also helped health professionals in decision making. Simulators have been
developed for many basic procedures, from blood extraction to more complex situations such as
laparoscopic surgery and trauma. In addition, such simulators have helped to design prototypes
of new tools for the biomedical engineering ﬁeld and can also be applied in the development of
new clinical treatments and early diagnosis tools. The greatest beneﬁt of employing simulators
consists of a reduced number of clinical adversities for patients, which are primarily caused by
the inexperience of some physicians.
Study involving the masticatory system, amongst all of the human articulation system, are
useful in clarifying the functioning of the whole complex, either in health or in pathological
situations [1]. Simulating cooperative structural and functional elements is especially valuable
when linking one cause to an eﬀect. The contraction of muscles of diﬀerent shapes and sizes
performed by two joints makes the physics of this working system very complex and not yet fully
2878

Selection and peer-review under responsibility of the Scientiﬁc Programme Committee of ICCS 2015
c The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V.
doi:10.1016/j.procs.2015.05.451

Modeling and Simulation of Masticatory Muscles

Eduardo, M´
arcio and Marta

understood [2]. The use of simulators of jaw movements with educational purposes, orthodontic
ﬁtting of the occlusion, or craniofacial surgery planning, is of great importance. Although the
association between jaw movement and speciﬁc muscle contraction is one of the most important
aspects of mandibular biomechanics, it is also one of the most poorly understood.

2

Methods

The mathematical model for muscle functioning described here is based on the model proposed
by McMahon [4]. Muscle activation produces two classes of forces, active and passive, which
together compose the total. The muscle contractile element provides the power to action after
the interaction between the proteins actin and myosin. These elements also contribute to its
passive force. Technically, the passive element of a muscle has visco-elastic properties, but
these can be simplistically modeled mechanically by springs. Since the spring modeled element
is in series with the contractile element, one can consider the force produced by the contractile
element as an active force transmitted to the bone by the serial elastic element. The extra
elastic element is called parallel elastic element and also contributes to its passive force.
In 1922, A.V. Hill conducted experiments in which he noticed that the muscles produce
more force when held in isometric conditions, i.e., a ﬁxed length, than when they are shortened.
When muscles are shortened, they apparently spend part of their active energy to overcome
some kind of inherent resistance. This resistance is not caused by serial elastic elements, because
they are actually active against muscle stretching, not against shortening. Therefore this Hill
resistance is another type of passive force in the muscle. Hill found that the faster the shortening
of the muscle, lower is the force it produces. Assuming that the active force is constant, Hill
concluded that rapid contraction leads to higher resistance forces. This behavior is analogous
to the mechanical behavior of a damper. In a shock absorber for a given speed x,
˙ the force
required to move the piston will be T = bx.
˙ If a muscle requires less force to be shortened, Hills
assumption was that the viscosity-associated element would be in parallel with the contractile
element, and therefore this element could be considered a parallel elastic element.
The work is based on a physical model to simulate the temporomandibular muscular function
(TMJ), to reproduce the movements of the jaw. A physical simulator of the TMJ is required,
allowing the change of parameters of muscle according to the model adopted. The model is
composed of three basic elements, where the ﬁrst component is the geometric model generated
from CT scans of the skull bones of a patient with a healthy TMJ. The second element is the
mathematical model for the muscles and the ﬁnal part involves the modeled ligaments, which
restrain the movement of the jaw. Interactions between user and simulator begin with the
modeling of the position and shape of the muscles in the geometric model. In a second step,
user can control the levels of muscle activation. The physics software PhysX analyzes the forces
and constraints applied to the physical model of the jaw, identiﬁes and respond to collisions
between rigid bodies, and updates the condition of each of its variables. The simulation results in
the real time response visualization through a rendered model and the generation of trajectories
from the incisal point which can be compared with the actual trajectories of the jaw.
Models that can simulate muscles involved in the chewing process can be developed in three
basic steps: the ﬁrst is in vivo medical imaging. The second step is to model muscles, tendons
and ligaments as a complex and, ﬁnally, to simulate muscle contraction, resulting in a trajectory
that can now be validated by comparison with experimental data. User and graphical model
geometry interact through model scoring. An invisible line originating from a point within
the two-dimensional regions allows this interaction by providing the user with the possibility
to click using a computer mouse. Starting at this point, a line is designed to allow the users
2879

Modeling and Simulation of Masticatory Muscles

Eduardo, M´
arcio and Marta

view. The detection of overlap between bodies and the projected line indicates the desired
three-dimensional point, and this information is expressed as a sphere, which becomes visible
to the user.
Muscles, the objects of the present study, were modeled by curves representing the origin and
insertion of its ﬁbers using Hill-type eﬀectors (Hill, 1938). During the simulation, which takes
place in real time, the user can change the level of activation of each muscle group, observing
the reaction of the model to the set of forces exerted by muscles. The objective of this work
is not modeling muscles anatomically, but the biomechanical modeling. For a better view of
the level of activation of muscles, the beams were rendered in a RGB color model (blue for
minimum muscle strength and red for maximum muscle strength) in order to visually represent
the level of force generated by muscles enabling a more intuitive interface with the user.
During the second phase of development of the simulation model, muscles and ligaments were
modeled in order to obtain the trajectory of jaw movement. The trajectories were determined
by inﬂuence of forces derived from muscle contraction, which were based on the levels of muscle
activation and on various parameters that were adjusted for each muscle of the complex. The
following sections describe in detail the steps for modeling these elements.
An important step of model development was the deﬁnition of three-dimensional curves of
muscle insertion. They were set manually, in accordance with the literature and the magnetic
resonance images obtained from one volunteer, who served as a reference for a correct deﬁnition
of these points. The use of muscle straight lines is commonly performed to estimate the action
of their activation of the structure of bones. This straight line is usually set over two main
points: the point of origin which is usually inserted in the ﬁx region, and an insertion point
associated with the bone that moves. We took this design as a reference but, instead of insertion
points, we used the concept of origin and insertion curves. The fact that TMJ muscles exhibit a
much more rectangular than long proﬁle, when compared to other muscles of the human body
such as the upper and lower limbs, was our motivation to adapt this suggestion. In doing so,
we hoped to obtain more realistic results. Control points that guide the direction of the force,
in the case of bone-involving muscle regions, are also commonly used. In this work, however,
control points were not taken into account because only a small portion of only one muscle, the
temporal muscle, has border regions.
The deﬁnition of origin and insertion point lines was performed manually, and the initial
points were deﬁned by the interaction of the user with the three-dimensional model. Since
the insertions of muscles appear naturally, a curve containing the manually marked points was
automatically generated.
We modeled six groups of muscle. The anterior temporal and temporal muscles, followed
by the masseter, superior lateral, inferior lateral and medial pterygoid. The right side of the
jaw was also modeled, and the highest possible symmetry between the two sides was sought.
To simulate the action of muscles generating the coordinate movement of the jaw, deﬁnition
of muscle activation curves was required. Activation curves simulate how nerve stimulation
generates the basic movements of the jaw. Data are entered graphically through the activation
contours ranging from 0 to 1 (0 to 100) as a function of time. Data on the levels of activation
were investigated by Moller [5], Hannan and Wood [6] and Hiraba et al.[7], among others.
They measured the electromyography of muscle activity during chewing and biting movements.
Curved insertions makes it necessary to deﬁne the variation across the width of the muscle,
otherwise this approach will not add much information, since the average force generated by
the muscle would be continuous and therefore would have single line of action. In fact, this
change will occur considering that the section of muscle and other muscle parameters vary
across its diﬀerent lengths, therefore justifying this approach. Moreover, there remains the
2880

Modeling and Simulation of Masticatory Muscles

Eduardo, M´
arcio and Marta

Figure 1: Deﬁnition and arrangement of the origin and insertion curves for temporal (a), anterior
temporal (b), masseter (c) and superior lateral (d), bottom (e) and medial (f) pterygoid muscles,
seen in the full model (1) and in the mandible external (2) and internal (3) views.
opportunity for future work to deﬁne speciﬁc activation across diﬀerent regions, since it is still
not fully understood how the muscle is activated in each of its sub-regions. Despite the large
amount of available data concerning muscle activation, it is believed that empirical adjustments
are required to obtain an ideal ﬁnal trajectory.
The simulation of the muscles was based on the Hill muscle model [3], which can be considered a model based on an engineers point of view, since it deals mainly with the mechanical
behavior of this system and not so much with the chemical process involved in muscle contraction.
Model validation requires that the modeled trajectories reproduce those of the jaw of the
volunteer who provided the data. However, the trajectory of the moving jaw of the volunteer is
not stable or reproducible. Moreover, it is important to underline that the control of movements
is performed by the brain, which works almost automatically in accordance to our learned neural
coordinate muscle movements. The model has no feedback system for automatic correction
of the position, so diﬀerences between the volunteer trajectory captured and the trajectory
obtained by simulation are expected. Demonstrations that simulated movements are running
a similar course and that simulated trajectories remain within a convex region formed by the
acquired trajectories of the volunteer can be considered an acceptable validation.
Figure 2 illustrate the data for the simulation of the jaw opening and closing and comparison
with data acquired from a volunteer. Fifteen cycles of opening and closing were performed
during both simulation and real data collection

3

Conclusion

Since we described a system that moves through the activation of various muscle groups, a
control system designed to report the position of the mandible would be very complex, and
out of the scope of our study. Therefore, the fact that the model originates a trajectory very
similar to that observed in real individuals demonstrates its ability to perform the movements
required to mimic the actual movements. An evaluation of the dynamic behavior of the modeled system was not taken as a priority in this study, but could also be estimated during the
simulation even though the temporal responses were not described. It should be noticed that
the simulated trajectory is not as stable as the human system, but this could be improved if the
model also considered drivers responsible for reﬁned control of movements. The contribution
of each muscle groups forces was evaluated, but their magnitude could not be estimated, since
no actual data from the same individual were available for comparison. The calculation of
parameters that could help to adjust the model to real data was not possible, thus contributing
2881

Modeling and Simulation of Masticatory Muscles

Eduardo, M´
arcio and Marta

Figure 2: Comparison between convex hull of the trajectory captured and the simulated trajectory, both in 15 cycles of jaw opening and closing. Dimensions in mm.
to the uncertainties involved in the validation process for this model. This study consists on a
new attempt to model the temporomandibular joint, contributing to the development of more
realistic medical simulators and enabling a more detailed understanding about the inﬂuence of
each muscle to the functioning of the temporomandibular joint.

References
[1] J.-P. Baeyens, H. Gilomen1, B. Erdmann, R. Clijsen, J. Cabri and D. Vissers, In vivo measurement
of the 3D kinematics of the temporomandibular joint using miniaturized electromagnetic trackers:
technical report, Med Biol Eng Comput (2013) 51:479-484.
[2] J. J. Lemoine, J. J. Xia, J. Gateno, M. A. Liebschner, Radiographic analysis for jaw motion
normalization, Journal of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery 63 (7) (2005) 961 – 967.
[3] A. Hill, The heat of shortening and the dynamic constants in muscle, Proc.Roy.Soc.London 126
(1938) 136–195.
[4] T. McMahon, Muscles, reﬂexes and locomotion., Priceton University Press, 1984.
[5] E. Moller, The chewing apparatus. an electromyographic study of the action of the muscles of
mastication and its correlation to facial morphology., Acta Physiol Scand Suppl 280.
[6] A. Hannan, W. Wood, Medial pterygoid activity during the closing and compressive phases of
human mastication., American Journal of Physical Anthropology 55 (1981) 359–367.
[7] K. Hiraba, K. Hibino, K. Hiranuma, T. Negoro, Emg activities of two heads of the human lateral
pterygoid muscle in relation to mandibular condyle movement and biting force., J Neurophysiol
83 (4) (2000) 2120–2137.
[8] H. E. Huxley, M. Kress, Crossbridge behaviour during muscle contraction, Journal of Muscle
Research and Cell Motility 6 (2) (1985) 153–161.

2882

