Procedia Computer Science
Volume 51, 2015, Pages 1128–1137
ICCS 2015 International Conference On Computational Science

Multiscale modeling approach for radial particle transport
in large-scale simulations of the tokamak plasma edge
Felix Hasenbeck1∗, Dirk Reiser1 , Philippe Ghendrih2 , Yannick Marandet3 ,
Patrick Tamain2 , Annette M¨oller4 , and Detlev Reiter1
1

Forschungszentrum J¨
ulich GmbH, J¨
ulich, Germany
CEA Cadarache, Saint-Paul-lez-Durance, France
3
PIIM, CNRS/Universit´e d’Aix-Marseille, Marseille, France
Department of Animal Sciences, Biometrics & Bioinformatics Group, University of G¨
ottingen,
G¨
ottingen, Germany
2

4

Abstract
A multiscale model for an improved description of radial particle transport described by the
density continuity equation in large-scale plasma edge simulations for tokamak fusion devices
is presented. It includes the eﬀects of mesoscale drift-ﬂuid dynamics on the macroscale proﬁles
and vice versa. The realization of the multiscale model in form of the coupled code system B2ATTEMPT is outlined. A procedure employed to eﬃciently determine the averaged mesoscale
terms using a nonparametric trend test, the Reverse Arrangements Test, is described. Results
of stationary, self-consistent B2-ATTEMPT simulations are compared to prior simulations for
experiments at the TEXTOR tokamak, making a ﬁrst evaluation of the predicted magnitude
of radial particle transport possible.
Keywords: multiscale modeling, nuclear fusion, magnetic conﬁnement, drift-ﬂuid dynamics, radial
particle transport

1

Introduction

The tokamak is currently the most advanced concept of a nuclear fusion device, using magnetic
ﬁelds to conﬁne a hot plasma in a toroidal vessel. Transport of particles and energy directed
radially outwards, i.e. from the core to the vessel wall, determines the quality of the plasma
conﬁnement and thereby the choice of the wall material and the magnetic conﬁguration in
the edge region next to the wall. Predictions of the radial particle transport for this region
by so-called classical and neoclassical theories using a diﬀusion approach underestimate it by
at least one order of magnitude [1]. It is generally accepted nowadays that, for its correct
description, the detailed interaction of the plasma with the electric and magnetic ﬁelds present
∗ Corresponding

1128

author. E-mail: f.hasenbeck@fz-juelich.de

Selection and peer-review under responsibility of the Scientiﬁc Programme Committee of ICCS 2015
c The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V.

doi:10.1016/j.procs.2015.05.282

Multiscale modeling approach for the tokamak plasma edge

F. Hasenbeck et al.

in the plasma has to be taken into account. Corresponding computer codes employ drift-ﬂuid or
gyrokinetic models and are very demanding regarding computational resources for simulations
on the scale of the tokamak edge and the typical tokamak pulse length, i.e. the ‘lifetime’ of
the plasma: while these scales are on the order of meters and seconds in today’s machines, the
small-scale processes to be included have evolution times down to the microseconds range and
resolve structures down to the order of millimeters. Large-scale edge codes are signiﬁcantly
less resource-demanding. However, they typically approximate radial transport with simpliﬁed
models, employing transport coeﬃcients such as diﬀusivities estimated from experimental data.
This impedes ab initio predictive modeling.
In this paper, a multiscale model for an improved description of the radial particle transport
in the large-scale edge code B2 [2] is outlined. B2 uses a ﬂuid model to describe the plasma,
based on balance equations for the particle density, the streaming velocity and the energy of
ions and electrons. The averaged mesoscale ﬂux, aﬀecting the large-scale proﬁles, is obtained by
local drift-ﬂuid simulations with the local version of the ATTEMPT code [3]. ATTEMPT uses
large-scale quantities such as the macroscale radial density gradient ∂x n0 as input parameter
that drive the dynamic processes.
Similar approaches of coupling large-scale and mesoscale codes have been applied for the
core region of the tokamak, using gyrokinetic models for the mesoscale dynamics [4, 5]. For
the edge region, employing drift-ﬂuid models on the mesoscale, corresponding studies can be
found in [6, 7] and references therein. This work focuses on several new aspects of a coupled
code system for the plasma edge, amongst other things a procedure to determine the averaged
mesoscale terms eﬃciently and, for the ﬁrst time, a quantitative evaluation of the coupled code
results using prior modeling results adjusted to measurements at the TEXTOR tokamak.
This paper is organized as follows. The general structure of the model equations is elucidated
in section 2. The coupling procedure is described in section 3, with special emphasis on the
procedure applied to obtain the averaged mesoscale data. In section 4, the results of the
coupled code system B2-ATTEMPT are compared to prior modeling results for experiments at
the tokamak TEXTOR. In section 5, a summary and an outlook are given.

2

Multiscale model

The multiscale model is based on the assumption of a scale separation whose meaning is illustrated best by introducing the operator ... . It averages a ﬂuid quantity α over a time δtav and
3
. A Reynolds decomposition [8] is then carried out by splitting α into its
a volume δVav ≈ δrav
macroscale part α0 ≡ α and its mesoscale part α ≡ α−α0 . With τD (α) being the characteristic
evolution time of α and λD (α) being the respective characteristic length, the averaging intervals
δrav
λD (α0 ) and
δtav and δrav have to be chosen in such a way that the relations λD (α)
δtav
τD (α0 ) are fulﬁlled. They express a hierarchy of scales representing the scale
τD (α)
separation assumption. It can then be assumed that α0 is piecewise linear on the averaging
scales δrav and δtav [9]. Hence, one has α0 = α0 and α = 0 which is crucial for the derivation
of the multiscale balances in the next paragraph.
A generic multiscale model for a ﬂuid is obtained by applying the Reynolds decomposition
to the generic ﬂuid balances for the particle density n, the streaming velocity v and the temperature T as given for example in [10], p. 208 - 210. In the spirit of the Reynolds Averaged
Navier Stokes equations [8], the macroscale balances are obtained by applying the averaging
operator ... to the full balances while the mesoscale equations are obtained by subtracting
the macroscale equation from the full equation for the quantity α. For the density continuity
1129

Multiscale modeling approach for the tokamak plasma edge

F. Hasenbeck et al.

equation this procedure yields the macroscale and mesoscale balances
∂t n0 + ∇ · (n0 v 0 ) = S0 −
∂t n + ∇ · n[v 0 + v]

∇ · (nv) ,

+ ∇ · (n0 v) = S +

(1)
∇ · (nv) ,

(2)

where S0 and S are source terms due to inelastic collisions, including also the interaction of the
plasma with neutral particles. Eqs. (1) and (2) illustrate the mutual coupling principles. The
term ∇·(nv) in the macroscale balance (1) represents the averaged divergence of the mesoscale
ﬂux nv, inﬂuencing the evolution of n0 . It appears also in the mesoscale balance (2) to ﬁlter out
any macroscale evolution in the mesoscale dynamics and therefore ensures a clear scale separation. The scale separation assumption allows for considering n0 and v 0 as constant parameters
on the typical scale of the mesoscale dynamics. Thus the macroscale evolution is assumed to
consist of a comparably slow transition of states which on the mesoscale can be approximated
by local dynamic equilibria. These equilibria correspond to (statistically) weakly stationary
states [11] or saturated states which are reached by the system after an equilibration time δteq .
A respective coupled code system consists of a procedure which iteratively solves eqs. (1) and
(2), determining the quantity ∇ · (nv) with a new set of n0 , v 0 after the macroscale code has
simulated a time on the order of τD (α0 ). This equally applies to the multiscale equations for the
velocities v 0 and v and the temperatures T0 and T , which can be obtained in an analogous way.
Now the transition from a multiscale model for a generic ﬂuid to one for a collisional,
magnetized plasma as present in the edge region of a tokamak is made. In the coupled code
system B2-ATTEMPT, B2 [2] accounts for the macroscale proﬁles of the plasma, while the local
version of ATTEMPT [3] (in the following ATTEMPT) describes the local mesoscale dynamics.
The coupling is currently restricted to the radial particle transport.
B2 assumes quasineutrality (electric charges are almost completely shielded by the plasma),
ambipolar ﬂows (absence of electric currents) and toroidal symmetry. It evolves the proﬁles of
the density n0 , the ion velocity u 0 parallel to the magnetic ﬁeld lines, and the ion and electron
temperatures, T0i and T0e , in a two-dimensional poloidal cut of the tokamak vessel (see ﬁg.
1). The term − ∇ · (nv) in eq. (1) is approximated by a diﬀusion-convection macroscale
transport model with diﬀusion coeﬃcient D and convective velocity vc , which are typically
chosen to reproduce the experimental proﬁles of interest. The B2 particle balance reads:
∂t n0 + ∇ · (n0 v 0 ) = S0 − ∇ · (vc n0 − D∂x n0 )ˆ
ex ,

(3)

ˆx is the respective unit vector.
where x denotes the radial direction and e
The ATTEMPT code employs an isothermal drift-ﬂuid model with cold ions (Te = cst., Ti =
0), derived with the drift ordering outlined in [12]. It includes the assumption that n
n0 ,
which allows to approximate n by n0 . ATTEMPT evolves the mesoscale electron density n, the
parallel ion velocity u , the electric potential φ, and magnetic perturbations B ⊥ perpendicular
to the equilibrium magnetic ﬁeld B 0 , represented by the vector potential A (B ⊥ = ∇ × A ),
in a three-dimensional toroidal geometry for a quasineutral plasma. The cross-ﬁeld velocity v ⊥
perpendicular to B 0 is approximated by the E×B drift v E = B 0 ×∇⊥ φ/B02 and the diamagnetic
drift which for the electrons is given by v ∗ = −T0e B 0 × ∇⊥ (n)/(en0 B02 ). Advection in parallel
direction and the source term S are neglected. The latter simpliﬁcation can be justiﬁed by
the fact that currently, ATTEMPT calculations are only carried out for the region of closed
magnetic ﬂux surfaces (which can be pictured as a set of nested tori whose surfaces have constant
pressure), where the neutral density is rather low. Most of the neutrals can be found in the
1130

Multiscale modeling approach for the tokamak plasma edge

F. Hasenbeck et al.

scrape-oﬀ layer (SOL) where the plasma strongly interacts with the so-called limiter (compare
ﬁg. 1). The term ∇ · (nv) is diﬃcult to compute due to the involved averaging procedure
in time and space; its evaluation would require a computationally expensive iterative solving
n00 } being the real part
procedure. Hence it is replaced by the term γ(n) ∼ R{ˆ
n00 }, with R{ˆ
of the Fourier coeﬃcient n
ˆ 00 , corresponding to the toroidally constant part of n. The particle
balance of ATTEMPT reads:
∂t n + v E · ∇⊥ (n + n0 ) + n0 ∇ · v + v E + ∇ · (n0 v ∗ ) = γ(n) .

(4)

The parallel electron velocity v is expressed by the parallel ion velocity u and the vector potential, using Maxwell’s equations: v = u + ∇2⊥ A /(μ0 en), μ0 being the vacuum permeability.
Eqs. (3) and (4) are the counterparts of the generic multiscale balances (1) and (2) for the
B2-ATTEMPT system. The details of the coupling procedure are outlined in the next section.

3

Structure of the coupling procedure

The iterative coupling of B2 and ATTEMPT is managed via a Python script which organizes
the code calls and the exchange of information. The procedure, which belongs to the class of
heterogeneous multiscale models [13], is sketched in ﬁg. 1.
flux surfaces

center of the torus

radial
direction
toroidal
direction
major radius

core
minor radius

poloidal
direction

line limiter
scrape-off layer (SOL)
B2 simulation

ATTEMPT simulation
average radial particle flux
for each radial B2 zone from stat. stationary state,
in the region of
determine profile of
closed flux surfaces

Figure 1: Sketch of the B2 simulation domain and the coupling procedure of B2-ATTEMPT.
A tokamak conﬁguration with circular, concentric ﬂux surfaces is considered. Before the
coupled code simulation is started, the B2 simulation domain is divided into Nxc radial zones
(widths δxav , centers xi ) and into Nθc poloidal zones (widths δθav , centers θj ). These zones
represent the grid for the diﬀusion coeﬃcient proﬁle D(xi , θj ) used by B2. One global iteration
of the B2-ATTEMPT system consists of the following steps:
1.) Run B2 for a time Δtrun ∼ τD (α0 ). Determine the averages n0 i , ∂x n0 i , T0e i and the
minor radius a0 i for each radial zone of the B2 grid, i = 1, ..., Nxc .
2.) For each radial B2 zone in the region of closed ﬂux surfaces, run a separate ATTEMPT
simulation with input parameters n0 i , ∂x n0 i , T0e i and a0 i for a suﬃciently long
time δtrun . Use the results to determine the diﬀusion coeﬃcient proﬁle D(xi , θj ) =
− nvEx ij / ∂x n0 i , with j = 1, ..., Nθc and vEx being the radial part of the E×B velocity.
The operator ... ij refers to the average over a time δtav corresponding to the local
1131

Multiscale modeling approach for the tokamak plasma edge

F. Hasenbeck et al.

dynamic equilibrium state, the complete radial and toroidal extent of the simulation
domain and a poloidal extent from θi − δθav /2 ≤ θ ≤ θi + δθav /2 from the data obtained
from the ATTEMPT simulation for radial zone i.
k
(xi , θj ) =
3.) Hand the proﬁle of D(xi , θj ) to B2 and calculate the relaxed proﬁle with Drx
k
k−1
0.3D (xi , θj )+0.7Drx (xi , θj ), k denoting the global iteration index. For all zones within
the SOL, the D proﬁle of the radial zone closest to the SOL is used. Continue at step 1.).
To understand when the coupled code system is computationally cheaper than a global
mesoscale simulation which evolves α on the mesoscale and macroscale assume that the local
and global mesoscale simulations are both equally costly per unit of simulated time. Suppose
that the computational cost of the macroscale code can be neglected compared to the costs of
the mesoscale code. Then the coupled code system is less resource-demanding if the speed-up
factor rt ≡ Δtrun /δtrun > 1; its eﬃciency increases the larger rt . The determination of δtrun is
elucidated in section 3.1. A benchmark of the coupled code system for a 1D time-dependent
test problem is analyzed in [9].
When interested in stationary macroscale solutions (∂α0 /∂t = 0), as they are considered in
this paper, the runtime Δtrun should be chosen in such a way so that the ﬁnal proﬁles after each
B2 iteration are stationary. It is practical to deﬁne a termination condition to decide when the
coupled code simulation has converged. The condition employed here is:
1
c
Nx Nθc

Nxc Nθc
i=1 j=1

Dk−1 (xi , θj ) − Dk (xi , θj )
Dk−1 (xi , θj )

2

< 0.01 ,

(5)

where k and k−1 are the global iteration indices. The determination of a more rigid convergence
criterion will require further work due to the inevitable introduction of statistical ﬂuctuations
in D(xi , θj ), originating in the ﬁnite averaging intervals used for the mesoscale data. Note
also that the choice of a purely diﬀusive macroscale transport model for B2 does not imply
the assumption of the averaged mesoscale transport being actually diﬀusive. For stationary
cases the choice of the macroscale transport model should not inﬂuence the ﬁnal results of the
coupled code system (see [9], chapter 8). However, especially for time-dependent evolution, this
topic remains an important point for future research.

3.1

Determination of the average mesoscale terms

The determination of the averaged mesoscale term nvEx and therefore the calculation of
the times δtrun , δtav and the start and end position of the averaging interval are crucial for
the coupled code system regarding the quality of the results as well as the computational
eﬃciency. For simpliﬁcation let w denote the function of mesoscale quantities to be averaged
(here w = nvEx ). For each individual ATTEMPT simulation the coupling procedure has to
ensure that
a) the averaging interval δtav is long enough so that a representative average w can be
determined, meaning that δtav
τD (w),
b) the part of the time trace used for averaging does not include the initial equilibration
phase of length δteq to obtain an unbiased average,
c) the overall simulated time δtrun of ATTEMPT is as short as possible to maximize the
speed-up factor rt while conditions a) and b) are fulﬁlled.
Issue c) is addressed by letting the mesoscale simulation run for a number of time steps which
correspond to a simulated time t
τD (w) and check for points a) and b) after each of these
1132

Multiscale modeling approach for the tokamak plasma edge

F. Hasenbeck et al.

internal ATTEMPT iterations. If both conditions are fulﬁlled the average w is calculated
and the ATTEMPT run is ﬁnalized; if not, the ATTEMPT simulation is extended for another
internal iteration after which the check is repeated.
To check for point a), δtav is set to δtav = Nav τD (w), where Nav should be at least around
20 for a statistically meaningful average. Hence an estimate of τD (w) is needed for the choice
of δtav . Here, τD (w) is approximated by the correlation time τc . The latter is deﬁned as the
e-folding time of the autocorrelation function ρ(t) of w; τc being estimated by the minimal lag
tl for which ρ(tl ) = 1/e and ρ(t > tl ) ≤ 0.5.
Point b) is checked for by considering the time trace w(t) from the time interval δtrun − δtav
to δtrun and investigating if values from this time interval exhibit a trend, i.e. a non-constant
average. If this is the case, it can be reasoned that the time series from the chosen interval does
not correspond to a statistically weakly stationary state, thus contains a signiﬁcant part of the
equilibration phase. Various nonparametric trend tests not relying on a distribution assumption
have been proposed in the literature, such as the Runs Test [14], the Mann-Kendall Test [15]
and the Reverse Arrangements Test (RAT) [16]. Here, it is relied on the RAT whose concept
is as follows: if the time series w is trend-free, the quantity A,
N −1

A ≡

N

Ak ,

Ak =

k=1

ckl ,

ckl =

l=k+1

1 wk > w l ,
0 otherwise ,

(6)

is Gaussian. By calculating the distribution’s mean μ and variance σ, a z-score is given by:
z = (A − μ)/σ ,

μ = N (N − 1)/4 ,

σ =

(2N 3 + 3N 2 − 5N )/72 .

(7)

For a trend-free series of values wk z follows a Gaussian distribution with μ = 0 and σ = 1.
One can therefore check for trends by comparing the probability p(z) against an arbitrary limit
probability plim which corresponds to the chosen conﬁdence interval. A value of plim = 0.95
relates, for instance, to a ±2σ conﬁdence interval.
The working hypothesis for the application of the RAT within the coupling procedure is
that the time trace w(t) from δtrun − δtav to δtrun stems from the statistically weakly stationary
state. Additionally, it is assumed that samples w(tk ) and w(tk+1 ) can be considered as being
τc . A time series of the form (wk , ..., wN ) with
independent from each other if |tk+1 − tk |
wk = w t0 + [k − 1]Δt ,

k = 1, ..., N ,

t0 = δtrun − δtav ,

Δt = 3τc ,

(8)

is created to which the RAT is then applied. For improvement of statistics, t0 is varied with
t0 = δtrun − δtav + (j − 1)Δt/Ns , j = 1, ..., Ns , and the procedure is then repeated with the new
time series. In total, Ns time series with N samples each are analyzed. The working hypothesis
is examined with the mean of all z-scores and the decision if a trend is present or not is made.
In ﬁg. 2, two examples are given for the procedure described above. The function contemplated here is w = nvEx V , the average being carried out over the whole simulation domain of
ATTEMPT. In the left picture, the working hypothesis of the RAT is rejected for the time trace
with δtrun ≈ 15 · 10−5 s (red × in ﬁg. 2, left) with p( z ) = 0.955 > plim = 0.95. After another
internal ATTEMPT iteration (δtrun ≈ 18 · 10−5 s, green + in ﬁg. 2, left) p( z ) = 0.777, which
means that the working hypothesis is accepted. The procedure works also for considerably
longer evolution times of w (ﬁg. 2, right, p( z ) = 0.707).

4

Simulation results

Stationary proﬁles of the B2-ATTEMPT system are discussed for simulations of the plasma
edge of the tokamak TEXTOR [17] for a deuterium plasma. The cases presented here are
1133

[1019 m−2 s−1]
V
Ex

1.3
1.2
1.1
1.0
0.9
0.8

0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 18 20
time t [10−5 s]

nv

nv

Ex

V

[1020 m−2 s−1]

Multiscale modeling approach for the tokamak plasma edge

F. Hasenbeck et al.

5.0
4.5
4.0
3.5
3.0

0 5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 50
time t [10−5 s]

Figure 2: Examples of the application of the RAT to w(t) = nvEx

V (t) (solid black lines, dashed
blue line). The dashed gray lines mark the internal ATTEMPT iterations, each comprising 3 000 time
steps. The red crosses and blue squares mark the points of the time series (w1 , ..., wN ) (N = 15).

oriented towards B2-EIRENE simulations described by D. Gray in [18], speciﬁcally cases 3 and
4 therein. While for case 3 only Ohmic heating of the plasma was used it was complemented
by heating via neutral beam injection for case 4. The transport coeﬃcients D and vc of the B2EIRENE simulations were chosen to reproduce the experimentally determined radial density
proﬁles at the outer midplane (θ = 0◦ ). They can therefore be interpreted as estimates for
the experimentally found level of transport and thus may serve for a ﬁrst evaluation of the
magnitude of radial particle transport predicted by the B2-ATTEMPT system.
Simulation parameters of B2-ATTEMPT are chosen as follows. The B2 simulation domain
extends from x = 40 cm to x = 50 cm with a line limiter present for x ≥ 45 cm at θ = 315◦
(see ﬁg. 1). The simulation domain is divided into Nθc = 12 poloidal and Nxc = 8 radial zones
of which the inner 4 lie within the area of closed ﬂux surfaces, thus are provided with diﬀusion
coeﬃcients from ATTEMPT simulations. For the initial B2 iteration D = 1 m2 s−1 .
Each ATTEMPT run uses a simulation domain of radial extent of 64 ion Larmor radii; its
toroidal extent is chosen so that it has to be mapped nine times side by side to cover the entire
toroidal domain. The number of time steps per internal ATTEMPT iteration is Nit = 3 000.
For the RAT one has N = 15 and Ns = 10. Further simulation parameters are R0 = 1.75 m
for the major radius of the toroidal vessel, a magnetic ﬁeld of B0 = 2.25 T, a safety factor of
q0 = 3 and a shearing parameter sˆ = 2, the latter two parameters deﬁning the pitch angle of
the magnetic ﬁeld lines and its change with the radial position, respectively [3].
Boundary conditions for B2 are chosen in agreement with the B2-EIRENE results of [18].
At the inner radial simulation boundary, Dirichlet boundary conditions for n0 , T0e and T0i are
employed, at the outer radial boundary e-folding decay lengths of 2 cm for these quantities are
prescribed. The parallel ion velocity u 0 is set to zero at the inner radial boundary while at
the outer radial boundary, mi n0 ux u 0 = 0 with ux = Γ/n0 = (n0 vc − D∂x n0 )/n0 has to be
fulﬁlled. At the surfaces of the line limiter, sheath boundary conditions are prescribed, see [19],
p. 73-76. 65% of the particles hitting the limiter surfaces are reﬂected back into the plasma.
The transport coeﬃcients χ⊥ for the perpendicular heat ﬂux for ions and electrons in the energy
balances were chosen as for the B2-EIRENE simulations (χ⊥ = 0.84 m2 s−1 (3.6 m2 s−1 ) for
case 3 (4)). For the ATTEMPT simulations, periodic boundary conditions are used in poloidal
and toroidal direction, while in radial direction n = u = A = φ = 0.
The results of the B2-ATTEMPT simulations are shown in ﬁgs. 3 and 4. The data stemming
from the B2-EIRENE simulations of [18] as well as the experimental data has been reconstructed
1134

Multiscale modeling approach for the tokamak plasma edge

F. Hasenbeck et al.

from ﬁgs. 2 and 3 of [18]. The termination condition (5) is fulﬁlled by B2-ATTEMPT after 9
(7) global iterations for case 3 (4).
B2-EIR., case 3
B2-ATT., case 3
exp. data, case 3
B2-EIR., case 4
B2-ATT., case 4
exp. data,
case 4

Figure 3: Left: radial density proﬁles at θ = 0◦ . Right: proﬁles of the scaled gradient L⊥ ∂x n0 /n0
and the plasma beta βp from the ﬁnal iteration of the B2-ATTEMPT simulation for case 3.
The radial density proﬁles at the outer midplane are presented in ﬁg. 3, left, and show that
the values of n0 from both code systems and the experimental data are in the same range. The
density increase in the B2-EIRENE results in the region 42 x 45 cm as compared to the
B2-ATTEMPT proﬁles can be explained by the diﬀerent limiter conﬁguration employed. While
for the B2-ATTEMPT runs a simpliﬁed line limiter conﬁguration has been applied (compare
ﬁg. 1), the limiter in the B2-EIRENE simulations was situated at the same position, but with a
component facing the plasma in radial direction with a poloidal extent Δθ ≈ 20◦ . This lead to
an increased reﬂection of particles towards the core. The T0e proﬁles of B2-ATTEMPT, which
are not shown here, predict a typically around 30% higher electron temperature in the region
of closed ﬂux surfaces than the B2-EIRENE results. This can be explained by the additional
energy sink in the latter due to the re-ionization of neutral particles, modeled by EIRENE.
The ﬁnal proﬁle of D(xi , θj ) from the B2-ATTEMPT simulations for case 3 is exemplarily
shown in ﬁg. 4, left. Values of D are of the same order of magnitude as those typically used
in plasma edge studies and as determined in prior multiscale simulations [20]. The step-wise
structure in radial direction is due to the discretization of the B2 simulation domain used for the
local ATTEMPT simulations (compare the blue rings in ﬁg. 1). The eﬀect of ‘bad curvature’ of
the torus, which increases transport at its outer side, the low (B-)ﬁeld side, is clearly visible and
leads to an increase of D of up to 50 % as compared to the values at the torus’ inner side, the
high (B-)ﬁeld side. In radial direction, the D proﬁles reﬂect the inﬂuence of diﬀerent driving
parameters for the local drift-ﬂuid dynamics (see ﬁg. 3, right). One ﬁnds that in positive
x-direction, the normalized gradient L⊥ ∂x n0 /n0 (with the background gradient length L⊥ = 5
cm being constant in all simulations) increases, augmenting the outward particle transport. T0e
diminishes in the same direction, which leads to a decreasing plasma beta βp , βp being the
ratio of the (kinetic) plasma pressure and the pressure exerted by the magnetic ﬁeld in radial
direction due to the Lorentz force. Thus a decreasing βp leads to better plasma conﬁnement.
Around x = 44 cm, this eﬀect seems to outbalance the drive due to increasing L⊥ ∂x n0 /n0 .
The radial particle transport for θ = 0◦ is illustrated and compared with the results from
[18] in ﬁg. 4, middle and right. In the B2-EIRENE runs, D = 0.69 m2 s−1 (D = 0.9 m2 s−1 )
and vc = −6.9 m s−1 (vc = 0 m s−1 ) for case 3 (4) delivered the best match regarding the
experimentally determined radial density proﬁles. For comparison with the D proﬁle of the
B2-ATTEMPT predictions for case 3, the ratio −Γ/∂x n0 is calculated from the B2-EIRENE
1135

Multiscale modeling approach for the tokamak plasma edge

D [m2 s−1]

case 3
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1

F. Hasenbeck et al.

case 3

case 4
B2-EIR.

B2-ATT.

B2-ATT.
B2-EIR.

270

◦

180

θ

◦

90◦

0◦

45
44
43
42
41 x [cm]
40

limiter position

limiter position

neoclassical estimate

neoclassical estimate

Figure 4: Left: ﬁnal proﬁle of D(xi , θj ) of B2-ATTEMPT for case 3. Middle and right: proﬁles of
D and −Γ/∂x n0 at θ = 0◦ . The gray dashed lines mark the limiter position.

results, where Γ = vc n0 − D∂x n0 includes both the diﬀusive and convective part of the ﬂux.
For both cases, values of D from the B2-ATTEMPT simulations are of the same magnitude
as D and −Γ/∂x n0 from the B2-EIRENE simulations. For an estimate of a maximum D from
neoclassical theory [1] one has Dneo ≈ q02 ρ2s /τi ≈ 0.0225 m2 s−1 , where the ion Larmor radius
is estimated by ρs ≈ 0.5 mm and the ion collision time by τi ≈ 0.1 ms. Thus, the maximum
estimate of D from neoclassical theory is one order of magnitude smaller than the values of D
from the B2-ATTEMPT simulations.
The stationary B2-ATTEMPT results can be used to estimate the potential savings in computational resources if a time-dependent problem is addressed, as compared to respective global
drift-ﬂuid simulation. The average number of internal ATTEMPT iterations per ATTEMPT
run for case 3 (4) was 6.88 (4.89), which relates to an average simulated time of ATTEMPT
of δtrun ≈ 0.289 ms (≈ 0.194 ms). Estimating Δtrun ≈ τD (α0 ) by a diﬀusive approach with
τD (α0 ) ∼ Δx2 /D where Δx = 5 cm is the characteristic radial length and D = 0.5 m2 s−1 , one
ﬁnds Δtrun ∼ 5 ms. This results in a potential speed-up factor rt ∼ 20. For larger tokamaks
such as JET or ITER with Δx ∼ 10 cm while D stays approximately constant this means even
a larger potential speed-up on the order of rt ∼ 100.

5

Summary and Outlook

In this paper, a multiscale model and its realization within a coupled code system to improve
the description of radial particle transport in large-scale edge codes have been presented. With
the hypothesis of a scale separation regarding the drift-ﬂuid dynamics and the proﬁle evolution
on the tokamak scale, a set of coupled mesoscale and macroscale balances is obtained. It is
realized within the coupled code system B2-ATTEMPT whose coupling procedure accounts for
an eﬃcient determination of averaged mesoscale terms, using the Reverse Arrangements Test
for trend. Comparison of B2-ATTEMPT results show that the system provides the same level of
radial particle transport which was observed in prior B2-EIRENE simulations with transport
coeﬃcients adjusted to match experimental measurements. The self-consistently determined
diﬀusion coeﬃcients are on the order of D ≈ 0.5 m2 s−1 .
Various topics and challenges related to the results presented here remain open. This includes the assessment if the multiscale model can be extended to the scrape-oﬀ layer (SOL)
where the character of the mesoscale dynamics changes, i.e. if the assumption of a scale sepa1136

Multiscale modeling approach for the tokamak plasma edge

F. Hasenbeck et al.

ration can be regarded as valid for this region. If this is not possible, as suggested in [21, 22],
alternative solutions to improve the radial particle transport description in this region in largescale edge codes have to be found. On a more basic level, the question in how far the coupled
code system always converges and if the solution then is unique is yet to be answered.

References
[1] U. Schumacher. Fusionsforschung. Wissenschaftliche Buchgesellschaft Darmstadt, 1993.
[2] B. Braams. Radiative divertor modelling for ITER and TPX. Contributions to Plasma Physics,
36:276–281, 1996.
[3] D. Reiser. Impact of large island perturbations on turbulent blob transport in tokamaks. Physics
of Plasmas, 14(8):082314, 2007.
[4] J. Candy, C. Holland, R. Waltz, M. Fahey, and E. Belli. Tokamak proﬁle prediction using direct
gyrokinetic and neoclassical simulation. Physics of Plasmas, 16(6):060704, 2009.
[5] M. Barnes, I. Abel, W. Dorland, T. Goerler, G. Hammett, and F. Jenko. Direct multiscale coupling
of a transport code to gyrokinetic turbulence codes. Physics of Plasmas, 17(5):056109, 2010.
[6] T. Rognlien, M. Umansky, X. Xu, R. Cohen, and L. LoDestro. Simulation of plasma ﬂuxes to
material surfaces with self-consistent edge turbulence and transport for tokamaks. Journal of
Nuclear Materials, 337-339:327–331, March 2005.
[7] Y. Nishimura, D. Coster, and B. Scott. Characterization of electrostatic turbulent ﬂuxes in tokamak edge plasmas. Physics of Plasmas, 11:115, 2004.
[8] S. Pope. Turbulent ﬂows. Cambridge University Press, 2000.
[9] F. Hasenbeck. Development and application of a multiscale model for the magnetic fusion edge
plasma region. PhD thesis, RWTH Aachen University, to be published.
[10] S. Braginskii. Transport processes in a plasma. Reviews of Plasma Physics, 1:205, 1965.
[11] P. Brockwell and R. Davis. Introduction to time series and forecasting. Springer-Verlag, 2002.
[12] B. Scott. Low frequency ﬂuid drift turbulence in magnetized plasmas. IPP Report IPP 5/92, 2001.
[13] W. E. Principles of Multiscale Modeling. Cambridge University Press, 2011.
[14] S. Siegel and N. Castellan, Jr. Nonparametric statistics for the behavioral sciences. McGraw-Hill,
1988.
[15] R. Gilbert. Statistical Methods for environmental pollution monitoring. Van Nostrand Reinhold
Company, New York, 1987.
[16] H. Mann. Nonparametric tests against trend. Econometrica, 13(3):245–259, 1945.
[17] G. Wolf. TEXTOR: Research programme on plasma wall interaction. Journal of Nuclear Materials,
122 & 123:1124–1135, 1984.
[18] D. Gray, M. Baelmans, J. Boedo, D. Reiter, and R. Conn. Self-consistent plasma-neutral modeling
in tokamak plasmas with a large-area toroidal belt limiter. Physics of Plasmas, 6(7):2816, 1999.
[19] M. Baelmans. Code improvements and applications of a two-dimensional edge plasma model for
toroidal fusion devices. PhD thesis, Katholieke Universiteit Leuven, 1993.
[20] Y. Nishimura, K. Borrass, D. Coster, and B. Scott. Eﬀects of resistive drift wave turbulence on
tokamak edge transport. Contributions to Plasma Physics, 44:194–199, April 2004.
[21] Y. Sarazin and P. Ghendrih. Intermittent particle transport in two-dimensional edge turbulence.
Physics of Plasmas, 5(12):4214–4228, 1998.
[22] V. Naulin. Turbulent transport and the plasma edge. Journal of Nuclear Materials, 363-365:24–31,
June 2007.

1137

