Procedia Computer Science
Volume 51, 2015, Pages 513–521
ICCS 2015 International Conference On Computational Science

Simulation of Alternative Fuel Markets using
Integrated System Dynamics Model of Energy System
1

Ehsan Shafiei 1* , Brynhildur Davidsdottir1, Jonathan Leaver2,
Hlynur Stefansson3 and Eyjolfur Ingi Asgeirsson3
School of Engineering and Natural Sciences, University of Iceland, Reykjavik, Iceland
2
Unitec Institute of Technology, Auckland, New Zealand
3
School of Science and Engineering, Reykjavik University, Reykjavik, Iceland
ehsan@hi.is, bdavids@hi.is, jleaver@unitec.ac.nz, hlynurst@ru.is, eyjo@ru.is

Abstract
An integrated system-dynamics model of energy systems is employed to explore the transition process
towards alternative fuel markets. The model takes into account the entire energy system including
interactions among supply sectors, energy prices, infrastructure and fuel demand. The paper presents
the model structure and describes the algorithm for the short-term and long-term simulation of energy
markets. The integrated model is applied to the renewable-based energy system of Iceland as a case
study to simulate the transition path towards alternative fuel market during the time horizon of 20152050. The transition pathways towards hydrogen and biofuels are investigated for the numerical
results. The market simulation algorithm effectively exhibits the continual transition towards
equilibrium as market prices dynamically adjust to changes in supply and demand.
The application of the model has potential to provide important policy insights as it can simulate the
impact of different policy instruments on both supply and demand sides.
Keywords: Market Simulation, Alternative Fuels, Energy System Model, System Dynamics, Transportation

1 Introduction
The transition towards alternative fuel system is a complex process and requires effective
interactions among multiple stakeholders. This process can be described by a set of nonlinear and
complex equations. Nonlinearities, multiple feedback loops and time delays produce unexpected
system behaviors over time. Thus, the formulation of effective policies to support the transition
process requires a comprehensive analytical tool, enabling us to evaluate the interactions among
* Corresponding author: Iceland University, Reykjavik, Iceland, Tel.: (+354) 86 722 85, Email: ehsan@hi.is

Selection and peer-review under responsibility of the Scientiﬁc Programme Committee of ICCS 2015
c The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V.

doi:10.1016/j.procs.2015.05.277

513

Ehsan Shaﬁei, Brynhildur Dav´ısd´
ottir, Jonathan Leaver, Hlynur Stefansson and Eyjolfur Ingi
´
Simulation of Alternative Fuel Markets using System Dynamics Model of Energy System Asgeirsson

energy markets, infrastructures and vehicle fleets. The analytical models should represent the dynamic
equilibrium throughout time and contain endogenous representation of supply and demand for various
fuels. System-dynamics approach satisfies these criteria as it can show a broader view of energy
systems and is capable to take into account complex interdependencies and feedback structures over
time. This approach looks at the process of market development as a whole and facilitates
understanding the interactions of different stakeholders in complex systems.
System-dynamics approach has been widely used for studying the evolution of vehicle fleets (e.g.
Janssen et al., 2006; Struben & Sterman, 2008; Leaver et al., 2009; Meyer & Winebrake, 2009; Leaver
& Gillingham, 2010; Park et al., 2011; Shepherd et al., 2012; Shafiei et al., 2013). Since the transition
path of energy supply and transport systems is of interest in this paper, we focus on the integrated
system-dynamics model for the transition analysis as well as the interaction among various fuel
suppliers and transport fleets. The integrated energy and transport modelling which assumes an
endogenous demand and competitive energy markets raises the complexity of numerical simulation.
Thus, the identification of the model components and the process of fuel market simulation will be the
center of attention in this paper.
In Section 2, the model structure and market simulation algorithm are described. Section 3
introduces the case study for a numerical simulation. Results are presented in Section 4 and, finally,
Section 5 concludes the paper.

2 Methodology
2.1 UniSyD_IS Model
UniSyD_IS is a detailed resource and technology specific model in which equilibrium interactions
act across electricity, hydrogen, biogas, bioethanol and biodiesel markets. The model is composed of
60 subsectors and it is capable of simulating the interactions of around 2000 key variables up to year
2050 and beyond. The model typically takes few minutes to run over a 40-year simulation period in
two-week time steps. Important outputs from the model include profiles for alternative fuels supply,
co-evolution of fuel stations, GHG emissions, vehicle fleet composition, transport energy use and
transition costs.
The model encompasses conventional and alternative fuel supply pathways and the corresponding
vehicle powertrains in the transport sector. For a detailed description of the model see (Leaver et al.,
2009; Leaver & Gillingham, 2010; Shafiei et al., 2014a; Shafiei et al., 2015). The block diagram in
Figure 1 highlights the model structure, showing how different components influence each other.
According to Figure 1, the model structure is divided into four main modules:
1) Energy supply: This module incorporates capacities and production costs of existing and future
plants and calculates the amount of energy that can be available at the various estimated
wholesale prices.
2) Energy prices: This module attempts to coordinate fuel supply and demand by adjusting the
market prices. The energy market maintains one market clearing price, as all generators of all
types compete in an open market.
3) Refueling infrastructure: The fuel station sector links the energy supply system to consumers
and determines the station service availability as an important factor that conditions the
consumer preferences toward alternative fuels.
4) Energy demand: Transport fuel use is determined using travel demand and vehicle stock. The
Multinomial Logit (MNL) model gives the probability that the consumers purchase vehicles

514

Ehsan Shaﬁei, Brynhildur Dav´ısd´
ottir, Jonathan Leaver, Hlynur Stefansson and Eyjolfur Ingi
´
Simulation of Alternative Fuel Markets using System Dynamics Model of Energy System Asgeirsson

based on their preferences toward the vehicles’ attributes including purchase price, fuel cost,
maintenance cost, battery replacement cost, GHG emissions, vehicle range and fuel
availability. The annual travel demand is adjusted according to changes in fuel cost per km.
Transport fuel demand is then determined using travel demand and vehicle stock. Total marine
fuel demand is exogenous, but the share of biodiesel in this sector is determined based on the
ratio of biodiesel to diesel oil price.

Figure 1: Structure of UniSyD_IS
The model spends the bulk of its time within the confines of the energy supply and pricing
modules that together pose the complexity of the energy market. The algorithm for the short-term and
long-term simulation of energy market with a focus on supply and price modules are described in the
following sections.

2.2 Short-term Energy Market Simulation
Generation scheduling and energy pricing are the main outputs of the short-term market
simulation. The model calculates the amount of energy that would be available at the various
estimated wholesale prices. The production level of each plant is determined by using the following
equation:

515

Ehsan Shaﬁei, Brynhildur Dav´ısd´
ottir, Jonathan Leaver, Hlynur Stefansson and Eyjolfur Ingi
´
Simulation of Alternative Fuel Markets using System Dynamics Model of Energy System Asgeirsson

Gn,t

­
§ Pf ,t
°
Min ® 1 , ¨
¨ Cn , t
°
©
¯

·
¸
¸
¹

w½

°
¾ u K n ,t
°
¿

(1)

where Gn,t is the production of plant n at time t, K n ,t the maximum production capacity, Pf ,t the
wholesale market price of fuel f, C n,t the production cost and w the loss willingness parameter.
According to the above equation, for the offer prices over the production cost, the plant will operate at
full capacity. For prices lower than the cost of production, the plant will produce exponentially less,
according to the loss willingness parameter, which represents the plant’s tendency to sell energy below
profitability.

Figure 2: Market simulation algorithm

516

Ehsan Shaﬁei, Brynhildur Dav´ısd´
ottir, Jonathan Leaver, Hlynur Stefansson and Eyjolfur Ingi
´
Simulation of Alternative Fuel Markets using System Dynamics Model of Energy System Asgeirsson

Figure 2 illustrates the market simulation algorithm to equilibrate the demand with the supply
curves of various plants by changing the offer price. The model tries to minimize the wholesale price
while meeting generation needs and maximizing generator profit. To solve these two problems
simultaneously at each time step, the model tries to make an educated guess at this optimal price. It
does so by testing the plants’ responses to various percentage increases and decreases in price from the
wholesale price value in the previous time step. The model then determines the minimum wholesale
price that can provide the sufficient energy.
If the price increase is insufficient to suppress demand to match the production capacity, then one
or more steps increase in price is chosen (i.e the parameter b in Figure 2) due to a production shortfall.
It means that the production shortfalls trigger large price increases. In this way, with each time step,
the model moves the wholesale price closer towards equilibrium condition.

2.3 Long-term Evolution of Energy Market
The production costs of new constructed plants are determined by the cumulative amount of
capacity constructed, plant sizes and exogenous technology learning rates. Renewable production cost
is expected to increase with cumulative installed capacities due to the effects of resource supply cost
and, hence, it leads to an increase in the fuel price.
In the long-term, the forecasted prices play a crucial role in building new capacity. Higher
wholesale prices encourage new capacity, something that is needed to keep pace with increasing
demand. Higher prices increase the potential fuel supply, which in turn leads to a negative adjustment
of fuel price.
Whenever there is more demand than production capacity (i.e. shortfalls), the model must decide
what type of capacity to build. The plant siting substructure of the model determines the feasible
technology and plant size based on fuel shortfalls and resource availability. The least cost choice will
qualify if the technology’s production cost is less than the forecasted future prices. After a
predetermined amount of construction time, that amount of plant capacity will become available in the
market.

3 Description of Case Study
The model is applied to simulate Iceland’s alternative fuel markets. The time horizon of the study
is 2015-2050. The technologies represented in the supply side are hydropower, geothermal, wind
turbine, biogas from wastes, biodiesel from vegetable oils and animal fats, bioethanol from lignocellulosic biomass and hydrogen from electrolysis (Shafiei et al., 2014a, 2014b). Wind turbine,
electrolyzer and bioethanol production technologies have exogenous learning for the costs, while
constant costs along the horizon are assumed for the other technologies. The future costs of hydro,
geothermal and biofuel resources are modeled using supply curves in which unit generation cost is
expected to increase with cumulative installed capacities. Decreasing power functions describe the
economy of scale effects for the cost of different biofuel plants. The forecourt electrolysis is modeled
with the capacity of 1500 kg of hydrogen per day. A linear reduction is assumed for the cost and
electricity consumption of hydrogen production and delivery adopted from (NREL, 2012).
The transport fleet is divided into light (LDV) and heavy (HDV) duty vehicle fleets with the upper
weight limit for LDVs being 3.5 tonnes. The vehicle technologies within each fleet are classified into
four main groups: petroleum, electric, biofuel and hydrogen vehicles. We assume significant
improvements in the purchase cost and fuel economy of new vehicles as described in (Shafiei et al.,
2014a).

517

Ehsan Shaﬁei, Brynhildur Dav´ısd´
ottir, Jonathan Leaver, Hlynur Stefansson and Eyjolfur Ingi
´
Simulation of Alternative Fuel Markets using System Dynamics Model of Energy System Asgeirsson

We have chosen hydrogen, biogas, biodiesel and bioethanol fuels to present the simulation results.
A constant oil price of $100 per barrel is applied in the analysis and it is assumed that the carbon tax is
increased from $25 in the base year to $200 per tonne in 2050.
According to Table 1, there scenarios are defined based on initial supply infrastructure. Since a
biogas plant is available in Iceland, further initial supply capacity is not required for this fuel. Each
hydrogen station includes one forecourt electrolyzer unit.

Scenarios

Number of fuel stations per year
during 2018-2022 for each of
LDV and HDV fleets

Initial production capacity in 2018
for biodiesel and bioethanol plants

Baseline

one station for each of biofuels
one station for hydrogen

one small plant with the capacity
of 2.5 million liter/year

-

-

two stations for each of biofuels
two stations for hydrogen

one medium plant with the capacity
of 5 million liter/year

No Supply Push

Strong Supply Push

Table 1: Scenarios for the initial introduction of supply infrastructure

4 Simulation Results
The integrated supply-demand structure of UniSyD_IS, according to the algorithm presented in
Section 2, determines the trend of fuel prices as depicted in Figure 3. The trend for each fuel price
reflects the overall effects of technology costs, feedstock costs, resource supply curves, economy of
scale and, last but not least, the market equilibrium. The fuel prices along with vehicles’ fuel economy
and annual distance traveled determine the annual fuel cost, which in turn forms an important
feedback that conditions the adoption of hydrogen and biofuel vehicles. The algorithm used in
UniSyD_IS determines the fuel prices in the market to best equilibrate supply and demand sides as
illustrated in Figure 4 for the Baseline scenario.
In the Baseline scenario, the insufficient capacity to respond the increasing demand for bioethanol
during 2020-2025 leads to a sharp increase in the bioethanol price. Thereafter, the higher market price
and the forecasted rising demand encourage the new capacity installation for bioethanol, which in turn
balances and then reduces the market price. In the same way, the inadequacies of supply capacities
during 2020-2025 cause the slight growth of biogas and biodiesel prices. The growth rate of biodiesel
demand due to the marine fuel use together with the effect of resource supply cost gradually increase
the biodiesel price over the study period. The price of biogas, however, will remain stable in the
Baseline case until 2040, where the capacity growth of biogas is saturated due to the restricted
resource potential. Thereafter, the biogas price rises quickly according to the imbalance of demand and
supply. The delay produced by the construction time of all biofuel plants leads to imbalance market in
several time points as shown in Figure 4.

518

Ehsan Shaﬁei, Brynhildur Dav´ısd´
ottir, Jonathan Leaver, Hlynur Stefansson and Eyjolfur Ingi
´
Simulation of Alternative Fuel Markets using System Dynamics Model of Energy System Asgeirsson

The higher stimulated demand in the Strong Supply Push scenario leads to higher market prices for
biogas and biodiesel in the long-term, compared to the Baseline case. However, the larger production
buffer for bioethanol in the Strong Supply Push scenario results in a lower bioethanol price. The price
for bioethanol in the No Supply Push scenario reflects its production cost as no market exists.
The decreasing pattern of hydrogen price until 2025, as shown in Figure 3, is caused by the
assumptions on technology improvement in terms of electrolyzer cost and energy use. The slight
growth of hydrogen price after 2025 conforms to the price growth of electricity that is used in the
hydrogen production process. The results in Figure 4 exhibit the same trend for both hydrogen
production and demand. The reason is that the forecourt electrolyzer for hydrogen production has been
considered as a must-run technology that coordinates supply and demand effectively. It leads to the
same hydrogen price in different scenarios as shown in Figure 3.

Figure 3: Simulated market price for alternative fuels in different scenarios

519

Ehsan Shaﬁei, Brynhildur Dav´ısd´
ottir, Jonathan Leaver, Hlynur Stefansson and Eyjolfur Ingi
´
Simulation of Alternative Fuel Markets using System Dynamics Model of Energy System Asgeirsson

Figure 4: Forecasted trends of demand, production, and installed capacity for alternative fuels in
the Baseline Scenario

5 Conclusions
An integrated system-dynamics model for the transition towards alternative fuel markets was
presented. The model considers the competition between different “well-to-tank” pathways and, thus,
between various fuel supply to consumers. Since the fuel demand is determined endogenously, the
supply capacity is driven not by the given demands but by the demand curves. Thus, we have a system
of equations for establishing the supply-demand equilibrium path. In this framework, the minimized
cost of fuel supply development leads to the maximized total surplus of consumers and producers in
the equilibrium condition.
We explored the transition pathways towards hydrogen and biofuel markets in Iceland with
implications for fuel demand, fuel prices and required supply infrastructure. The algorithm used for
the short-term and long-term simulation of fuel markets effectively reflected the continual transition
towards equilibrium condition by adjusting to changes in supply and demand.
The model can show how the decisions made by energy suppliers and infrastructure owners
influence the consumer behavior and, on the other hand, the impact of demand for alternative fuels on

520

Ehsan Shaﬁei, Brynhildur Dav´ısd´
ottir, Jonathan Leaver, Hlynur Stefansson and Eyjolfur Ingi
´
Simulation of Alternative Fuel Markets using System Dynamics Model of Energy System Asgeirsson

development of energy infrastructure can be evaluated. The presented model structure enables the
simulation of alternative fuel markets based on a market-oriented energy system in which fuel supply
viability is determined by market clearing price and profitability. If the wholesale prices for alternative
fuels are regulated by government, or energy supply infrastructure is provided by a central planner, the
fuel supply decisions should be treated differently.

Acknowledgments:
The preparation of this paper has been supported by the Norden Top-level Research Initiative subprogramme “Effect Studies and Adaptation to Climate Change” through the Nordic Centre of
Excellence for Strategic Adaptation Research (NORD-STAR).

References
Janssen, A., Lienin, S., Gassmann, F. & Wokaun, A., (2006). Model aided policy development for
the market penetration of natural gas vehicles in Switzerland. Transportation Research Part A, 40(4),
pp. 316–333.
Leaver, J. & Gillingham, K., (2010). Economic impact of the integration of alternative vehicle
technologies into the New Zealand vehicle fleet. Journal of Cleaner Production, 18(9), pp. 908–916.
Leaver, J., Gillingham, K. & Leaver, L., (2009). Assessment of primary impacts of a hydrogen
economy in New Zealand using UniSyD. International Journal of Hydrogen Energy, 34(7), pp. 2855–
2865.
Meyer, P. & Winebrake, J., (2009). Modeling technology diffusion of complementary goods: The
case of hydrogen vehicles and refueling infrastructure. Technovation, Volume 29, pp. 77–91.
NREL, 2012. DOE H2A Production Analysis. Retrieved from http://www.hydrogen.energy.gov/h2a_production.html [Accessed 2013].
Park, S., Kim, J. & Lee, D., (2011). Development of a market penetration forecasting model for
hydrogen fuel cell vehicles considering infrastructure and cost reduction effects. Energy Policy, 39(6),
pp. 3307–3315.
Shafiei, E., Stefansson, H., Asgeirsson, E. I., Davidsdottir, B. & Raberto, M., (2013). Integrated
agent-based and system-dynamics modeling for simulation of sustainable mobility. Journal of
Transport Reviews, 33(1), pp. 44-70.
Shafiei, E., Davidsdottir, B., Leaver, J., Stefansson, H. & Asgeirsson, E.I., (2014a). Potential
impact of transition to a low-carbon transport system in Iceland. Energy Policy, Volume 69, pp. 127–
142.
Shafiei, E., Stefansson, H., Ásgeirsson, E. I. & Davidsdottir, B., (2014b). Market Penetration of
Alternative Fuel Vehicles in Iceland: A Hybrid Modeling Approach. Operations Research
Proceedings 2012, Springer International Publishing Switzerland, pp. 437-442.
Shafiei, E., Davidsdottir, B., Leaver, J., Stefansson, H. & Asgeirsson, E.I., (2015). Comparative
analysis of hydrogen, biofuels and electricity transitional pathways to sustainable transport in a
renewable-based energy system. Energy (2015), http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.energy.2015.02.071.
Shepherd, S., Bonsall, P. & Harrison, G., (2012). Factors affecting future demand for electric
vehicles: A model based study. Transport Policy, Volume 20, pp. 62–74.
Struben, J. & Sterman, J., (2008). Transition challenges for alternative fuel vehicle and
transportation systems. Environment and Planning B, Volume 35, pp. 1070–1097.

521

