Procedia Computer Science
Volume 51, 2015, Pages 1178–1187
ICCS 2015 International Conference On Computational Science

The Formation of a Magnetosphere with Implicit
Particle-in-Cell Simulations
Ivy Bo Peng1 , Stefano Markidis1 , Andris Vaivads2 , Juris Vencels1 , Jorge
Amaya3 , Andrey Divin4 , Erwin Laure1 , and Giovanni Lapenta3
1

3

HPCViz Department, KTH Royal Institute of Technology
2
Swedish Institute of Space Physics, Uppsala, Sweden
Department of Mathematics, Centre for Mathematical Plasma Astrophysics (CmPA), KU Leuven
4
St. Petersburg State University, St. Petersburg, Russia

Abstract
We demonstrate the improvements to an implicit Particle-in-Cell code, iPic3D, on the example
of dipolar magnetic ﬁeld immersed in the ﬂow of the plasma and show the formation of a magnetosphere. We address the problem of modelling multi-scale phenomena during the formation
of a magnetosphere by implementing an adaptive sub-cycling technique to resolve the motion
of particles located close to the magnetic dipole centre, where the magnetic ﬁeld intensity is
maximum. In addition, we implemented new open boundary conditions to model the inﬂow
and outﬂow of plasma. We present the results of a global three-dimensional Particle-in-Cell
simulation and discuss the performance improvements from the adaptive sub-cycling technique.
Keywords: Particle-in-Cell, Particle Methods, Particle Movers, Magnetosphere, Multi-Scale Simulations

1

Introduction

A magnetosphere is a region of space ﬁlled with plasma around a planet with a dipolar magnetic ﬁeld. The magnetosphere magnetic ﬁeld shields the planet from the incoming solar wind
particles, protecting the life on the planet. The interaction between the solar wind and Earth’s
magnetosphere can aﬀect human health, disrupt communications and power grids and even
damage satellites. Thus it beneﬁts not only the science community but also the society and
economy to accurately model the dynamics and to predict adverse events.
The shape of a magnetosphere is determined by the microscopic interaction phenomena between the solar wind and the dipolar magnetic ﬁeld of the planet. To describe these interactions
correctly, we need to model phenomena occurring over a large range of time and spatial scales.
In fact, magnetosphere comprises regions with diﬀerent particle densities, temperatures and
magnetic ﬁeld intensities, where the characteristic time scales (plasma period, electron and ion
gyro period) and spatial scales (Debye length, ion and electron skin depth) vary considerably.
1178

Selection and peer-review under responsibility of the Scientiﬁc Programme Committee of ICCS 2015
c The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V.

doi:10.1016/j.procs.2015.05.288

The Formation of a Magnetosphere with Implicit Particle-in-Cell Simulations

Ivy B. Peng et al.

In this work, we address the problem of modelling multi-scale phenomena during the formation of a magnetosphere by improving an implicit Particle-in-Cell (PIC) code, called iPic3D [7].
The implicit PIC method implicitly discretizes in time the Maxwell’s equations and particle
equations of motion. The implicit PIC method allows for a simulation time step and a grid
spacing much larger than those allowed in explicit PIC method. This is particularly important in the global simulation of magnetosphere, where large systems need to be simulated and
the severe numerical stability constraints of explicit PIC methods need to be avoided. Several
simulations of magnetosphere using explicit PIC codes are reported in Refs. [3, 8, 4, 1]. We
developed a new relativistic particle mover with adaptive sub-cycling to resolve in time the fast
gyration of particles located in strong dipolar magnetic ﬁeld. We also implemented new open
boundary conditions to mimic the inﬂow and outﬂow of the plasma into/out from the simulation box. We present the simulation results of the formation of a magnetosphere. We report the
performance improvement from the adaptive sub-cycling technique used in the new relativistic
particle mover. Compared to the relativistic particle mover using a ﬁxed number of sub-cycles,
the adaptive sub-cycling technique showed approximately ﬁve times speedup with the same
conﬁguration set up of the simulation reported in this paper. When realistic ion-to-electron
mass ratio is used, the tests showed a typical 19 times speedup.
The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents the implicit PIC method, the adaptive
sub-cycling method and the open boundary conditions. Section 3 describes the results of the
implicit PIC simulation of the formation of a magnetosphere and the performance of the particle
mover using adaptive sub-cycling. The conclusions and future plans are presented in Section 4.

2

Implicit Particle-in-Cell Simulations

One of the most successful approaches to simulate space plasmas is the Particle-in-Cell method.
This numerical technique uses a statistical sample of computational particles to represent the
initial plasma distribution function, which is related to the probability of ﬁnding a particle
with a certain velocity at a given position. The distribution function evolves by updating the
particle position xp and velocity vp at each computational cycle. In implicit PIC simulations,
the particle velocity and position at time n + 1 are calculated as follows [9]:
⎧
v
¯p (γ n+1 + γ n ) − γ n vpn
⎨ n+1
vp =
,
(1)
γ n+1
⎩ n+1
xp = xnp + v
¯p Δt
¯p is calculated as follows:
where the Lorentz factor γ = 1/ 1 − vp2 /c2 and the average velocity v
˜ p = γ n vpn +
u
˜p +
u
v
¯p =

qs Δt n+1
E
,
ms 2 p

˜p
qs Δt u
qs Δt
× Bn+1
+
p
ms 2c γ˜
ms 2c
γ˜ 1 +

qs Δt n+1
B
ms 2c˜
γ p

˜ p n+1
u
Bn+1
Bp
p
γ˜
2

(2)

,

(3)

where ms and qs are the mass and charge of the species s respectively and Ep and Bp are the
electric and magnetic ﬁeld acting on the particle at the position xp . PIC method calculates
these quantities by the interpolation technique. The simulation domain is discretized into
a computational grid. The electric ﬁeld Eg and magnetic ﬁeld Bg on each grid node g are
calculated by discretizing the Maxwell’s equations on the grid and solving the resulted system.
1179

The Formation of a Magnetosphere with Implicit Particle-in-Cell Simulations

Ivy B. Peng et al.

The quantities Bp and Ep are then calculated from Bg , Eg by interpolation functions W (xg −xp )
(typically spline functions [2]):
Ep =

g

Eg W (xg − xp )

,

Bp =

g

Bg W (xg − xp )

(4)

In our implicit PIC code, we calculate Eg by solving the following equation:
(I + μn ) · En+1 − (cΔt)2 (∇2 En+1 + ∇∇ · (μn · En+1 )) = En + cΔt(∇ × Bn −

4π ˆn
J ) − (cΔt)2 ∇4π ρˆn ,
c

(5)

where I is the identity matrix and μ is called implicit susceptibility for similarity of Eq.(5) to
the ﬁeld equation in dielectric media, and it is deﬁned as:
μn · =

ns

μns ·

,

n
μns · ≡ 12 (ωps
Δt)2 Π(Ωns Δt
2 )·

Πns (Ωns Δt
2 )· is a tensor transformation:
⎡
2
n
n Δt 2
Ωnsz Δt
1 + (Ωnsx Δt
2 )
2 + Ω s x Ω sy ( 2 )
Δt
Δt
Δt
n
n
n
2
n
⎣ −Ωs
+ Ω sx Ω s y ( 2 )
1 + (Ωsy 2 )2
z 2
n
n Δt 2
n
n Δt 2
Ωnsy Δt
−Ωnsx Δt
2 + Ω sx Ω sz ( 2 )
2 + Ω s y Ω sz ( 2 )

(6)

n
n Δt 2 ⎤
−Ωnsy Δt
2 + Ω sx Ω sz ( 2 )
n
n Δt 2 ⎦
Ωnsx Δt
.
2 + Ω sy Ω sz ( 2 )
n Δt 2
1 + (Ωsz 2 )

n

qs B
and ωps = (4πρs qs )/ms are the gyrofrequency vector and plasma frequency for
Ωs ≡ m
s c
ˆ quantities are expressed by:
species s (i.e. electrons, ions, heavy ions, ...). The ρˆ and J
ˆ , J
ˆ = Π · (Jn − Δt ∇ · P n )
ρˆ = ρn − Δt∇ · J
(7)
2

The solution of Eq(7) requires the knowledge of charge density ρ, current density J and pressure
P on each grid cell. Again, these values can be computed by the interpolation technique: particle
quantities are interpolated to calculate ﬁeld values on the grid:
ρs,g =

Ns
p=1 qs W (xg

− xp ),

Js,g (r) =

Ns
p=1 qs vp W (xg

− xp ),

Ps,g (r) =

Ns
p=1 qs vp vp W (xg

− xp )

(8)

After the electric ﬁeld is calculated, the magnetic ﬁeld can be computed by the Faraday’s Law:
Bn+1 = Bn − cΔt∇ × En+1 .

(9)

The magnetic ﬁeld in the simulations of magnetospheres is the sum of a varying magnetic ﬁeld
Bint calculated from the above equations and a ﬁxed dipolar magnetic ﬁeld Bext . The dipolar
magnetic ﬁeld is aligned with z axis and centered at (x0 , y0 , z0 ). For a point at location (x, y, z),
the imposed dipolar magnetic ﬁeld is calculated by:
Bext = − Br0 R
5

3

3(x − x0 )(z − z0 )ˆ
x + 3(y − y0 )(z − z0 )ˆ
y + (2(z − z0 )2 − (x − x0 )2 − (y − y0 )2 )ˆ
z

(10)

where R is the planet radius, B0 is the magnetic strength measured at the equator and r =
(x − x0 )2 + (y − y0 )2 + (z − z0 )2 . Bext inside the planet is set to zero.

2.1

Adaptive Sub-Cycling

We introduce the sub-cycling method in the particle mover to correctly describe the motion of
particles located near the magnetic dipole centre, where the magnetic ﬁeld intensity is maximum. Particles located close to the magnetic dipole gyrate at a much higher frequency than
the particles of the solar wind. To address this diﬀerence in gyration frequency, we devised a
method to automatically select the number of sub-cycles depending on the magnetic ﬁeld acting
that particle.
The sub-cycling technique divides the simulation time step Δt into smaller time step
Δtsubcycle . The equation of motion is then calculated for each Δtsubcycle while the electric
and magnetic ﬁeld remain ﬁxed. As shown in Figure 1a, the smaller time step is chosen to be
one eighth of the gyro period T of the particle, which is calculated from the local magnetic ﬁeld
Blocal imposing on that particle. We determine Blocal by interpolating the magnetic ﬁeld at the
1180

The Formation of a Magnetosphere with Implicit Particle-in-Cell Simulations

Ivy B. Peng et al.

computational grid nodes where the particle is enclosed in. The gyro period is then calculated
2π
, where the electron gyrofrequency Ωe = eBlocal /me c. The number of sub-cycles
as T = Ω
e
#subcycles = 4ΔtΩe /π.
By using adaptive sub-cycling, it is possible to resolve in time the fast motions that cannot
be resolved by the simulation time step and to save computation cost by using large time step
for the particles that gyrate slow. The relative speedup by the adaptive sub-cycling is reported
in Section 3.2.

2.2

Boundary Conditions

For simulations of the formation of a magnetosphere, we have implemented new boundary
conditions to mimic the injection of solar wind and the exit of plasma from the simulations
box. In particular:
1. Inﬂow Open Boundary Condition This boundary condition was used to mimic the
injection of solar wind into the simulation box. For the example in Figure 1b, inﬂow open
boundary is applied to x=0 side, indicated as the thickened line on the left side. On this
boundary, the magnetic ﬁeld is ﬁxed to BIM F from the solar wind and the electric ﬁeld
is ﬁxed to −vinf low × BIM F . At each computational cycle, particles are removed from
the simulation if their updated location is inside the repopulation area, which is three
grid spacing from the inﬂow open boundary (indicated as shaded cells in Figure 1b). For
each cell inside the repopulation area, new particles are populated with a Maxwellian
distribution at the solar wind velocity vinf low and with a random space distribution.
More details about the repopulation technique are presented in Ref. [6].
2. Outﬂow Open Boundary Condition This boundary condition was used to mimic the
outﬂow of plasma from the simulation box. In our simulation, this boundary condition
is applied to all boundaries except the boundary where the solar wind is injected. In
Figure 1b, outﬂow open boundary is applied to x = Lx side, indicated as the thickened
line on the right side. First, the particles exiting the simulation box from the boundaries
with outﬂow open boundary condition, are removed from the simulation. A copy of the
remaining particles that are located in the three right-most cells are created. Particles
in this new copy are then shifted outward to the buﬀer zone, which is three grid spacing
outside the simulation box (indicated as the dash line boxes in Figure 1b). For each
particle in the buﬀer zone, we check if it will enter the simulation box after one time step
by comparing its updated location xp = xp + vp Δt with the simulation box boundary,
where xp is the shifted location in the buﬀer zone and vp is the current velocity of the
particle. If the updated location xp is inside the simulation box, a new particle is created
with the velocity vp and with the location xp and inserted to the simulation box [5].

3

Simulation Results

We have implemented the new open boundary conditions and the new adaptive particle mover
in the implicit iPic3D code [7]. The iPic3D code is written in C++ and is designed to run on
massively parallel supercomputers. Simulations with iPic3D were carried out on the Lindgren
supercomputer at KTH, a Cray XE6 system. The simulation ran for 24 hours using 2,048
Message Passing Interface (MPI) processes.
1181

The Formation of a Magnetosphere with Implicit Particle-in-Cell Simulations

(a) sub-cycling method is
used to move the particle at a reduced time
step equal to one eighth
of the local gyro-period
2π
Δtsubcycle = T /8 = 8Ω
.
e

Ivy B. Peng et al.

(b) Inﬂow Open Boundary Condition is applied to the x=0 side
to mimic the injection of solar wind. Outﬂow Open Boundary
Condition is applied to the x = Lx side to mimic the exit of
plasma from the simulation box.

Figure 1: Panel a shows the sub-cycling method. Panel b illustrates open boundary conditions.

We used a simulation box of size Lx × Ly × Lz × = 20 di × 20 di × 20 di , where the ion
inertial length di = c/ωpi , c is the speed of light in vacuum and the ion plasma frequency
ωpi = 4πρs qi /mi . The radius of the planet object is equal to 0.5 di . The centre of the dipole
is located at (x0 = 8 di , y0 = 10 di , z0 = 10 di ). The dipolar magnetic ﬁeld is in z direction
and the solar wind is injected on the x = 0 plane with inﬂow velocity in x direction. We used
the solar wind velocity vinf low = 0.02 c = 6000 km/s in our simulation, while the typical solar
wind velocity is 400 − 700 km/s. The Alfv´en Mach number of the solar wind is equal to 20.
The simulation domain used a computational grid of 384 × 384 × 384 cells. The grid spacing
Δx = 0.05 di .The simulation time is normalized at the ion plasma frequency ωpi . We used a
−1
−1
in each cycle and a total simulation period of 2250 ωpi
(cycle 15000).
time step Δt = 0.15 ωpi
9
Initially, a total number of 3.01 × 10 particles were used and uniformly distributed in the
simulation box. During the simulation, particles are continuously ejected out and injected into
the simulation box as described in the open boundary conditions. We used a reduced mass
ratio between the ion and electron mi /me = 64, instead of the realistic value 1836, to reduce
the computational cost. We start from a uniform distribution in space in the simulation box for
electrons and ions. The electrons and ions have drifting Maxwellian distribution in velocities
with drift velocity equal to the solar wind velocity at x direction and with electron thermal
velocity vthe = 0.0779 c and ion thermal velocity vthi = 0.011 c. The dipolar magnetic ﬁeld
has B0 = 2.0 mi ωpi /qi . A Northward magnetic ﬁeld BIM F = 10−4 mi ωpi /qi is used in the
simulation. A convective electric ﬁeld E = −vinf low × BIM F is initialized in the simulation box
and on x = 0 boundary plane.

3.1

The Formation of a Magnetosphere

We carried out a three-dimensional implicit PIC simulation to model the formation of a magnetosphere. Figures 2 and 3 show the macroscopic evolution of the system on the Sun-dipole
plane (XZ plane) and the equatorial plane (XY plane). Starting from non-equilibrium state,
the simulation went through the expansion stage, reaching a quasi-stable state.
Figure 2 shows the contourplots of electron density on the Sun-dipole plane (XZ plane) at
representative stages of the simulation. The ﬁrst row of the contour-plots shows the initial stage
1182

The Formation of a Magnetosphere with Implicit Particle-in-Cell Simulations

Ivy B. Peng et al.

−1
of the process. At time step 75 ωpi
(cycle 500), high electron density, indicated in dark red,
−1
(cycle
is located in front of the dipole and near the back dipole centre. At time step 150 ωpi
−1
1000) and 225 ωpi (cycle 1500), expansion of the density structure can be clearly observed from
the enlarged red and blue area on the plot. During the expansion process, the plasma sheet is
compressed, indicated by the shortened tail of the red area in −x direction at z = Lz /2.
The second row of the contour-plots shows the development stage of the formation of magnetosphere. Pile-up region in the front part of the dipole structure kept on accumulating both
inside and outside the dipole, which is visible from the enlarged dark red area and reduced blue
−1
−1
−1
layer from time step 300 ωpi
(cycle 2000), 375 ωpi
(cycle 2500) to 450 ωpi
(cycle 3000). Dur−1
−1
to 450 ωpi
, one
ing this process, the tail continues stretching along x direction. From 375 ωpi
plasmoid (an high density structure), indicated as the white area in the tail region at z = Lz /2,
is ejected and moves out of the simulation box.
The last row of the contour plots show the stabilization stage of the formation of magneto−1
−1
sphere. From time step 1650 ωpi
(cycle 11000) to time step 2250 ωpi
(cycle 15000), minimal
changes were observed from XZ plane, indicating the magnetosphere reached a quasi-steady
state. The front part of the dipole, which was destroyed in the development stage, is restruc−1
(cycle 7000) till the end of the simulation. Tail lobes, the
tured and remains from 1050 ωpi
lowest density area shown as two dark blue stripe on the plot, keep elongating along x direction.
In z direction, no further expansion is observed. Magnetopause, indicated as the white layer
separating the red and blue area, clearly outlines the structure of the magnetosphere in this
stage.
Figure 3 shows the contour-plots of electron density on the equatorial plane (XY plane) at
diﬀerent simulation time steps. Starting from a spiral structure of high density distribution
−1
at 75 ωpi
(cycle 500), this structure is distorted while at the same time the low density area,
indicated in light blue, keeps on expanding. From the equatorial plane, we can clearly see
that the maximum electron density located inside the dipole, is close to the back dipole center.
This spiral distribution mainly attribute to the gyration of electron[1]. The stretching of the
tail is visible from the elongated blue region along x direction, which is consistent with the
development stage in Figure 2. At the ﬁnal stage, higher density in magnetotail, shown as
white area, is mainly distributed in the upper y direction while low electron density, indicated
in dark blue, develops in the lower y direction. An instability, similar to Kelvin-Helmholtz
−1
−1
instability, develops at cycle 1650 ωpi
(cycle 11000) and is clear at cycle 2250 ωpi
(cycle
15000).
Figure 4 shows a contour-plot of electron density at the ﬁnal simulation time step on the Sundipole plane (XZ plane) and the equatorial plane (XY plane), with magnetic ﬁeld line imposed.
In this plot, the solar wind moves from right to the left side. Magnetopause, indicated as the
white layer between red and blue area, clearly outlines the structure of the magnetosphere.
The maximum electron density forms in front of the magnetic dipole. On XZ plane, the tail
lobe, are indicated in dark blue area, which has the lowest electron density. The formation
of a magnetosphere reached quasi-steady state: charge density distribution on XZ plane is in
steady state and an instability, similar to Kelvin-Helmholtz instability, is clear on XY plane.
The magnetic ﬁeld line shows the dipole structure with turbulence developed in front of the
dipole.

3.2

Performance Results

The adaptive sub-cycling method used in the particle mover addresses the considerable scale
diﬀerence of the gyration frequency in particles. Particles close to the magnetic ﬁeld dipole
1183

The Formation of a Magnetosphere with Implicit Particle-in-Cell Simulations

Ivy B. Peng et al.

Figure 2: Evolution of the electron density on the Sun-dipole plane (XZ plane). The electron density
contour plot shows the formation of a low density regions in proximity of the dipole center and in the
tail. The structure expands in the initial stage, tail stretching along x direction and reaching a steady
state with minimal change till the end of the simulation.

centre gyrate much faster than the particles in the solar wind. A large number of sub-cycles are
used to move these particles while a small number of sub-cycles is used to move the remaining
particles. A particle mover using a ﬁxed number of sub-cycles need to apply the maximum
number of sub-cycles used in the adaptive sub-cycling to correctly describe the motion of all
particles. In this section, we present the performance gain from using the adaptive sub-cycling
in particle mover by comparing the key measures from three groups of test simulations. Test
−1
−1
simulations in each group share the same time step Δt, ranging from 0.1 ωpi
, 0.15 ωpi
to
−1
. Within each group, three test simulations using ion-to-electron mass ratio increasing
0.2 ωpi
from 64, 256 to 1836, were carried out for a total of 50 computational cycles.
For each test simulation, we ﬁrst run it using the adaptive sub-cycling in the particle mover
to determine the maximum number of sub-cycles #subcyclesmax used by particles across all
computational cycles. We then repeat each simulation using the ﬁxed number of sub-cycles
equal to #subcyclesmax in the particle mover. Table 1 reports the key measures from the test
1184

The Formation of a Magnetosphere with Implicit Particle-in-Cell Simulations

Ivy B. Peng et al.

Figure 3: Contourplot of electron density on the equatorial plane (XY plane) at diﬀerent simulation
time steps representing the formation of a magnetosphere. The distribution structure of the electron
density was distorted and restructured. An instability, similar to Kelvin-Helmholtz, is clear at ﬁnal
stage of the simulation.

simulations using adaptive sub-cycling method: the average number of sub-cycles, the maximum
number of sub-cycles, the percentage of particles undergoing sub-cycling and the speedup of
total simulation time. The speedup is calculated as the total time used by ﬁxed sub cycling
simulation divided by the total time used by adaptive sub-cycling simulation.
By comparing the average number of sub-cycles and the maximum number of sub-cycles,
it is clear that only a small percentage of particles, i.e. less than 0.26% of the total particles
need undergoing #subcyclesmax sub-cycling. We also checked the location of the particles that
require a large number of sub-cycles and they are close to the dipolar magnetic ﬁeld centre,
which is consistent with the equation used to determine the sub-cycles. The small percentage of
particles using large number of sub-cycles explains the speedup observed: the adaptive method
saved computation cost by using a small number of sub-cycles on the slow gyrating particles,
which is the majority of the total particles.
1185

The Formation of a Magnetosphere with Implicit Particle-in-Cell Simulations

Ivy B. Peng et al.

−1
Figure 4: Contourplot of the electron density with magnetic ﬁeld lines superimposed at time 2250 ωpi
(cycle 15000). In this plot, the solar wind moves from right to the left side. A pile-up region (red area)
forms in front of the magnetic dipole while an elongated low density (blue area) region forms on the left
side of the plot. The dipole structure is clear with turbulence developed in front of it.

Δt
−1
(ωpi
)
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.15
0.15
0.15
0.2
0.2
0.2

QOM #subcycles #subcyclesmax % of Particles
with Sub–cycles
64
1.03
30
1.11
256
1.18
119
4.63
1836 2.96
852
33.67
64
1.05
45
1.69
256
1.30
180
6.97
1836 4.16
1295
49.29
64
1.07
60
2.28
256
1.42
237
9.32
1836 5.42
1726
62.26

Speedup
5.58
11.35
19.05
4.91
11.46
19.30
5.49
11.79
19.23

Table 1: Key measurements of the performance improvement from the sub-cycling method.

4

Conclusions

We presented an implicit PIC simulation of the formation of magnetosphere using new open
boundary conditions and a new relativistic particle mover using adaptive sub-cycling method.
Our simulation has shown the potential of implicit PIC method carrying out global simulation
of magnetosphere with realistic parameters as large time step and grid spacing are allowed. The
adaptive sub-cycling method improves the performance by saving computation cost on particles
that gyrate slow and still correctly modelling the particles that gyrate fast close to the dipolar
magnetic ﬁeld centre.
We identiﬁed the diﬀerent stages in the macroscopic evolution of the magnetosphere formation. The simulation starts from an non-equilibrium state and reached a quasi-stable state,
where minimal changes were observed from the charge density distribution on the XZ plane and
magnetic instability developed in front of the magnetic dipole. We veriﬁed the performance of
the adaptive sub-cycling in the particle mover by conducting simulations with increasing mass
1186

The Formation of a Magnetosphere with Implicit Particle-in-Cell Simulations

Ivy B. Peng et al.

ratio mi /me and time step Δt. The sub-cycling method substantially save the computation cost
and speed up the simulation as mi /me and Δt increase. The adaptive sub-cycling method become more important as moving towards large simulations of realistic size. The new boundary
conditions and new adaptive particle mover introduce load imbalance in the simulation. Future
work will focus on developing numerical techniques to decrease the particle load imbalance.

Acknowledgments
This work was funded by the Swedish VR grant D621-2013-4309 and by the European Commission through the EPiGRAM project (grant agreement no. 610598. epigram-project.eu).

References
[1] Y Ashida, H Usui, I Shinohara, M Nakamura, I Funaki, Y Miyake, and H Yamakawa. Full
kinetic simulations of plasma ﬂow interactions with meso-and microscale magnetic dipoles.
Physics of Plasmas (1994-present), 21(12):122903, 2014.
[2] Charles K Birdsall and A Bruce Langdon. Plasma physics via computer simulation. CRC
Press, 2004.
[3] Oscar Buneman, Torsten Neubert, and K-I Nishikawa. Solar wind-magnetosphere interaction as simulated by a 3D EM particle code. Plasma Science, IEEE Transactions on,
20(6):810–816, 1992.
[4] D Cai, XY Yan, K-I Nishikawa, and Bertrand Lemb`ege. Particle entry into the inner
magnetosphere during duskward IMF by: Global three-dimensional electromagnetic full
particle simulations. Geophysical research letters, 33(12), 2006.
[5] AV Divin, MI Sitnov, M Swisdak, and JF Drake. Reconnection onset in the magnetotail:
Particle simulations with open boundary conditions. Geophysical research letters, 34(9),
2007.
[6] Maria Elena Innocenti, Giovanni Lapenta, Stefano Markidis, Arnaud Beck, and Alexander
Vapirev. A multi-level multi-domain method for particle-in-cell plasma simulations. Journal
of Computational Physics, 238:115–140, 2013.
[7] Stefano Markidis, Giovanni Lapenta, and Rizwan-uddin. Multi-scale simulations of plasma
with iPIC3D. Mathematics and Computers in Simulation, 80(7):1509–1519, 2010.
[8] K-I Nishikawa. Particle entry through reconnection grooves in the magnetopause with
a dawnward IMF as simulated by a 3-D EM particle code. Geophysical research letters,
25(10):1609–1612, 1998.
[9] Ivy Bo Peng, Juris Vencels, Giovanni Lapenta, Andrey Divin, Andris Vaivads, Erwin Laure,
and Stefano Markidis. Energetic particles in magnetotail reconnection. Journal of Plasma
Physics, pages 1–14.

1187

