Procedia Computer Science
Volume 51, 2015, Pages 2848–2853
ICCS 2015 International Conference On Computational Science

Computational system for planning
search and rescue operations at sea
Roberto Vettor* and C. Guedes Soares†
Centre for Marine Technology and Ocean Engineering (CENTEC), Instituto Superior Técnico,
Universidade de Lisboa, Portugal
† Also Research Center for High Performance Computing, ITMO University, Saint-Petersburg, Russia
*roberto.vettor@centec.tecnico.ulisboa.pt, †c.guedes.soares@centec.tecnico.ulisboa.pt

Abstract
The paper describes the main tasks and features for emergency interventions in the marine
environment and describes the computation and information system required to support and planning
fast and efficient operations. The most common causalities that activate emergency procedures are
identified and the main features of the Search And Rescue (SAR) intervention are described as well as
the inputs and details that are required. A more detailed description is given of the existing
components for an integrated information system in the Portuguese coasts, from the computation of
the environmental conditions to the adoption of dedicated graphical interface that provides all the
necessary information in a clear and complete way.
Keywords: Search And Rescue, Marine emergency, Information System

1 Introduction
Safety in the seas has been more and more in the public attention and the political eye in the last
decades (Guedes Soares and Teixeira, 2001). This is mainly to do with the damages caused by the
major accidents that occurred, such has Herald of Free Enterprise (1987), Exxon Valdez (1989),
Estonia (1994), Erica (1999), Prestige (2002), Costa Concordia (2012) and Sewol (2014). Considering
that 90% of the international trades are made by sea (UNCTAD, 2007) and the steady increase of the
world’s merchant fleet, which grow of about 18% in ten years (reference period 2001-2011; Pike et
al., 2013), Maritime Industry can be considered rather safe. Nevertheless the capability to effectively
operate in emergency scenarios to prevent or to limit casualties and environmental disasters is an
irreplaceable skill of any national government, often requiring the collaboration of the international
community. Examples are the Marine Environment Monitoring Service, part of the Copernicus
Programme within the European Union or the GODAE OceanView (Davidson et al. 2009) program
that involves some of the most representative agencies and groups in the field, such as the US National

2848

Selection and peer-review under responsibility of the Scientiﬁc Programme Committee of ICCS 2015
c The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V.
doi:10.1016/j.procs.2015.05.446

Computational system for planning SAR operations at sea

R. Vettor and C. Guedes Soares

Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA), the Australian Bureau of Meteorology, the
European Space Agency, the French Ifremer and many others.
The goal of Search And Rescue (SAR) in these scenarios is to use any available information such
as “mayday”, current direction, wind direction and observations from rescue vehicles and find and
rescue the target. Behind any SAR operation there has to be a well-established and coordinated system
that collects and shares information before and during the operations and performs simulations of the
possible path of the search target.
This paper gives an overview on the emergency operations at sea, considering the cases when an
alert will activate the procedures (section 2) and the evolution to reach a strengthened and more
standardized approach (section 3). The development of a forecast computational system to support
emergency operations in the Portuguese coasts is described in section 4. Finally some consideration on
the importance of a robust computational and information system in the crucial objective of reducing
the time of intervention with a successful result will be highlighted in section 5.

2 When emergency intervention is required
Whenever an object without an active propulsion system is lost on the sea-surface, it is subjected
to forces caused by the surrounding environment, mainly due to the effect of wind and surface
currents. Those forces cause the drift of the object that will move from the original position; the
amount of motion is called leeway (Allen and Plourde, 1999).
Such an emergency scenario can be caused by many accidents such as the fall of men, objects or
hazardous material overboard, the launch of life rafts or the loss of an airplane in the ocean. In all
these cases it is necessary to activate procedures aimed at finding the missing object or person in the
shortest possible time. To do that a precise estimation of the track of the object must be provided in
short time to the search and rescue group in order to delimit the search area, optimize the available
SAR units to be exploited and start the operations, maximizing the probability of success.
From a modelling point of view, this is a similar problem to the assessment of the path of
accidental oil spills (Sebastião and Guedes Soares, 2003) or the trajectory of icebergs (Korsnes &
Moe, 1994).
In all these causalities the factors that strongly influence the evolution of the scenario are the realtime and predicted wind (Breivik et al., 2011), the near-surface current (Hackett et al., 2006) and the
waves (Röhrs et al., 2012), which cause the drift of the object. Thus quickly available and wellorganized information about those factors can be determinant in the success of the operation.
Information regarding the sea temperature to estimate the survival time (if people are on the water)
and the visibility can improve the awareness in the allocation of recourses.

3 Search And Rescue main features
There are three fundamental theories that establish the bases of the search and rescue operations:
the search theory outlined by Koopman (1956a, b; 1957), the studies on how a target object moves in
the ocean (Washburn, 1980) and the weather forecast. The improvements in all these strongly depend
on the improvements in the computer science, but in a different way. For the search management a
robust and efficient information technology must be applied to store and exchange all the necessary
information. Near-real-time forecast of environmental conditions at a high-resolution level requires
fast computational routines and the assimilation of new available data during the operations.
Finally an assessment of the uncertainties in the path prediction is important in order to determine
the area of possible drift of the object, as exemplified in the case of oil spill by Sebastião and Guedes
Soares, (2007).

2849

Computational system for planning SAR operations at sea

R. Vettor and C. Guedes Soares

From the operational point of view, starting from the 50s, United States Coast Guard (USCG)
promoted the main steps towards a standardization of the SAR procedures. Due to the poor
computational capabilities of that time, they provided the guidelines for the manual calculation of the
search planning methods, which have been later on implemented in a computer-base system. The
Bayesian statistic played an important role in the Computer-Assisted Search Planning (CASP;
Richardson and Discenza 1980) implemented in 1974, which estimated the location of the object
giving a probability distribution produced by the Monte Carlo method.
The main weaknesses of these methods were the very simple drift model adopted to assess the
particle motion and the coarse and poorly reliable forcing fields. In order to face these problems, the
USCG started a program to measure surface current in near real-time, the Self-Located Datum Marker
Buoys (SLDMBs; Davis, 1985), that now provides more and more reliable and detailed information
and gives a great contribution in operational SAR. At the same time also the improvements of the
numerical weather prediction models (Simmons & Hollingworth, 2002) contributes to a better
definition of the forcing fields.
In 2007 the Search And Rescue Optimal Planning System (SAROPS; Kratzke et al., 2010) started
to be operative. It consists in a user interface, an environmental data server that gathers wind and
current data and prediction from different sources and a simulator that provides recommendations for
the search path of the employed units. It has been thought to minimize the time in the chain from the
receiving of the alert and the rescue and assistance.
The main problem remains the evaluation and reduction of the uncertainties. Usually stochastic
models are adopted in the modern SAR planning to take into account the unknowns in the search
object but not in the forcing fields. Studies of the effect of using the computational expensive full- or
multi-ensemble models have been conducted in the last years (e.g. Scott et al. 2012) after the
introduction of true ocean model ensembles. However the overall cost-benefit has still not been
clarified.
Normally the drifting models neglect the direct effect of waves because only if the wave-length
and the object dimension are comparable the excitation and damping forces are considered relevant
(Mei, 1989). Nevertheless Röhrs et al. (2012) highlighted the importance of taking into account Stokes
drift. It must be noted that in most of the cases the relations between wind and leeway are empirical
(Allen and Plourde, 1999) and it makes difficult if not impossible to distinguish between the effect of
wind and of the Stokes drift.

4 Computational implementation for the Portuguese coasts
In figure 1 a general scheme summarizes the operations that follow the reception of an alert. Firstly
all the data regarding the emergency case (e.g. location of the loss, type of object, dimensions, etc)
must be collected and always updated in a standard format and immediately available to all the
subjects involved in the operations. The environmental condition is then assessed by means of
numerical models and, when available, real-time measurements and used to assess the search object
path and to build the probability density map. This information will then allow verifying the
availability of the SAR units which are more suitable to be activated in the particular scenario and to
plan the active intervention. Finally it is of prime importance that both the weather data and the ones
relative to the searching object are updated with in-situ information during the intervention.
High-resolution models are required to resolve the mesoscale features in the regional circulation
systems that can significantly contribute to the drifting forces. Moreover it must be considered that
most of the interventions are within 40km from the shore (Breivik and Allen, 2008) where an even
higher resolution can be necessary to describe the interaction of the circulation features especially in
the presence of complex topographic structures such as canyons or caves and even the effect sea
breeze should be included for successful estimations (Carretero et al., 2000).

2850

Computational system for planning SAR operations at sea

R. Vettor and C. Guedes Soares

Figure 1. General scheme of intervention.

An operational forecasting system for the Portuguese coasts has been developed and validated
(Guedes Soares et al. 2011) and is operational since October 2008. It is based on a set of nested grids
with higher resolutions (up to 4.1km) in the most critical areas, such as around the archipelagos of
Madeira and Azores and in the coasts between Lisbon and Sines in the south and Porto and Viana do
Castelo in the north. It provides waves and wind predictions for a time window of four days. It uses
the Fifth-Generation NCAR/Penn State Mesoscale Model (MM5; Grell et al. 1994) designed to predict
mesoscale and regional-scale atmospheric circulation and two state-of-the-art third-generation spectral
wave models WAM Cycle 4 (WAMDI Group, 1988) and SWAN version 40.51 (Booij et al. 1999) for
the propagation to the coastal environment. The atmospheric model MM5 is presently being upgraded
with the more recent WRF model (Salvação et al 2014). The system must be coupled with a surface
current prediction model to take into account ocean and tidal currents, which have been already
studied in Sauvaget et al. (2000) with a resolution up to 1km capable to interface World Ocean and
coastal circulations. It has also been used for computation of combined tide and wind currents.
Once the forcing are established, the trajectory of the search object or oil mass (Beegle-Krause,
2001) have to predicted and sent to the management unit that as an input for a Geographical
Information System (GIS) tool for storing, analysing and displaying data for the decision maker. A
pre-operational system for oil spill simulation on the Iberian Peninsula has been developed (Sebastião
and Guedes Soares, 2003). It allows simulating and visualizing the trajectory and fate of oil spills
taking into account wind waves and currents. The system can be upgraded by including models for the
assessment of the drift of different objects.

5 Conclusions
The main characteristics and requirements to provide information and assist operations in marine
emergency events such as search and rescue interventions or oil spills environment protection

2851

Computational system for planning SAR operations at sea

R. Vettor and C. Guedes Soares

activities have been described. The most important aspects to improve these important operations can
be summarized as following:
• uncertainties in the prediction of weather or in the characteristic of the search object can
significantly affect the results and the extension of the search area (thus the duration and efficacy
of the operation);
• forcing fields must be carefully modelled taking into account the effect of many environment
factors besides wind and near-surface current, for instance Stokes drift;
• local high resolution models are necessary to resolve the mesoscale features and the eddy activities
near-coast where most of the operations are required;
• the assimilation of near real-time data in numerical models must be improved adopting new
observing platform to increase the reliability of the input data;
• providing spatial data management and visualization GIS tools specifically designed to support
decision in maritime emergency reduces the time of intervention and allows a better optimization
of the resources, increasing the probability of success.
• computational forecasting models for waves, wind and currents as well as for oil spills trajectories
have been already constructed for the Iberian Peninsula and they can be integrated in a
comprehensive system to support emergency operations.

Acknowledgments
The first author was supported by the Portuguese Foundation for Science and Technology (FCT Fundação para a Ciência e Tecnologia, Portugal) under the contract no. SFRH/BD/89476/2012.

References
Allen, A. and Plourde, J.V. (1999) Review of leeway: field experiments and implementation.
Technical Report CG-D-08-99, US Coast Guard Research and Development Center, 1082
Shennecossett Road, Groton, CT, USA.
Beegle-Krause, C.J. (2001). General NOAA oil modeling environment (GNOME): a new spill
trajectory model. In: 2001 International Oil Spill Conference.
Booij, N., Ris, R.C. and Holthuijsen, L.H. (1999). A thirdgeneration wave model for coastal
regions, 1, Model description and validation. J. Geophys. Res., 104, 7649–7666.
Breivik, Ø., Allen, A.A., Maisondieu, C. and Roth, J.C. (2011) Wind-induced drift of objects at
sea: The leeway field method. Applied Ocean Research, Vol. 33 (2), pp 100-109.
Carretero, J.C., Alvarez, E., Gomez, M., Perez, B. and Rodríguez, I., (2000). Ocean forecasting in
narrow shelf seas: application to the Spanish coasts. Coastal Engineering 41, 269–293.
Davidson, F.J.M., Allen, A., Brassington, G.B., Breivik, Ø., Daniel, P., Kamachi, M., Sato, S.,
King, B., Lefevre, F., Sutton, M. and Kaneko, H. (2009). Applications of GODAE ocean current
forecasts to search and rescue and ship routing. Oceanography, Vol. 22(3), pp. 176-181
Davis, R.E. (1985). Drifter Observations of Coastal Surface Currents During CODE: The Method
and Descriptive View. Journal of Geophysical Research, 90, 4741-4755.
Grell, G.A., Dudhia, J. and Stauffer, D.R. (1994). A description of the fifth-generation Penn
State/NCAR mesoscale modeling system (MM5). Tech. Note NCAR/TN–398+STR, NCAR.
Guedes Soares, C. and Teixeira, A.P. (2001). Risk assessment in maritime transportation.
Reliability Engineering and System Safety, Vol. 74, pp. 299-309.
Guedes Soares, C., Rusu, L., Bernardino, M. and Pilar, P. (2011). An operational wave forecasting
system for the Portuguese contnental coastal Area. Journal of Operational Oceanography, Vol. 4 (2),
pp. 17-27.

2852

Computational system for planning SAR operations at sea

R. Vettor and C. Guedes Soares

Hackett, B., Breivik, Ø. and Wettre, C. (2006) Forecasting the drift of objects and substances in the
oceans, in Ocean weather forecasting: an integrated view of oceanography, EP Chassignet and J
Verron (eds), pp. 507-524.
Koopman, B. (1956a) The theory of search, part I: kinematic bases. Operations Research, Vol. 4,
pp. 324–346.
Koopman, B. (1956b) The theory of search, part II: target detection. Operations Research, Vol. 4,
pp. 503–531.
Koopman, B. (1957). The theory of search, part III: the optimum distribution of searching effort.
Operations Research, Vol. 5, pp. 613–626.
Korsnes, R. and Moe, G. (1994). Approaches To Find Iceberg Collision Risks For Fixed Offshore
Platforms. International Journal of Offshore and Polar Engineering, Vol. 4.
Kratzke, T.M., Stone, L.D. and Frost, J.R. (2010) Search and rescue optimal planning system.
Proceedings of the 13th international conference on information fusion. IEEE, p. 8.
Mei, C.C. (1989) The applied dynamics of ocean surface waves, 2nd edn. World Scientific,
Singapore.
Pike K., Butt N., Pryce-Roberts N., Vigar N., 2013. 15 years of shipping accidents: a review for
WWF.
Richardson, H.R. and Discenza, J.H. (1980). The United States Coast Guard computer-assisted
search planning system (CASP). Naval Research Logistics Quarterly. Vol. 27 number 4. pp. 659–680.
Röhrs, J., Christensen, K.H., Hole, L.R., Broström, G., Drivdal, M. and Sundby, S. (2012)
Observation-based evaluation of surface wave effects on currents and trajectory forecasts. Ocean
Dynamics, Vol. 62, pp. 1519-1533.
Salvacao, N.; Bernardino, M., and Guedes Soares, C. (2014) Assessing mesoscale wind
simulations in different environments. Computers & Geosciences. 71:28-36.
Sauvaget, P., David, E. and Guedes Soares, C. (2000). Modelling tidal currents on the coast of
Portugal. Coastal Engineering. Vol. 40, pp. 393-409.
Scott, R., Ferry, N., Drèvillon, M., Barron, C., Jourdain, N., Lellouche, J.M., Metzger, E., Rio,
M.H. and Smedstad, O. (2012) Estimates of surface drifter trajectories in the equatorial Atlantic: a
multi-model ensemble approach. Ocean Dynamics, Vol. 62(7), pp. 1091–1109.
Simmons, A.J. & Hollingworth, A. (2002). Some aspects of the improvement in skil of numerical
weather prediction. Quarterly Journal of the Royal Meteorological Society, 128, pp 647-677.
Sebastião, P. and Guedes Soares, C. (2003). Pre-Operational System for Oil Spill Simulation,
Building the European Capacity in Operational Oceanography, 2003, H. Dahlin, N. C. Flemming, K.
Nittis e S. E. Petersson (Eds.), Elsevier Oceanography Series, pp. 190-194
Sebastião, P., Guedes Soares, C. (2007). Uncertainty in prediction of oil spill trajectories in open
sea. Ocean Engineering, Vol. 34, pp. 576-584.
WAMDI Group (1988). The WAM model – A third generation ocean wave prediction model.
Journal of Physical Oceanography, 18, 1775–1810.
Washburn, A.R. (1980). On search for a moving target. Naval Research Logistic. 27, 315–322.

2853

