Procedia Computer Science
Volume 51, 2015, Pages 1865–1871
ICCS 2015 International Conference On Computational Science

Computational study of electrochemical
CO2 reduction at transition metal
electrodes
1

Javed Hussain1, Egill Skúlason1, and Hannes Jónsson1, 2
Science Institute and Faculty of Physical Sciences, University of Iceland VR-III, 107Reykjavík,
Iceland.
2
Dpt. of Applied Physics, Aalto University, Espoo, FI-00076, Finland.
jah16@hi.is1, egillsk@hi.is1 and hj@hi.is1,2

Abstract
A detailed understanding of the mechanism of electrochemical reduction of CO2 to form hydrocarbons
can help design improved catalysts for this important reaction. Density functional theory calculations
were used here to model the various elementary steps in this reaction on transition metal surfaces, in
particular Cu(111) and Pt(111). The minimum energy paths for sequential protonation by either Tafel
or Heyrovsky mechanism were calculated using the nudged elastic band method for applied potentials
comparable to those used in experimental studies, ranging from -0.7 V to -1.7 V. A detailed
mechanism for CO2 reduction on Cu(111) has been identified where the highest activation energy is
0.5 eV at -1.3 V vs. RHE. On Pt(111), a different mechanism is found to be optimal but it involves a
higher barrier, 0.7 eV at -1.0 V vs. RHE. Hydrogen production is then a faster reaction with activation
energy of only 0.3 eV on Pt(111) at the same potential, while on Cu(111) hydrogen production has an
activation energy of 0.9 eV at -1.3 V. These results are consistent with experimental findings where
copper electrodes are found to lead to relatively high yield of CH4 while H2 forms almost exclusively
at platinum electrodes.
Keywords: Density functional theory, Electrocatalysis, Electrochemical reduction of carbon dioxide, Nudged
elastic band

1 Introduction
The increasing energy demand, global climate change and foreseeable reduction in fossil fuel
availability has sparked interest in the development of ways to produce synthetic fuel. One option is
the conversion of CO2 to methane or methanol. The latter is already produced commercially at a
factory in Iceland in a two-step process, where hydrogen is first generated by electrolysis of water and
Selection and peer-review under responsibility of the Scientiﬁc Programme Committee of ICCS 2015
c The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V.

doi:10.1016/j.procs.2015.05.419

1865

Calculations of CO2 electrochemical reduction

Javed Hussain, Egill Sk´
ulason and Hannes J´
onsson

subsequently reacted with CO2 [1]. Extensive, pioneering work on electrochemical reduction of CO2
using pure transition metal catalysts has been carried out by Hori and coworkers [2, 3, 4]. They found
significant yield of hydrocarbons formed at copper electrodes, with methane being the major product.
The Faradaic yield for hydrocarbons was given as 72.3% while the yield for H2 is 20.5%. In other
words, copper both reduces CO2 to form hydrocarbons and also reduces protons to form H2. However,
no other metal electrode was found to produce a significant yield of hydrocarbons. Hydrogen formed
almost exclusively on many transition metals, such as Ti, Fe, Ni, and Pt, while the reduction of CO2
terminated with CO desorption at Au and Ag electrodes. An important challenge is to identify the
detailed mechanism of CO2 reduction on Cu electrodes and explain why this reaction does not occur
on other transition metals such as Pt. The reduction at Cu electrodes requires rather high overpotential
and it would be advantageous to identify an improved electrochemical catalyst with a reduced
overpotential. A detailed understanding of the mechanism could help design such an improved
catalyst. By gaining a deeper understanding of the mechanism of CO2 reduction on Cu, we hope to
shed more light on the uniqueness of Cu as an efficient electro- catalyst for CO2 reduction and,
thereby, possibly contribute to the development of even better electro-catalyst for this reaction.
Significant progress has been made on the theoretical modeling of this reaction. Calculations based
on density functional theory (DFT) have identified various possible reaction pathways for CO2
reduction, in particular electrochemical reduction, and provided estimates of the electrical potential
needed. Peterson and co-workers estimated the onset potential for various reduction products based on
the free energy of intermediates on a stepped Cu surface [5]. The effect of applied voltage was
modeled by adding neU for each electron added, where e is the charge of the electron and U is the
applied potential [6]. We will refer to this as the thermochemical model. The onset potential is then
estimated as the voltage needed for all the elementary steps in the mechanism not to increase the free
energy. This is, however, only a rough estimate since the activation energy (i.e. transition state energy)
is not included in the thermochemical model. Nevertheless, the calculated onset potentials turned out
to be in good agreement with the measurements of Hori and co-workers for reduction at Cu electrodes
[5]. The model, however, does not explain why other metal electrodes such as Pt do not form
hydrocarbons but rather evolve H2 gas, as discussed below. A more detailed study of the reaction
mechanism is, therefore, needed.
Experimental studies [2, 7, 8, 9], as well as DFT calculations by Peterson and co-workers [5, 10,
11], have provided information about reaction paths for the formation of methane (CH4) and ethylene
(C2H4) on Cu. The reduction could proceed through various paths and an important issue is whether

CO is reduced to form CHO or COH. The thermochemical model predicts CO to be reduced to

CHO on Cu(111) and to COH on Pt(111), based on the relative stability of the two species, but this
does not take activation energy into account.
Recently, Nie et al. estimated the activation energy for electrochemical CO2 reduction to methane
on Cu(111) [12]. There it was concluded that the rate-limiting step is the reduction of COH to form

C with an activation barrier of only 0.4 eV at 1.15 V vs. RHE on the Cu(111). It should be noted
that the electrochemical model used by Nie et al. is quite different from the one used in this study. Nie
et al. include only one physiosorbed water molecule to represent the water phase and only one H-atom
was adsorbed on the metal surface. The barrier was calculated for a so-called H-shuttling mechanism
where the H atom is first transferred to the water molecule, creating a hydronium ion, and then a
proton is transferred to the COH molecule, forming C adatom and a water molecule that desorbs
from the surface. The calculated value of the activation energy was actually 1.02 eV, but they use a
model based on the Butler-Volmer formalism to extrapolate this value to the desired potential, 1.15
V vs. RHE in this case, which gave activation energy of 0.4 eV. The calculations presented here are
more detailed and involve a more realistic model for the electrochemical system.
In the present study, a detailed mechanism of CO2 reduction on Cu(111) and Pt(111) surfaces has
been determined by calculating the activation energy for the key elementary steps as a function of
applied voltage. In order to fully account for the reaction kinetics, calculations of the mechanism of

1866

Calculations of CO2 electrochemical reduction

Javed Hussain, Egill Sk´
ulason and Hannes J´
onsson

CO2 on Cu(111) surface were carried out including evaluation of minimum energy paths (MEPs). Our
results for electrochemical reduction of CO2 to methane on Cu(111) surface have identified pathways
with sufficiently low activation barriers to be active under the conditions used in the experimental
measurements. Similar calculations for the Pt(111) surface show why Pt is not an active electrocatalyst
for the reduction of CO2. Both the Tafel mechanism and the Heyrovsky mechanism were studied.

2 Methodology
In order to model the water-solid interface as a function of electrode potential, a bilayer of water
molecules was added to the surface and additional H-atoms inserted in the layer to form solvated
protons and additional electrons at the electrode [13]. By changing the number of H- atoms added, the
electrostatic potential of the double layer was tuned and chosen to be close to the experimental
conditions in measurements of Pt and Cu electrodes by Hori et al. [2]. Slabs of three layers with (111)
surfaces were used in this work. Adding more layers changed the calculated results by less than 0.1
eV. Calculations of the free energy of the various molecules adsorbed on the surface were carried out
using the harmonic approximation and experimental estimates of the entropy of gas phase species. The
DFT calculations made use of the RPBE functional and the Vienna Ab-initio Simulation Package
(VASP). The application of an external electrical potential, U, affects the free energy of the
intermediates of the reduction path in such a way that a contribution of G = eU gets added
whenever one H+ and one e react to add an H-atom to the admolecule. A calculated rise in the free
energy at an elementary step involving reaction of 0.8 eV can therefore be eliminated by applying an
electrical potential of 0.8 V. Assuming that a reaction path becomes active when no elementary step
involves an increase in the free energy (neglecting the rise in free energy at transition states), the onset
potential can be estimated from the largest free energy increase in an elementary step in the reaction
path [6]. The most endothermic elementary step determines the onset potential within this
thermochemical model.
In order to go beyond the thermochemical model, the MEPs of the elementary steps were
calculated using the climbing image nudged elastic band (CI-NEB) method [14, 15]. The highest
energy along the MEP corresponds to a first order saddle point on the energy surface and gives an
estimate of the activation energy for the elementary step. A calculation of the frequency of vibrational
modes at the initial state and at the saddle point can then be used to estimate the transition rate in
harmonic transition state theory. For the reduction of each intermediate, both the Tafel mechanism,
where a H-adatom gets added to the admolecule, and the Heyrovsky mechanism, where a proton gets
added directly from the water phase, was studied.

3 Results
The thermochemical model was used to estimate the onset potential for CO2 reduction on various
FCC(111) transition metal surfaces, including Cu, Pt, Ni, Rh, Ir, Pd, Ag and Au. From the calculated
binding energy of the various intermediates on the surface the onset potential was estimated as
described above. The results are shown in Fig. 1. For Cu(111), the onset potential turned out to have a
large magnitude, -0.8 V, while the onset potential for the Pt(111) surface was found to have much
smaller magnitude, 0.3 V. From these estimates alone, one would conclude that Pt(111) is a better
electrocatalyst for CO2 reduction than Cu(111), contrary to experimental findings. Analogous
calculations for the other metals, Ni, Rh, Ir, Pd, Ag and Au, gave intermediate values for the onset
potential, as shown in Fig. 1.

1867

Calculations of CO2 electrochemical reduction

1.50
1.25

Javed Hussain, Egill Sk´
ulason and Hannes J´
onsson

*CO + (H+ + e-)
*CO +

(H+ +

e-)

CO2 + (H+ + e-)

*CHO
*COH
*COOH

-U / V

1.00
0.75
0.50
0.25
0.00

Ag Au Cu Pd

Ir

Rh Ni

Pt

Figure 1: Calculated onset potential for the reduction of CO2 to form methane or methanol using only
the estimated free energy of the intermediates but neglecting activation energy. The legend indicates
which elementary step has the largest rise in free energy and, thereby, determines the onset potential.
Of the metal surfaces studied here, the smallest magnitude of the onset potential is predicted for
Pt(111), significantly smaller than that for Cu(111), but experimental studies have reported significant
methane formation only at copper electrodes, while hydrogen forms at platinum electrodes.
The MEP calculations of various possible reaction paths have revealed that the optimal mechanism
for CO2 reduction to methane on Cu(111) involves the formation of hydroxymethylidyne (COH) as a
proton is added to adsorbed CO. These findings are consistent with recent experimental results of
Schouten et al. [9]. By calculating the MEPs between local minima, a consistent picture is obtained
and the trends between different metals can be explained. A sequence of elementary steps at the
Cu(111) electrode, either involving Heyrovsky or Tafel mechanism, has been identified where the
overall activation energy is low, around 0.5 eV at a voltage of -1.3 V, see Fig. 2.

1868

0.49
0.79

0.57



0.39

0.47

0.61
*CHO

0.33

0.43
0.41



	

0.42

 

0.42

Heyrovsky mechanism

Tafel mechanism



0.23
	 










Javed Hussain, Egill Sk´
ulason and Hannes J´
onsson



 

16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0
-2


  

Free energy / eV

Calculations of CO2 electrochemical reduction

0.37
0.48
 0.35
0.47

	
1.12

0.15


-1

0

1

2

3

4

5

(H+ + e-) transferred

6

 0.04
0.17
0.20



7

8

Figure 2: Free energy diagram for the electrochemical reduction of CO2 to CH4 on Cu(111) surface at
300 K as a function of applied voltage. Each step along the horizontal axis represents the transfer of a
proton and an electron to the admolecule. Minimum energy paths between local minima corresponding
to the various possible intermediates were calculated for both Heyrovsky and Tafel mechanisms. The
values of the lowest activation energy found are indicated next to the energy maxima.
The experiments of Hori et al. [3] used a large applied potential, of -1.44 V but it has been shown
that hydrocarbons can already be formed at around -0.7 to -0.9 V vs. RHE on Cu electrodes [7].
Hydrogen evolution is a competing reaction and it is also important to calculate the MEPs for that
reaction for comparison. The activation energy for hydrogen evolution reaction (HER) on Cu(111)
under the same conditions is calculated to be significantly higher, 0.9 eV showing that CO2 reduction
can take place without the protons being consumed by H2 formation. At the Pt(111) electrode, the
opposite is found, i.e. a high activation energy for CO2 reduction, 0.7 eV, but a low activation energy
for H2 formation, 0.3 eV at -1.0 V vs. RHR. These results help explain why CO2 can be reduced at
copper electrodes to form hydrocarbons while platinum electrodes mainly form hydrogen gas.

3.1 Discussion
The goal of this study was to gain better understanding of electrochemical reduction of CO2 on
copper electrodes and obtain an explanation for failed attempts to electrochemically reduce CO2 on
platinum electrodes. We have simulated conditions in the experiments by constructing a model of a
double layer and evaluating the MEPs for both Tafel and Heyrovsky mechanisms. The activation
energy for a range of possible elementary steps has been evaluated as well as the free energy of
intermediates. From the free energy of intermediates alone, the thermochemical model, one would
conclude that Pt(111) is the best electrocatalyst in a group of metals that includes Cu, Pt, Ni, Rh, Ir,
Pd, Ag and Au. This is in stark contrast with experimental observation since no reduction products

1869

Calculations of CO2 electrochemical reduction

Javed Hussain, Egill Sk´
ulason and Hannes J´
onsson

from CO2 have been observed at platinum electrodes. The overpotential for Cu(111) is predicted to be
among the highest in this group of metals, and yet a significant yield of hydrocarbons can be obtained
in experiments with copper electrodes. This discrepancy is removed when the activation energy for the
various elementary steps is also calculated. The reduction of CO2 has a significantly lower activation
energy on Cu(111) than on Pt(111). The formation of H2, however, has a significantly larger activation
energy on Cu(111) than on Pt(111). This explains why CO2 can be electrochemically reduced on Cu
electrodes but only hydrogen forms on Pt electrodes. A detailed understanding of the mechanism of
electrochemical CO2 reduction on Cu can help optimize the process further, both to reduce the
overpotential and to improve selectivity.

3.2 Conclusion
In conclusion, our DFT calculations of the activation energy for the various elementary steps have
shown that the reduction of CO is the key step for the selective production of methane by CO2
electroreduction on Cu(111) surface. The dominant path involves reduction of *CO to form *COH,
which ultimately leads to the formation of methane. This reaction path is different from what is
obtained solely from the reaction free energies in the thermochemical model. Also, it is important to
include the effect of the aqueous environment, which stabilizes COH formation. Our proposed
reaction path is able to explain experimental data on CO2, CO, and CH2O reduction on Cu electrodes.
Other factors affecting the reaction rate such as coverage effects and surface structure, in particular the
presence of step edges need to be explored in future studies. The results of our calculations contribute
to an improved understanding of CO2 electroreduction on Cu surfaces by providing estimates of the
activation energy for the elementary steps. It could help design improved catalysts for CO2 (photo)electroreduction. For example, an important aspect is the relative activation energy for the formation
of *COH and *CHO since the former intermediate leads to formation of methane while the latter leads
to formation of formaldehyde, which then leaves the surface and is not reduced further.

4 Acknowledgements
This work was funded by Nordic Energy Research as part of the NISFD network, the Icelandic
Research Fund and the Academy of Finland through its FiDiPro Program under Project No. 263294.
JH thanks the University of Iceland doctoral fellowship fund for support.

References
[1] K. C. Tran, O. F. Sigurbjörnsson. That’s why we should all go to Iceland. The Chemical
Engineer., 840 (2011) 28.
[2] Y. Hori, A. Murata, R. Takahashi. Formation of hydrocarbons in the electrochemical reduction of
carbon dioxide at a copper electrode in aqueous solution. J. Chem. Soc. Faraday Trans., 185
(1989) 2309.

1870

Calculations of CO2 electrochemical reduction

Javed Hussain, Egill Sk´
ulason and Hannes J´
onsson

[3] Y. Hori, H. Wakebe, T. Tsukamoto, O. Koga. Electrocatalytic Process of CO Selectivity in
Electrochemical Reduction of CO2 at Metal Electrodes in Aqueous Media. Electrochim. Acta.,
39 (1994) 1833.
[4] Y. Hori, C. G. Vayenas, R. E. White, M. E. Gamboa-Aldeco. Modern Aspects of
Electrochemistry. Springer. New York., 42 (2008) 89.
[5] A. A. Peterson, J. K. Nørskov. Activity Descriptors for CO2 Electroreduction to Methane on
Transition-Metal Catalysts. J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 3 (2012) 251.
[6] J. K. Nørskov, J. Rossmeisl, A. Logadóttir, L. Lindqvist, J. R. Kitchin, T. Bligaard, H. Jónsson.
Origin of the Overpotential for Oxygen Reduction at a Fuel-Cell Cathode. J. Phys. Chem. B, 108
(2004) 17886.
[7] K. P. Kuhl, E. R. Cave, D. N. Abram, and T. F. Jaramillo. New insights into the electrochemical
reduction of carbon dioxide on metallic copper surfaces. Energy Environ. Sci., 5 (2012) 7050.
[8] K. J. P. Schouten, E. P. Gallent, and M. T. M. Koper. The influence of pH on the reduction of CO
and CO2 to hydrocarbons on copper electrodes. J. Electroanal. Chem., 716 (2014) 53.
[9] K. J. P. Schouten, Y. Kwon, C. J. M. van der Ham, Z. Qin, M. T. M. Koper. A new mechanism
for the selectivity to C1 and C2 species in the electrochemical reduction of carbon dioxide on
copper electrodes. Chem. Sci., 2 (2011) 1902.
[10] W. J. Durand, A. A. Peterson, F. Studt, F. Abild-Pedersen, J. K. Nørskov. Structure effects on the
energetics of the electrochemical reduction of CO2 by copper surfaces. Surf. Sci., 605 (2011)
1354.
[11] A. A. Peterson, F. Abild-Pedersen, F. Studt, J. Rossmeisl, J. K. Nørskov. How copper catalyzes
the electroreduction of carbon dioxide into hydrocarbon fuels. Energy Environ. Sci., 3 (2010)
1311.
[12] X. Nie, M. R. Esopi, M. J. Janik, A. Asthagiri. Selectivity of CO2 reduction on Copper
Electrodes: The Role of the Kinetics of elementary steps. Angew. Chem. Int. Ed., 52 (2013) 2459.
[13] E. Skúlason, V. Tripkovic, M. E. Björketun, S. Gudmundsdóttir, G. Karlberg, J. Rossmeisl, T.
Bligaard, H. Jónsson and J. K. Nørskov. Modeling the Electrochemical Hydrogen Oxidation and
Evolution Reactions on the Basis of Density Functional Theory Calculations. J. Phys. Chem. C,
114 (2010) 18182.
[14] G. Henkelman, B.P. Uberuaga, and H. Jónsson. A climbing image nudged elastic band method
for finding saddle points and minimum energy paths. J. Chem. Phys., 113 (2000) 9901.
[15] G. Henkelman and H. Jónsson. Improved tangent estimate in the nudged elastic band method for
finding minimum energy paths and saddle points. J. Chem. Phys., 113 (2000) 9978.

1871

