Procedia Computer Science
Volume 51, 2015, Pages 1269–1271
ICCS 2015 International Conference On Computational Science

Workshop on Large Scale Computational Physics - LSCP
Elise de Doncker1 and Fukuko Yuasa2
1

2

Western Michigan University, Kalamazoo MI 49008, U. S. A.
elise.dedoncker@wmich.edu
High Energy Accelerator Research Organization (KEK), Tsukuba, Ibaraki, 305-0801, Japan
fukuko.yuasa@kek.jp

Abstract
The LSCP workshop focuses on symbolic and numerical methods and simulations, algorithms
and tools (software and hardware) for developing and running large-scale computations in physical sciences. Special attention goes to parallelism, scalability and high numerical precision.
System architectures are also of interest as long as they are supporting physics related calculations, such as: massively parallel systems, GPUs, many-integrated-cores, distributed (cluster,
grid/cloud) computing, and hybrid systems. Topics are chosen from areas including: theoretical physics (high energy physics, nuclear physics, astrophysics, cosmology, quantum physics,
accelerator physics), plasma physics, condensed matter physics, chemical physics, molecular
dynamics, bio-physical system modeling, material science/engineering, nanotechnology, ﬂuid
dynamics, complex and turbulent systems, and climate modeling.
Keywords: Workshop overview, Workshop organization, Large Scale Computational Physics

Preface
The LSCP Workshop has been held under the ICCS conference since 2011. In LSCP 2015 the
following papers are presented:
– “The particle accelerator simulation code PyORBIT,” Andrei Shishlo [Shi15];
– “Simulations of several ﬁnite-sized objects in plasma,” Wojciech Miloch [Mil15];
– “DiamondTorre GPU implementation algorithm of the RKDG solver for ﬂuid dynamics and
its using for the numerical simulation of the bubble-shock interaction problem,” Boris Korneev
and Vadim Levchenko [KL15];
– “Optimal temporal blocking for stencil computation,” Takayuki Muranushi and Junichiro
Makino [MM15];
– “A Case Study of CUDA FORTRAN and OpenACC for an atmospheric climate kernel,”
Matthew Norman, Jeﬀrey Larkin, Aaron Vose and Katherine Evans [NLVE15];
– “OpenCL vs OpenACC: lessons from development of lattice QCD simulation code,” Hideo
Matsufuru, Sinya Aoki, Tatsumi Aoyama, Kazuyuki Kanaya, Shinji Motoki, Yusuke Namekawa,
Hidekatsu Nemura, Yusuke Taniguchi, Satoru Ueda and Naoya Ukita [MAA+ 15];
Selection and peer-review under responsibility of the Scientiﬁc Programme Committee of ICCS 2015
c The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V.

doi:10.1016/j.procs.2015.05.311

1269

Workshop on Large Scale Computational Physics

de Doncker and Yuasa

– “Application of GRAPE9-MPX for high precision calculation in particle physics and
performance results,” Hiroshi Daisaka, Naohito Nakasato, Tadashi Ishikawa and Fukuko
Yuasa [DNIY15];
– “Adaptive integration for 3-loop Feynman diagrams with massless propagators,” Elise de
Doncker, Fukuko Yuasa and Omofolakunmi Olagbemi [dDYO15].
The ﬁrst three papers address simulations, for particle acceleration [Shi15], ﬁnite-sized objects in plasma [Mil15], and the bubble-shock interaction problem in ﬂuid dynamics [KL15].
In [Shi15], the implementation as well as the parallel and simulation capabilities of the open
source code PyORBIT are discussed, structured in two levels where the control ﬂow, programmed in Python, is layered over the intensive calculations coded in C++. The interaction
of ﬁnite-sized objects is simulated in particle-in-cell simulations, and results of the DiP3D code
are presented in [Mil15]. DiamondTorre is a GPU implementation scheme of an RKDG (RungeKutta discontinuous Galerkin) method, employed in [KL15] for solving 3D Euler equations of
gas dynamics.
PiTCH tiling is introduced in [MM15] as a temporal blocking method that is shown to
remove the bandwidth bottleneck for various stencil computations.
The development of an OpenACC kernel for GPUs (Graphics Processing Units) is considered
by [NLVE15], in comparison to an existing CUDA FORTRAN port, for the tracer advection
routines of the Community Atmosphere Model - Spectral Element (CAM-SE), where the results show encouraging performance of the OpenACC implementation. The OpenACC parallel
programming environment (utilized through compiler directives inserted in the program) is also
applied to numerical simulations of lattice QCD in [MAA+ 15], and compared with OpenCL,
which explicitly controls accelerator devices through API functions.
The GRAPE9-MPX system [DNIY15] operates a new dedicated architecture consisting of
multiple Field Programmable Gate Array (FPGA) boards, to accelerate high precision calculations for quadruple/hex/octuple precision in particle physics. Results of a parallel/distributed
multivariate integration package (ParInt) combined with extrapolation methods are reported
in [dDYO15] for a class of 3-loop Feynman integrals, which contribute to cross section calculations of particle interactions in high energy physics.

Acknowledgments
The LSCP chairs appreciate the help of the Workshop Program Committee, all reviewers of the
LSCP papers, and the organizers of the ICCS conference. We also acknowledge the support of
Western Michigan University, the National Science Foundation under Award Number 1126438,
Grant-in-Aid for Scientiﬁc Research (24540292) of JSPS, and the Large Scale Simulation Program No. 14/15-06 of KEK.

References
[dDYO15] E. de Doncker, F. Yuasa, and O. Olagbemi. Adaptive integration for 3-loop Feynman
diagrams with massless propagators. Procedia Computer Science, 2015. Workshop on
Large Scale Computational Physics (LSCP), ICCS 2015.
[DNIY15] H. Daisaka, N. Nakasato, T. Ishikawa, and F. Yuasa. Application of GRAPE9-MPX for
high precision calculation in particle physics and performance results. Procedia Computer
Science, 2015. Workshop on Large Scale Computational Physics (LSCP), ICCS 2015.
[KL15]
B. Korneev and V. Levchenko. DiamondTorre GPU implementation algorithm of the RKDG
solver for ﬂuid dynamics and its using for the numerical simulation of the bubble-shock

1270

Workshop on Large Scale Computational Physics

de Doncker and Yuasa

interaction problem. Procedia Computer Science, 2015. Workshop on Large Scale Computational Physics (LSCP), ICCS 2015.
+
[MAA 15] H. Matsufuru, S. Aoki, T. Aoyama, K. Kanaya, S. Motoki, Y. Namekawa, H. Nemura,
Y. Taniguchi, S. Ueda, and N. Ukita. OpenCL vs. OpenACC: lessons from development of
lattice QCD simulation code. Procedia Computer Science, 2015. Workshop on Large Scale
Computational Physics (LSCP), ICCS 2015.
[Mil15]
W. Miloch. Simulations of several ﬁnite-sized objects in plasma. Procedia Computer Science,
2015. Workshop on Large Scale Computational Physics (LSCP), ICCS 2015.
[MM15]
T. Muranushi and J. Makino. Optimal temporal blocking for stencil computation. Procedia
Computer Science, 2015. Workshop on Large Scale Computational Physics (LSCP), ICCS
2015.
[NLVE15] M. Norman, J. Larkin, A. Vose, and K. Evans. A case study of CUDA FORTRAN and
OpenACC for an atmospheric climate kernel. Procedia Computer Science, 2015. Workshop
on Large Scale Computational Physics (LSCP), ICCS 2015.
[Shi15]
A. Shishlo. The particle accelerator simulation code PyORBIT. Procedia Computer Science,
2015. Workshop on Large Scale Computational Physics (LSCP), ICCS 2015.
[SZK15]
R. Samulyak, L. Zhang, and H. Kim. On stability of targets for plasma jet induced magnetoinertial fusion. Procedia Computer Science, 2015. Workshop on Large Scale Computational Physics (LSCP), ICCS 2015.

1271

