Procedia Computer Science
Volume 51, 2015, Pages 630–639
ICCS 2015 International Conference On Computational Science

Parallel metaheuristics in computational biology: an
asynchronous cooperative enhanced Scatter Search method
David R. Penas1 , Patricia Gonz´alez2 , Jos´e A. Egea3 , Julio R. Banga1 , and
Ram´on Doallo2
1

BioProcess Engineering Group
IIM-CSIC - Instituto de Investigaciones Marinas
C/Eduardo Cabello, 6. E-36208 Vigo, Spain
{davidrodpenas,julio}@iim.csic.es
2
Computer Architecture Group
University of A Coru˜
na
Campus de Elvi˜
na s/n. 15071 A Coru˜
na, Spain
{patricia.gonzalez,doallo}@udc.es
3
Department of Applied Mathematics and Statistics
Universidad Polit´ecnica de Cartagena
Avenida Dr. Fleming s/n, 30202 Cartagena, Spain
josea.egea@upct.es

Abstract
Metaheuristics are gaining increased attention as eﬃcient solvers for hard global optimization
problems arising in bioinformatics and computational systems biology. Scatter Search (SS) is
one of the recent outstanding algorithms in that class. However, its application to very hard
problems, like those considering parameter estimation in dynamic models of systems biology,
still results in excessive computation times. In order to reduce the computational cost of the SS
and improve its success, several research eﬀorts have been made to propose diﬀerent variants
of the algorithm, including parallel approaches.
This work presents an asynchronous Cooperative enhanced Scatter Search (aCeSS) based
on the parallel execution of diﬀerent enhanced Scatter Search threads and the cooperation
between them. The main features of the proposed solution are: low overhead in the cooperation
step, by means of an asynchronous protocol to exchange information between processes; more
eﬀectiveness of the cooperation step, since the exchange of information is driven by quality of
the solution obtained in each process, rather than by a time elapsed; optimal use of available
resources, thanks to a complete distributed approach that avoids idle processes at any moment.
Several challenging parameter estimation problems from the domain of computational systems
biology are used to assess the eﬃciency of the proposal and evaluate its scalability in a parallel
environment.
Keywords: Computational Systems Biology, Parallel Metaheuristics, Enhanced Scatter Search

630

Selection and peer-review under responsibility of the Scientiﬁc Programme Committee of ICCS 2015
c The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V.

doi:10.1016/j.procs.2015.05.331

Asynchronous cooperative enhanced Scatter Search

1

D. R. Penas et al.

Introduction

The aim of systems biology is to generate new knowledge about complex biological systems
by combining experimental data with mathematical modeling and advanced computational
techniques. Dynamic models (described by sets of nonlinear ordinary diﬀerential equations) is
the most common formalism in this area. Model calibration consists of ﬁnding the parameters
of a dynamic model that give the best ﬁt to a set of time-series experimental data, which entails
minimizing a cost function that measures the goodness of this ﬁt. This class of problems is
extremely challeging due to its ill-conditioned and multimodal nature [9]. To eﬃciently solve the
calibration problem many research eﬀorts have focused on developing metaheuristic methods,
which combine mechanisms for exploring the search space and exploiting previous obtained
knowdlege. Those mechanisms make the methods be able to ﬁnd good solutions in reasonable
computation times [2].
Scatter search (SS) [6] is a population-based method that has recently been demonstrated
to produce promising results for solving combinatorial and nonlinear optimization problems. It
uses strategies for combining solution vectors that have proved eﬀective in a variety of problem
settings. Recently, a cooperative enhanced Scatter Search (CeSS) has been presented in [10].
This work demonstrates that the cooperation of individual parallel searches modiﬁes the systemic properties of the individual algorithms, improving its performance and outperforming
other competitive methods. However, the parallel strategy followed presents serious issues in
terms of computational eﬃciency and scalability.
This paper presents an asynchronous cooperative strategy to implement a parallel enhanced
Scatter Search algorithm. Building upon the ideas outlined in [10], this work makes the following
major contributions:
• an asynchronous communication protocol to handle inter-process information exchange,
avoiding idle processes while waiting for information exchanged from other processes
• an exchange of information driven by quality of the solutions obtained by each individual process, rather than by time elapsed, to achieve more eﬀective cooperation between
processes
• a distributed approach, instead of the classical centralized master-slave solutions, to improve the use of the available resources.
The structure of this paper is as follows. Section 2 brieﬂy presents the background and
related work. Section 3 presents the proposal for an asynchronous cooperative parallel Scatter
Search. Section 4 describes the experiments carried out and discusses on the obtained results.
Finally, Section 5 summarizes the conclusions of the paper and the future work.

2

Background

Scatter search (SS) [6], from the point of view of metaheuristic classiﬁcation, is a populationbased algorithm that constructs solutions by applying strategies of diversiﬁcation, improvement,
combination and population update. It derives its foundations from strategies originally proposed for combining decision rules and constraints in the context of integer programming. The
goal of this methodology is to enable the implementation of solution strategies that can derive
new solutions from combined elements in order to produce better solutions than those strategies
that base their combinations only on a set of original elements.
631

Asynchronous cooperative enhanced Scatter Search

D. R. Penas et al.





		
	


	


	


	


	


	
	
	

	
	



	
	
	

	


Figure 1: Schematic representation of a basic Scatter Search

Compared with other methods, like genetic algorithms, Scatter Search makes use of a low
number of population members, called Reference Set. Besides, it includes an improvement
method that usually consists in a local search to speed-up the convergence to optimal solutions.
The method starts by generating an initial population of solutions within the search space.
A good representative solutions of the population are selected to create the initial reference
set. Then a subset is selected from this reference set, and its solutions are combined to obtain
new ones which are candidate starting solutions in a subsequent improvement procedure. After
the mentioned mechanisms, a reference set update method is applied to create the population
of the next iteration before the procedure is repeated until the end of the search. Thus, the
SS strategy involves 5 procedures: the initial population creation method, the reference set
generation method, the subset generation method, the solution combination method and the
improvement solution method. Figure 1 shows a schematic representation of a basic SS design.
In [4, 5] an enhanced Scatter Search (eSS) method for the global dynamic optimization
of nonlinear processes is presented. This new method presents a simpler but more eﬀective
design which helps to overcome typical diﬃculties of nonlinear dynamic systems optimization
such as noise, ﬂat areas, nonsmoothness, and/or discontinuities. A basic pseudocode of the eSS
algorithm is shown in Algorithm 1. Innovative mechanisms are implemented in diﬀerent parts
of the method that address the balance between intensiﬁcation (local search) and diversiﬁcation
(global search):
• It uses a small population size, even for large-scale problems, but allowing more search
directions than in classical SS thanks to a new combination scheme. The number of
evaluations per iteration does not increase while the diversity in the search is preserved.
• It implements an intensiﬁcation mechanism in the global phase, which exploits the promising directions deﬁned by a pair of solutions in the reference set.
• Besides, a heuristic local search method is used to accelerate the convergence of large-scale
problems.
632

Asynchronous cooperative enhanced Scatter Search

D. R. Penas et al.

Algorithm 1: Enhanced Scatter Search algorithm - eSS
Create Population(ndiverse);
Generate RefSet(RefSet, dimRefSet);
repeat
Sort RefSet(RefSet);
for i=1 to dimRefSet do
Combine Solutions(RefSet, NewSol );
Improve Solutions(NewSol, ImprSol );
end
Update RefSet(RefSet);
until stopping criterion;

• It also implements diversiﬁcation strategies that make use of memory (introducing a tabu
list) to infer whether a solution is stagnated in a local optimum or if it is too close to
previously found solutions.
Thus, the eSS method provides a good balance between robustness and eﬃciency in the global
phase, and couples a local search procedure to accelerate the convergence to optimal solutions.
However, for most hard problems, like those considering parameter estimation in dynamic
models, eSS still requires excessive computation times.
Recently, in [10], a cooperative parallel strategy for the eSS method has been presented. The
proposed Cooperative enhanced Scatter Search (CeSS) follows a master-slave approach, where
each of the slave processors runs a sequential eSS algorithm, while they exchange their reference
set of solutions through a master processor at certain ﬁxed instants. The results presented
in [10] show how cooperation of individual parallel search slaves modiﬁes the systemic properties
of the individual algorithms, improving its performance and outperforming other competitive
methods. However, the parallel strategy followed presents serious issues. First, exchanging
information at ﬁxed instants, in a blocking fashion, forces a synchronization that delays the
progress in many slaves. Processors are idle during a signiﬁcant amount of time, while they are
waiting for each other during the migration steps. The penalty may be signiﬁcant because the
improvements introduced by the eSS in diversiﬁcation, like the local solver or the use of a tabu
list, lead processes into a more computationally unbalanced scenario. This synchronization is
one of the causes of its poor scalability when the number of processors grows. Another drawback
of this strategy is that the master processor is sit idle between the communication phases.

3

Asynchronous Cooperative enhanced Scatter Search

The parallelization of metaheuristics pursues one or more of the following goals: increase
the size of the problems that can be solved, speed-up the computations, or attempt a more
thorough exploration of the solution space [3, 1]. However, achieving an eﬃcient parallelization
of metaheuristics is usually a complex task, since the search of new solutions depends on previous
iterations of the algorithm, which not only complicates the parallelization itself but also limits
the speedup achievable.
The solution explored in this work pursues the development of an eﬃcient asynchronous
633

Asynchronous cooperative enhanced Scatter Search

D. R. Penas et al.

cooperative enhanced Scatter Search, focussed on both the acceleration of the computation
by performing separate evaluations in parallel, and the convergence improvement through the
stimulation of the diversiﬁcation in the search and the cooperation between diﬀerent processes.
The parallel algorithm proposed is based on the cooperation between parallel processes,
by means of an exchange of information driven by the quality of the solutions obtained in
each individual process. For cooperation to be eﬃcient, in large-scale diﬃcult problems, like
calibration in large-scale systems biology models, each parallel process must adopt a diﬀerent
strategy to increase the diversiﬁcation in the search. The idea is to run in parallel processes with
diﬀerent degree of agressiveness. Some processes will focus on diversiﬁcation (global search)
increasing the probabilities of ﬁnding a feasible solution even in a rough or diﬃcult space. Other
processes will concentrate in intensiﬁcation (local search) and speed-up the computations in
smoother spaces. Cooperation between them enables each process to beneﬁt from the knowledge
gathered by the rest.
However, the implementation of the cooperation step is not as straightforward as it may
appear to be. The naive solution would be to implement a communication protocol where
all the processes communicates with the rest, i.e. an all-to-all communication step. However,
this approach will become a bottleneck, specially when the number of processes grows, leading
to a solution that would diﬃcultly scale. Also the convergence of the cooperative algorithm
will be altered, since most of the communications will arrive delayed, thus being useless for
many processes that already have reached better solutions by themselves. To alleviate the
communications in the cooperation step and allow for the execution progress, the proposed
communication strategy uses a ring topology. Actually, a double-direction ring topology is
proposed, that is, each process i in the ring will exchange information with both its previous
neighbor (i − 1) and its next neighbor (i + 1).
The pseudocode for the asynchronous Cooperative enhanced Scatter Search (aCeSS) is
shown in Algorithm 2. At the begining of the algorithm, a local variable in each process is
declared to keep track of the best solution shared in the cooperation step. Each process creates its own population matrix of ndiverse solutions, where ndiverse is diﬀerent for diﬀerent
processes depending on their agressiveness. Then a initial RefSet is generated for each process
with dimRefSet solutions with high quality and random elements. Again diﬀerent dimRefSet
are possible for diﬀerent processes. The rest of the operations are performed within each RefSet
in each process, in the same way as in the serial eSS implementation. Every external iteration
of the algorithm, a cooperation phase is performed to exchange information with the rest of
the processes in the parallel application. Whenever a process reaches the cooperation phase, it
checks if any message with a new best solution from the double-direction ring has arrived to
its reception memory buﬀers. If a new solution has arrived, the process checks whether this
new solution improves the current shared best solution or not. If the new solution improves
the current one, the new solution promotes to be the best solution shared with this process till
now. The loop to check the reception of new solutions must be repeated until there are no more
shared solutions to attend. This is because the execution time of one external iteration may
be very diﬀerent from one process to another, due to the diversiﬁcation strategy explained before. Thus, while a process has complete only one external iteration, their neighbors may have
complete more, and several messages may be waiting in the reception buﬀer. The best solution
shared till now replaces then the worst solution in the process RefSet. After the reception step,
the process checks whether its best solution improves in, at least, an the best solution shared.
If its best solution improves the shared one, it updates the shared best solution with its best
solution. Finally, if the shared best solution has changed in this iteration, the process sends
it to their neighbors in the ring. The algorithm repeats the external loop until the stopping
634

Asynchronous cooperative enhanced Scatter Search

D. R. Penas et al.

Algorithm 2: Asynchronous Cooperative enhanced Scatter Search algorithm - aCeSS
coopBestSol = DBL MAX;
Create Population(ndiverse);
Generate RefSet(RefSet, dimRefSet);
repeat
! Serial eSS
Sort RefSet(RefSet);
for i=1 to dimRefSet do
Combine Solutions(RefSet, NewSol );
Improve Solutions(NewSol, ImprSol );
end
Update RefSet(RefSet);
! Cooperation step
sendﬂag=false;
recvﬂag=true;
while recvﬂag do
Non Blocking Recv(RecvSol,(preN,posN),recvﬂag);
if RecvSol < coopBestSol then
coopBestSol=RecvSol;
sendﬂag=true;
end
end
if sendﬂag then
Replace Worst Solution(worstSol,coopBestSol );
end
if ((coopBestSol − bestSol)/bestSol) < then
coopBestSol=bestSol;
sendﬂag=true;
end
if sendﬂag then
Non Blocking Send(coopBestSol,(preN,posN));
end
until stopping criterion;

criterion is met.
Note that both the sends and receptions of the messages are performed using non-blocking
operations, thus allowing for the overlap of communications and computations. Besides, the
proposed communication protocol avoids process stalls if messages have not arrived during an
external iteration, allowing for the progress of the execution in every individual process. This
is crucial in the application of the aCeSS method to solve large-scale diﬃcult problems, since
the algorithm success heavily depends on the diversiﬁcation degree introduced in the diﬀerent
processes, that will result in them running asynchronously and a computationally unbalanced
scenario. To implement the proposed protocol, the non-blocking point-to-point communication
functions of the Message-Passing Interface (MPI) standard have been used [8].
635

Asynchronous cooperative enhanced Scatter Search

4

D. R. Penas et al.

Experimental results

In order to evaluate the proposed cooperative asynchronous algorithm (aCeSS), the benchmarks from the BioPreDyn-bench suite [11] have been tested. These are challenging parameter
estimation problems from the domain of computational system biology. Results for three of
these benchmarks are reported in this section:
• Problem B2 : dynamic model of the Central Carbon Metabolism of E. coli. It consists of
116 kinetic parameters and maximum reaction rates to be estimated.
• Problem B4 : metabolic model of Chinese Hamster Ovary (CHO) cells. It consists of an
ODE model comprising 117 parameters in total.
• Problem B5 : signal transduction logic model. It consists of 26 ODEs that use a logic-based
formalism and include 86 continuous parameters.
To assess the eﬃciency of the aCeSS method, diﬀerent experiments have been carried out.
Its behavior, in terms of convergence and total execution time, was compared with the sequential
version of the enhanced Scatter Search (eSS) [4] and its synchronous cooperative parallel version
(CeSS) [10]. Although the reported implementations of the eSS and CeSS were coded in Matlab,
to perform here a fair comparison both algorithms have been implemented in F90. The original
CeSS implementation used jPar [7] to perform the parallel executions and the communication
between master and slaves. In the new developed version, to compare with the aCeSS, the MPI
library has been employed.
A multicore cluster was used to carry out these experiments. It consists of 16 nodes powered by two octa-core Intel Xeon E5-2660 CPUs with 64 GB of RAM. The cluster nodes are
connected through an InﬁniBand FDR network. OpenMPI library version 1.6.2 has been used
to compile the parallel implementations, and the experiments were carried out using from 1 to
30 processors.
With the aim of performing the most honest comparison, the tested scenario was the following: for each experiment, serial or cooperative, 10 processors were available for computing.
This means that, when executing the serial algorithm, 10 processors are available to run 10 eSS
algorithms in parallel (without cooperation). In order to perform a fair comparison, diversity
is introduced in these 10 eSS runs in the same sense as CeSS and aCeSS do, i.e. each one
performing a diﬀerent eSS with a diﬀerent strategy.
Comparing the sequential and the cooperative metaheuristic is not an easy task, due to
the substantial dispersion of experimental results in these stochastic problems. For this experimental evaluation, the cooperative metaheuristics CeSS and aCeSS were executed until their
achieved solutions had a similar accuracy as the serial eSS, i.e., they are compared based on a
quality solution. The value-to-reach (V T R) used was the optimal ﬁtness value reported in [11].
Each experiment was performed at least 5 times.
Average mean execution times and speedup results for these experiments are shown in
Table 1. This table displays, for each experiment, the average number of evaluations needed to
achieve the VTR (# evals), the mean, minimum, and maximum execution time of all the runs
in the experiment, and the speedup achieved. The speedup may appear to be very modest,
however, note that the speedups were calculated comparing execution times of aCeSS and CeSS
with the execution time of eSS, using in all the cases 10 processors (also in the eSS method as
explained above). In these experiments the computational load is not shared among processors,
thus, the total speedup achieved over the eSS depends on the impact that the cooperation
636

Asynchronous cooperative enhanced Scatter Search

P
B2
B4
B5

method
eSS
CeSS
aCeSS
eSS
CeSS
aCeSS
eSS
CeSS
aCeSS

#evals
104598
87031
57005
18195
16333
2427
19575
7992
7443

D. R. Penas et al.
time(s)
min.
1016.46
1541.85
1139.12
194.08
259.63
52.97
6475.00
2217.88
2010.70

mean
4256.10
2550.05
1873.45
544.37
517.33
168.29
9149.24
3686.18
3308.73

max.
7293.75
4569.63
3086.56
1087.07
935.34
248.82
14442.85
5929.51
4462.15

speedup
1.67
2.27
1.05
3.23
2.48
2.77

Table 1: Execution time and speedup results using 10 processors. V T RB2 = 2.1051 × 102 ,
V T RB4 = 4.5718 × 10−1 and V T RB5 = 3.0725 × 103 .









	




























		


		

(a) B2


		

(b) B4


















		


		


		

(c) B5

Figure 2: Box plot of the execution times.

among processes produces on achieving a good result performing less number of evaluations
and hence better performance. These ﬁgures show that the proposed aCeSS method reduces
the number of evaluations and the execution time of the eSS and CeSS.
637

Asynchronous cooperative enhanced Scatter Search

D. R. Penas et al.

B4. Convergence curves

7

10

10 proc

6

10

20 proc
5

f(x)

10

30 proc

4

10

3

10

2

10

1

10

0

50

100

150

200

250

300

Time (s)

Figure 3: Convergence curves for diﬀerent number of processors.

In this kind of stochastic problems it is important to evaluate the dispersion of the experimental results. Figure 2 illustrates how the proposed aCeSS reduces the variability of execution
time in the eSS and the CeSS method. It demonstrates that the outliers of the execution time
decrease in the asynchronous cooperative method. This is an important feature of the aCeSS,
because it reduces the average execution time for each benchmark.
One known issue of the CeSS method is its poor scalability, since its synchronous communication step is challenged by the increasingly computationally unbalanced scenario when the
number of processors grows. In order to evaluate the scalability of the aCeSS, it has been tested
using 10, 20 and 30 processors. Figure 3 shows, for B4 benchmark, the convergence curves for
those experiments that fall in the median values of the results distribution. Similar results are
obtained for B2 and B5 benchmarks. It can be seen that the aCeSS still improves the convergence results when the number of processors grows, thanks to the asynchronous communication
protocol.

5

Conclusions

In this paper an asynchronous cooperative parallel strategy for the enhanced Scatter Search
algorithm (aCeSS) is presented. The designed approach is an eﬀective way to cooperate between
diﬀerent processes running diﬀerent conﬁgurations of the eSS algorithm. Three are the main
features of the proposed approach: (i) it is a completely distributed approach, diﬀering from the
most popular centralized master-slave cooperative approaches; (ii) the exchange of information
between cooperating processes is driven by the quality of the solution encountered in each
individual process, rather than by a time elapsed; (iii) the cooperation phase is based on an
asynchronous communication protocol, that avoids processes’ stalls and allows for execution
progress in a computational unbalanced scenario.
The testbed used to evaluate the proposed asynchronous Cooperative enhanced Scatter
Search (aCeSS) was comprised of three challenging parameter estimation problems from the
domain of computational systems biology. The experimental results show that the asynchronous
parallel strategy proposed attains a reduction in the convergence time through cooperation
of the parallel processes, demonstrating also a competitive speedup against a synchronous
638

Asynchronous cooperative enhanced Scatter Search

D. R. Penas et al.

cooperative strategy (CeSS).
Despite the reduction in the convergence time, the diverse eSS methods running in diﬀerent
processors in the parallel execution cause often situations where only some processes, the most
promising ones, are able to share solutions with the rest. This limits the scalability of the
proposal, since those processes that never obtain solutions to be shared, can be considered idle
processes. Therefore, future work will focus on developing auto-tuning heuristics that allow for
reconﬁguring the slowest processes with the successful parameters of the promising processes.

Acknowledgment
This research received ﬁnancial support from the Spanish Ministerio de Econom´ıa y Competitividad (and the FEDER) through the projects DPI2011-28112-C04-03, DPI2011-28112-C0404, and TIN2013-42148-P, from the CSIC intramural project “BioREDES” (PIE-201170E018)
and from the Galician Government under the Consolidation Program of Competitive Research
Units (Network ref. R2014/041 and competitive reference groups GRC2013/055). D. R. Penas
acknowledges ﬁnancial support from the MICINN-FPI programme.

References
[1] Enrique Alba. Parallel metaheuristics: a new class of algorithms, volume 47. Wiley-Interscience,
2005.
[2] Julio R Banga. Optimization in computational systems biology. BMC Systems Biology, 2(1):47,
2008.
[3] Teodor Gabriel Crainic and Michel Toulouse. Parallel strategies for meta-heuristics. Springer,
2003.
[4] Jose A Egea, Eva Balsa-Canto, Maria S G Garc´ıa, and Julio R Banga. Dynamic optimization of
nonlinear processes with an enhanced scatter search method. Industrial & Engineering Chemistry
Research, 48(9):4388–4401, 2009.
[5] Jose A Egea, Rafael Mart´ı, and Julio R Banga. An evolutionary method for complex-process
optimization. Computers & Operations Research, 37(2):315–324, 2010.
[6] Fred Glover, Manuel Laguna, and Rafael Mart´ı. Fundamentals of scatter search and path relinking.
Control and Cybernetics, 39:653–684, 2000.
[7] A Karbowski, M Majchrowski, and P Trojanek. jPar–a simple, free and lightweight tool for
parallelizing Matlab calculations on multicores and in clusters. In 9th International Workshop on
State-of-the-Art in Scientiﬁc and Parallel Computing (PARA 2008), 2008.
[8] Peter S. Pacheco. Parallel Programming with MPI. Morgan Kaufmann Publishers Inc., San
Francisco, CA, USA, 1996.
[9] Alejandro F Villaverde and Julio R Banga. Reverse engineering and identiﬁcation in systems biology: strategies, perspectives and challenges. Journal of The Royal Society Interface,
11(91):20130505, 2014.
[10] Alejandro F Villaverde, Jose A Egea, and Julio R Banga. A cooperative strategy for parameter
estimation in large scale systems biology models. BMC Systems Biology, 6(1):75, 2012.
[11] Alejandro F Villaverde, David Henriques, Kieran Smallbone, Sophia Bongard, Joachim Schmid,
Damjan Cicin-Sain, Anton Crombach, Julio Saez-Rodriguez, Klaus Mauch, Eva Balsa-Canto, Pedro Mendes, Johannes Jaeger, and Julio R Banga. Biopredyn-bench: a suite of benchmark problems for dynamic modelling in systems biology. BMC Systems Biology, 2015. In press.

639

