Procedia Computer Science
Volume 51, 2015, Pages 1887–1896
ICCS 2015 International Conference On Computational Science

Modeling electrochemical reactions at the solid-liquid
interface using density functional calculations
Egill Sk´
ulason∗
Science Institute and Faculty of Physical Sciences, University of Iceland VR-III, 107 Reykjav´ık,
Iceland.

Abstract
Charged interfaces are physical phenomena found in various natural systems and artiﬁcial devices within the ﬁelds of biology, chemistry and physics. In electrochemistry, this is known as
the electrochemical double layer, introduced by Helmholtz over 150 years ago. At this interface,
between a solid surface and the electrolyte, chemical reactions can take place in a strong electric ﬁeld. In this presentation, a new computational method is introduced for creating charged
interfaces and to study charge transfer reactions on the basis of periodic DFT calculations. The
electrochemical double layer is taken as an example, in particular the hydrogen electrode. With
this method the mechanism of forming hydrogen gas is studied. The method is quite general
and could be applied to a wide variety of atomic scale transitions at charged interfaces.
Keywords: density functional theory, simulations, electrochemistry, catalysis, hydrogen

1

Introduction

Atomic scale computer simulations can provide access to the microscopic processes occurring
at electrode surfaces and can thereby contribute enormously to the understanding of electrochemical reactions. Despite the fact that the research ﬁeld of experimental electrochemistry
is about two centuries old, it is just within the last few years that computer simulations have
reached the point at which they can describe the complicated ionic interactions and electron
transfer reactions taking place in an electro-chemical cell.
In electrolysis, water is dissociated on the anode, forming oxygen gas molecules, protons
and electrons. This reaction is usually called the water splitting reaction (WSR) or oxygen
evolution reaction (OER). The protons are solvated in the electrolyte and the positive charge is
transferred through the liquid via the Grotthuss mechanism [5]. The electrons are transferred
with an external wire to the cathode, where the protons and the electrons are reduced to
hydrogen gas molecules. This is referred to the hydrogen evolution reaction (HER). To drive
these reactions, energy is required in the form of electricity. Fig. 1 describes this schematically.
∗ Corresponding

author: Egill Sk´
ulason

Selection and peer-review under responsibility of the Scientiﬁc Programme Committee of ICCS 2015
c The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V.

doi:10.1016/j.procs.2015.05.431

1887

ICCS 2015

Egill Sk´
ulason

Figure 1: Upper part: Schematic of an electrochemical cell performing electrolysis or splitting water and forming hydrogen gas. Lower part: The electrode potential proﬁle along the
electrochemical cell.

The interface between the solid electrode and the liquid electrolyte consists of two oppositely
charged plates with an electric potential drop in between, forming an electric ﬁeld at the
interface. At this interface, proton-electron elementary transfer reaction steps are constantly
taking place, when e.g. HER or HOR are running. The electric potential proﬁle can be seen
in the lower part of Fig. 1. The potential is constant in the electrodes and in the electrolyte
since there the electric ﬁeld is completely screened. At the interface between the electrode and
the liquid there is a potential drop where a strong electric ﬁeld is created. A more detailed
description of this interface and of the proton-electron transfer reaction will be given below.
It is generally accepted that the overall reaction
2(H + + e− )

H2

(1)

taking place at an electrode in contact with an electrolyte, involves three elementary reactions.
In the ﬁrst step, the solvated proton is discharged by combining with an electron from the
surface, following the Volmer route [33]
H + + e−

H∗

(2)

where H ∗ denotes hydrogen adsorbed on the surface. Forming the H2 molecule may be accomplished either by the homolytic Tafel reaction [29]
2H ∗
1888

H2 (g)

(3)

ICCS 2015

Egill Sk´
ulason

or by the heterolytic Heyrovsky reaction [12]
H ∗ + H + + e−

H2 .

(4)

Despite intensive research eﬀorts it is still unclear which of the two pathways, Volmer-Tafel
or Volmer-Heyrovsky, dominates under diﬀerent reaction conditions.
In this presentation, a new method is introduced to deal with these complicated systems and
the method is tested on the electro-catalysis of the simplest molecule of them all; the hydrogen
molecule. This method may, however, be applied to any charge transfer reactions and is being
tested for the reduction of N2 into ammonia and CO2 into methane and methanol, processes
that are under detailed study in my research group [9, 2, 14] together with the mechanistic
understanding of the hydrogen formation [19, 7, 8, 26].

2

Model and Calculation details

Due to technological developments in the capacity and power of computers, computer calculations have become an increasingly important tool in chemistry and physics. Within catalysis
empirical and semi-empirical methods have been used for some time and recently more demanding ab initio (or ﬁrst principles) calculations have become increasingly popular. Not only
do they oﬀer more accuracy but they also have greater predictive power as no ﬁtting to experimental results on chemical bonding is needed. One of the most popular methods is DFT,
which oﬀers a full quantum mechanical description without the complexity of the many-body
Schr¨odinger equation. DFT is only strictly valid for determining the properties of a systems
ground state, rather than its full eigenenergy spectrum. In contrast to wavefunction methods
like Hartree-Fock, DFT works with the electron density as the basic variable instead of the
wave function. This reduces the complexity of the many-body problem from one in terms of
3N independent variables (r1 , r2 , ..., rN ) to one in terms of three variables (r), where N is the
number of electrons in the system and r are the three-dimensional coordinates. The founding
father of DFT is Walter Kohn, who made essential contributions to the theory [13, 16]. In 1998
he was awarded the Nobel Prize in chemistry (together with John Pople) for his contributions
to DFT [15].
The electronic structure problem has been solved using DFT in a plane wave pseudopotential
implementation [21, 18], employing ultrasoft pseudopotentials [32] to represent the ionic cores.
All calculations were performed with the RPBE exchange-correlation functional [10] in the
dacapo code [1]. The self-consistent electron density is determined by iterative diagonalization
of the Kohn-Sham Hamiltonian, with the occupation of the Kohn-Sham states being smeared
according to a Fermi-Dirac distribution with a smearing parameter of kB T = 0.1 eV, and Pulay
mixing of the resulting electronic density. All total energies have been extrapolated to kB T =
0 eV.
The water layer has a hexagonal honeycomb structure as has been observed experimentally
and theoretically [20] on some close-packed surfaces. To model the solid-liquid interface we use
the H-down structure. The H-down structure is lower in energy when considering negatively
charged surfaces, whereas the H-up structure is more favorable when the surface is positively
charged [25, 23]. Other possible water structures have also been reported [11]. As there seems
to exist few local minima with very similar binding energies, this should not aﬀect the overall
conclusions or the trends found in this work. To create the bias, excess H atoms are included
in the water layer [27].
Adding this extra H atom to the water and calculating the electronic structure of the system
results in the formation of solvated protons (or an acid) in the water layer and a transfer of
1889

ICCS 2015

Egill Sk´
ulason

electrons to the metal [27, 28]. This is because the electron from this additional H atom ﬁnds a
position with a lower energy at the metal surface rather than in the water. In order to create a
positively charge surface, a H atom can be removed from the water in the same way. Here the
OH species in the water picks up an electron from the metal slab, creating an alkaline solution
on a positive electrode. By varying the number of hydrogen atoms added (or removed) and/or
the unit cell size used in the calculations, the electrostatic potential of the double layer can be
varied [24, 31, 3]. The electrode potential of the slab relative to the NHE may be estimated
from the work function, φ, relative to that of the NHE
U = φ − φN HE .

(5)

This procedure was outlined by Trasatti [30] and has been used previously by e.g. Filhol
and Neurock [6] and Cai and Anderson [4]. The reference system (NHE vs. vacuum), can e.g.
be chosen to be within the range φN HE = 4.44 V - 4.85 V found in the literature [22, 17].

3

Results

In the previous Section our interface model was reviewed. In that setup the surface charge and
the counter charge create the electric potential of the system. When allowing these charges to
react, some of the potential disappears as we will see in this Section. To avoid this, we propose
a scheme to extrapolate the results obtained in ﬁnite sized unit cell calculations to inﬁnitely
large systems, to mimic the energy landscape of a real electrochemical cell.
In the model presented above, where the ions are explicitly localized in the Helmholtz layer,
problem arises when these ions react. Since we use periodic boundary conditions and are limited
by using rather small unit cells, performing one proton-electron transfer reaction in a unit cell
is eﬀectively performing many over the whole space at the same time. Since the ions set up
the potential and the ﬁeld, performing such a reaction changes the potential of the electrode
at the same time. This problem is very severe for the smallest unit cells considered, where
the bias can change by up to 3.5 V. In Fig. 2 this can be seen for the Heyrovsky reaction,
H ∗ + H + + e− → H2 , where both the energy and the surface dipole are plotted along the
reaction path. As there is a one-to-one correspondence between the surface dipole and the
work function (and U) this may be viewed as a bias change during a reaction. There is a bias
drop around the TS where the electron leaves the surface and reacts with the solvated proton
to form a H2 molecule.
This may also be seen in the isosurface analysis. Here the charge density of the reacting H
is calculated in a separate calculational cell, where this H is a solvated proton in the IS but a
part of an H2 molecule in the FS. For images 0 and 3 in Fig. 2 this is done for two diﬀerent
H since the proton is ﬁrst translated laterally before it reacts with the H on the surface. For
images 6, 10 and 14 in Fig. 2 both of the hydrogen atoms, in the H2 which is being formed, are
used as the reference system and calculated together in a separate cell. The blue isosurfaces
show the positive charge around the proton and the purple isosurfaces show the negative charge
on the surface. The additional charge set up in the beginning completely disappears during the
reaction, as expected.
In a real system, one would not observe a change in the bias during an electrochemical
reaction. There might be local change in the electric ﬁeld where the reaction takes place, but
the global bias should stay constant. Since the unit cells are repeated in the DFT calculations,
we always have many proton/electron transfer reactions at the same time. If we increase the
unit cell size and only allow one proton-electron transfer reaction to occur we can reduce this
1890

ICCS 2015

Egill Sk´
ulason

Figure 2: Top ﬁgure: Energy barrier (black) and surface dipole (red) along the reaction path
of the Heyrovsky reaction; H ∗ + H + + e− → H2 . Lower ﬁgures: Isosurfaces change along the
reaction, shown for 5 images along the path, both in top view and side view. Blue isosurfaces
(isovalue: -0.0018 e bohr−3 ) represent a lack of electrons (positive charge) and purple isosurfaces
(isovalue: +0.0012 e bohr−3 ) represent a gain of electrons (negative charge).

problem signiﬁcantly. When there is a lower concentration of these reactions, the global bias
changes much less and we start to reach the limit of a real electrochemical reaction. However,
while doing this we also increase the computational cost exponentially.
When increasing the unit cell size, the problem of simultaneously reacting all charges decreases. Diﬀerent concentrations of protons/electrons can be made in larger unit cells and one
can allow only one of the protons/electrons to react instead of all of them. In Fig. 3 it can be
seen how the change in bias, ΔU , becomes smaller before and after the Heyrovsky reaction, as
the unit cells are increased.
When a charge, e, is transferred from one electrode to the other in a capacitor with potential,
U , n protons, and surface area N , the charge density, θ, changes as, Δθ = n/N − (n − 1)/N =
1/N , and the potential changes by a proportional amount ΔU . In Fig. 3 we observe a 1/N
dependence of the change in bias.
We have seen above how the bias was aﬀected by the unit cell size, where the change in bias
was decreased when using larger unit cells. Here we will see how the energetics are aﬀected
by the unit cell size. More precisely, we will show how the change in energy, when e.g. going
from initial state to either transition or ﬁnal state, depends on the change in bias during the
reaction.
Consider a system containing n protons in a unit cell with N surface atoms. The activation
1891

ICCS 2015

Egill Sk´
ulason

Figure 3: The change in electrode potential, ΔU , due to the Heyrovsky reaction; H ∗ + H + +
e− → H2 , vs the surface area or number of Pt atoms in the surface layer. This is shown for 3
diﬀerent initial electrode potentials.

energy and the reaction energy will be diﬀerent if the system reacts all the protons (and the extra
electrons) at the same time or if it only reacts part of the protons. This may be understood
from the capacitor model. Since the energy stored in the double layer is dependent on the
proton/electron concentration (or U), the diﬀerences in energy when subtracting one integral
energy from another will depend on where the systems are on the parabola.
In Fig 4 the Heyrovsky reaction is performed in three diﬀerent unit cell sizes; (3×2), (6×2)
and (6×4), where the initial proton concentration is always the same; 1/6, 2/12 and 4/24. In
each case, only one proton is allowed to react so the proton concentration in the ﬁnal state
is always diﬀerent or; 0/6, 1/12 and 3/24, respectively. We can see both how the dipole
decreases signiﬁcantly when the unit cells are increased but also how the reaction becomes
more exothermic at the same time. The activation barrier when going from left to right here is
more or less constant when performing the calculations at such a negative initial bias. However,
if we would oxidize the H2 molecule, going from right to left it can be seen how the activation
barrier would increase in a similar way as the reaction energy, when the unit cells are increased.
We now turn to the question of calculating reaction energies and activation energies for
charge transfer reactions without ﬁnite size errors. We continue with the Heyrovsky reaction,
now in the hydrogen oxidation (HOR) direction. The approach we will take in the following
is to calculate the energies for several diﬀerent unit cell sizes and show how to extrapolate the
results to the limit of an inﬁnite unit cell. This is equivalent to the limit where the change
in potential, ΔU , during the reaction approaches zero, which mimics the situation in a real
1892

ICCS 2015

Egill Sk´
ulason

Figure 4: Reaction energy proﬁle (black) and surface dipole (red) along the reaction coordinate
of the Heyrovsky reaction; H ∗ + H + + e− → H2 . This is shown for 3 diﬀerent unit cells where
the initial electrode potential and the proton concentration of the initial states are always the
same. In each case only one proton is reacted so when going to bigger unit cells the potential
has been less aﬀected.

electrochemical system.
We extrapolate to ΔU = 0, where ΔU is the diﬀerence of the IS and FS WF. The variation
in ΔU is obtained by using diﬀerent size unit cells, N , with a ﬁxed ratio of charges, n, in the
unit cell, n/N = θ, in either the IS or the FS as will be explained below. In Fig. 5a the
calculated reaction free energy, ΔG = GF S − GIS , for HOR is plotted as a function of ΔU
for diﬀerent values of the surface charge density, θ, or equivalently potentials in the FS when
ΔU < 0 and IS when ΔU > 0.
It is now possible to construct a free energy diagram for the HER, where the bias is kept
constant while a solvated proton from solution is transferred to the ﬁrst bilayer of water, to
the TS of the Heyrovsky reaction and when H2 has been formed in the gas phase. This is done
in Fig. 6 at several diﬀerent potentials where the information obtained from Fig. 5 is used.
Everything is referenced to H2 in the gas phase. The reaction barrier is potential dependent and
when ΔG is close to zero (when the reaction is thermoneutral) the barrier for the Heyrovsky
reaction is about 1.5 eV. This is an enormous barrier. Here we have reached somewhat selfconsistancy for the proton concentration and the hydrogen coverage on the surface. When going
in the HER direction, at U = -0.9 V vs NHE we have above 1 ML H on the surface, at U =
+0.2 V vs NHE we have 1 ML and at U = +1.4 V vs NHE the H coverage is very low, or only
1 H in the unit cell.

4

Conclusions

A realistic atomic model for the solidliquid interface at electrode surfaces has been constructed.
In addition a method is suggested for calculating reaction energies associated with charge transfer reactions at the solidliquid interfaces where ﬁnite size eﬀects do not matter. The calculations
require several calculations for diﬀerent unit cell sizes in order to extrapolate to the limit of
an inﬁnite surface unit cell, and it is therefore considerably more cumbersome than ordinary
calculations for surface reactions. It does, however, open up the possibility of detailed, realistic
calculations of electrochemical reaction energetics.
1893

ICCS 2015

Egill Sk´
ulason

Figure 5: (a) The reaction free energy of the Heyrovsky reaction: H2 → H + + e− + H ∗ as a
function of the electrode potential change during the reaction, shown for diﬀerent potentials.
The extrapolation to ΔU = 0 gives the free energy values at given potential (or proton coverage)
in the limit when the potential does not change during the electron-transfer reaction. The slope
of the extrapolation is ﬁxed to the theoretical value of 1/2. (b) Same as (a) but for the energy
of the transition state Ea . The slopes are not necessarily 1/2 as was the case for ΔG. Black
symbols; slightly more than 1ML, grey symbols; at 1ML, white symbols; low H coverage or 1H*
per N surface atoms.

5

Acknowledgement

This work was funded in part by the Icelandic Research Fund, the Nordic Energy Research by
way of the Nordic Initiative for Solar Fuel Development and the Research Fund of the University
of Iceland. The calculations were in part carried out on the Nordic High Performance Computer
(Gardar) located in Iceland.
1894

ICCS 2015

Egill Sk´
ulason

Figure 6: Standard free energy diagram for the Volmer-Heyrovsky route. The electric potential,
U, deduced from the WF is given for each free energy level.

References
[1] Dacapo pseudopotential code. URL http://www.fysik.dtu.dk/campos. Center for Atomic-scale Materials Physics, Technical University of Denmark, Kongens Lyngby.
´
[2] Y. Abghoui, A. L. Garden, S. Bj¨
orgvinsd´
ottir, V.F. Hlynsson, H. Olafsd´
ottir, and E. Sk´
ulason.
Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics, 17:4909, 2015.
[3] M. E. Bj¨
orketun, V. Tripkovic, E. Sk´
ulason, and J. Rossmeisl. Catalysis Today, 202:168, 2013.
[4] Y. Cai and A. B. Anderson. Journal of Physical Chemistry B, 108:9829, 2004.
[5] C. J. T. de Grotthuss. Sur la decomposition de l’eau et des corps qu’elle tient en dissolution a
l’aide de l’electricite galvanique. Ann. Chim., LVIII:54–74, 1806.
[6] J. S. Filhol and M. Neurock. Angew. Chem. Int. Ed., 45:402, 2006.
[7] S. Gudmundsd´
ottir, E. Sk´
ulason, and H. J´
onsson. Phys. Rev. Lett., 108:156101, 2012.
[8] S. Gudmundsd´
ottir, E. Sk´
ulason, K.-J. Weststrate, L. Juurlink, and H. J´
onsson. Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics, 15:6323, 2013.
[9] S. Gudmundsd´
ottir, W. Tang, G. Henkelman, H. J´
onsson, and E. Sk´
ulason. J. Chem. Phys.,
137:164705, 2012.
[10] B. Hammer, L. B. Hansen, and J. K. Nørskov. Phys. Rev. B, 46:7413, 1999.
[11] S. Haq, C. Clay, G. R. Darling, G. Zimbitas, and A. Hodgson. Growth of intact water ice on
ru0001 between 140 and 160 k: Experiment and density-functional theory calculations. Phys. Rev.
B, 73:115414, 2006.
[12] J. Heyrovsky. Recl. Trav. Chim. Pays-Bas, 46:582, 1927.
[13] P. Hohenberg and W. Kohn. Inhomogeneous electron gas. Phys. Rev., 136:B864, 1964.
[14] J. Hussain, H. J´
onsson, and E. Sk´
ulason. to be submitted.

1895

ICCS 2015

Egill Sk´
ulason

[15] W. Kohn. Nobel lecture: Electronic structure of matter - wave functions and density functionals.
Reviews of Modern Physics, 71:1253–1266, 1999.
[16] W. Kohn and L. J. Sham. Self-consistent equations including exchange and correlation eﬀects.
Phys. Rev., 140:A1133, 1965.
[17] E. R. Kotz, H. Neﬀ, and K. Muller. J. Electroanal. Chem., 215:331, 1986.
[18] G. Kresse and J. Furtmller. Comp. Mat. Sci., 6:15, 1996.
[19] L. Kristinsd´
ottir and E. Sk´
ulason. Surface Science, 606:1400, 2012.
[20] H. Ogasawara, B. Brena, D. Nordlund, M. Nyberg, A. Pelmenschikov, L.G.M. Pettersson, and
A. Nilsson. Phys. Rev. Lett., 89:276102, 2002.
[21] M. C. Payne, M. P. Teter, D. C. Allan, T. A. Arias, and J. D. Joannopoulos. Rev. Mod. Phys.,
64:1045, 1992.
[22] J. E. B. Randles. Trans. Faraday Soc., 52:1573, 1956.
[23] J. Rossmeisl, J.K. Nørskov, C.D. Taylor, M.J. Janik, and M. Neurock. J. Phys. Chem. B,
110:21833, 2006.
[24] J. Rossmeisl, E. Sk´
ulason, M.E. Bj¨
orketun, V. Tripkovic, and J.K. Nørskov. Chemical Physics
Letters, 466:68, 2008.
[25] A. Roudgar and A. Groß. Chem. Phys. Letters, 409:157, 2005.
[26] E. Sk´
ulason, A. A. Faraj, L. Kristinsd´
ottir, J. Hussain, A.L. Garden, and H. J´
onsson. Topics in
Catalysis, 57:273, 2014.
[27] E. Sk´
ulason, G. S. Karlberg, J. Rossmeisl, T. Bligaard, J. Greeley, H. J´
onsson, and J. K. Nørskov.
Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics, 9:3241, 2007.
[28] E. Sk´
ulason, V. Tripkovic, M. E. Bj¨
orketun, S. Gudmundsd´
ottir, G. S. Karlberg, J. Rossmeisl,
T. Bligaard, H. J´
onsson, and J.K. Nørskov. Modeling the electrochemical hydrogen oxidation
and evolution reactions on the basis of density functional theory calculations. J. Phys. Chem. C,
114:18182, 2010.
[29] J. Tafel. Z. Phys. Chem. Stoechiom. Verwandtschaftsl., 50:641, 1905.
[30] S. Trasatti. Electrochim. Acta, 36:1657, 1991.
[31] V. Tripkovic, M. E. Bj¨
orketun, E. Sk´
ulason, and J. Rossmeisl. Physical Review B, 84:115452, 2011.
[32] D. Vanderbilt. Phys. Rev. B, 41:7892, 1990.
[33] T. Volmer and M. Erdey-Gruz. Z. Phys. Chem., Abt. A, 150:203, 1930.

1896

