Procedia Computer Science
Volume 51, 2015, Pages 680–682
ICCS 2015 International Conference On Computational Science

8th Workshop on Biomedical and Bioinformatics Challenges
for Computer Science – BBC2015
Stefano Beretta1,2 , Mario Cannataro3,4 , and Riccardo Dondi5
1
3

Dept. of Informatics, Systems and Communication, University of Milano - Bicocca, Milano - Italy
2
Inst. for Biomedical Technologies, National Research Council, Segrate - Italy
Dept. of Medical and Surgical Sciences, University Magna Græcia of Catanzaro, Catanzaro - Italy
4
ICAR-CNR, National Research Council, Rende - Italy
5
Dept. of Human and Social Sciences, University of Bergamo, Bergamo - Italy
stefano.beretta@itb.cnr.it, cannataro@unicz.it, riccardo.dondi@unibg.it

1

Introduction

Life science has been revolutionized by the new developed technologies which now produce an increased amount of complex data, especially inﬂuencing ﬁelds such as genomics, transcriptomics,
and metagenomics. In fact, although the aims of bioinformatics were mainly devoted to the support for the analysis of biological and medical data, like the acquisition, storage, organization,
and archiving of data, the recent changes in the nature of the information produced by these
new emerging technologies opened new challenges. More precisely, the new needs have made the
role of computer science (both theoretical and applied aspects) much more central and critical
in all the bioinformatics research directions, requiring the development of new methods and
approaches to analyze the new produced data. On the other hand, computational biology was
focused on modelling and simulating biomedical processes and systems, with particular attention to the mathematical and computational aspects. Inﬂuenced by the advent of the developed
technologies, these two disciplines are becoming more and more related each other. In order
to tackle the growing complexity associated with emerging and future life science challenges,
bioinformatics and computational biology researchers and developers need to explore, develop
and apply novel computational concepts, methods, tools and systems. Many of these new approaches are likely to involve advanced and large-scale computing techniques, computational
approaches, technologies and infrastructures such as: (i) high-performance architectures and
systems (e.g., multicore, GPU); (ii) distributed computing (e.g. grid, cloud, peer-to-peer); (iii)
computational simulation (mechanistic, stochastic, multi-model); (iv) algorithms (theoretical
and experimental aspects); (v) applied bioinformatics (analysis pipelines, tools, applications);
(vi) artiﬁcial and computational intelligence (machine learning, agents, evolutionary techniques,
bio-inspired methods).
The eighth edition of the Workshop on Biomedical and Bioinformatics Challenges for Computer Science (BBC) aimed to bring together scientists in the ﬁelds of computer science, bioinformatics and computational biology to discuss the emerging and future directions in these
680

Selection and peer-review under responsibility of the Scientiﬁc Programme Committee of ICCS 2015
c The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V.

doi:10.1016/j.procs.2015.05.184

BBC 2015

Beretta, Cannataro, Dondi

areas. As in the past, also this year the workshop has been organized in conjunction with the
International Conference on Computational Science (ICCS).
The ﬁrst session, Bioinformatics Application for Medicine (I), comprised three full and two
short papers. In the ﬁrst paper Robust Conclusions in Mass Spectrometry Analysis, Zoppis et al.
proposed a framework to provide robust decisions, when testing hypothesis over a case/control
population of proteomic proﬁles. The approach is based on a graph model for the considered
data, on a test of hypotheses of the graph properties and on a reference random graph model, for
sources of uncertainties. It is applied to mass spectrometry proﬁles of the most common type of
Renal Cell Carcinoma. In the paper Modeling of Imaging Mass Spectrometry Data and Testing
by Permutation for Biomarkers Discovery in Tissues, Michal Marczyk et al. provided computational and statistical methods to investigate protein biomarkers. The proposed methodology
includes known pre-processing tools, advanced mathematical modeling algorithms and permutation tests, which are applied to identify components diﬀerentiating among proteome proﬁles
of tumor and surrounding tissues. The method allows to detect proteins/peptides speciﬁc to
tumor area, normal epithelium, muscle and saliva gland regions, with high conﬁdence. In the
paper Fuzzy indication of reliability in metagenomics NGS data analysis, Milko Krachunov et
al. introduced modiﬁed Hamming and Levenshtein distance functions, which are used as dropin replacement in NGS analysis procedures. The proposed approach is based on fuzzy sets of
reliable bases or an equivalent fuzzy logic, and uses a combination of read similarity and neural
networks. In the paper Pairwise genome comparison workﬂow in the Cloud using Galaxy, Oscar
Torreno et al. presented the integration of a tools management platform (Galaxy) and a Cloud
infrastructure. This integration provides a user-friendly platform that facilitates end-users in
performing their experiments, and guarantees the features of a Cloud environment (authentication, security and big-data transfer mechanisms). Pairwise and multiple genome comparison
tools are integrated to provide evidence of the usefulness of the proposed approach. In the
paper Iterative Reconstruction from Few-View Projections, Liubov A. Flores et al. proposed
an LSQR-approach, with soft threshold ﬁltering algorithm for few-view image reconstruction
based on GPUs. The method helps in dealing with 3D reconstruction of computed tomography
imaging.
The second session, Bioinformatics Application for Medicine (II), comprised ﬁve full papers
about computational methods for bioinformatics analysis of medical data. In the ﬁrst paper
GoD: An R-Package based on Ontologies for Prioritization of Genes with respect to Diseases,
Cannataro et al. presented an algorithm, called GoD (Gene ranking based On Diseases), to
rank a given set of genes exploiting ontology annotations. Genes are ordered based on the
semantic similarity computed between the annotations of each gene and those describing the
selected disease. The algorithm is applied to Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO), Gene Ontology (GO) and Disease Ontology (DO). In the paper Large Scale Comparative Visualisation
of Regulatory Networks with TRNDiﬀ, Xin-Yi Chua et al. presented an open source system,
called TRNDiﬀ, that supports the comparative analysis and visualization of Transcriptional
Regulatory Networks (TRNs) belonging to diﬀerent genomes. The presented approach allows
the rapid identiﬁcation of functional variations within species, as shown by a multiple TRN
analysis of the Fur iron-uptake system of Yersinia. In the paper Graph Theoretical Analysis of
Clarkson Disease GWAS Epistatic Interactions, Alex Upton et al. provided a graph approach
for the study of SNP and gene interaction networks constructed for a Clarkson disease GWAS.
The paper identiﬁed several genes and SNPs that are potentially involved in Clarkson disease
with respect to traditional single SNP analysis. In the paper Multiple structural clustering of
bromodomains of the bromo and extra terminal (BET) proteins highlights subtle diﬀerences in
their structural dynamics and acetylated leucine binding pocket, Suryani Lukman et al. con681

BBC 2015

Beretta, Cannataro, Dondi

sidered the functions of BET proteins, epigenetic readers whose deregulation results in cancer
and inﬂammation. The paper shows that, although BET proteins (BRD2, BRD3, BRD4 and
BRDT) are globally similar, there exist subtle diﬀerences in the structural dynamics, that could
be related to non-subtle functional eﬀects. By applying multiple structural clustering methods,
the paper identiﬁed representative structures of BET proteins, which are potentially useful for
developing potential therapeutic agents. In the paper Parallel Tools for Simulating the Depolarization Block on a Neural Model, Salvatore Cuomo et al. presented a computational neural
framework to investigate the depolarization block of a CA1 pyramidal cell of hippocampus.
An eﬃcient simulation of the framework is provided by means of parallel tools, providing an
eﬃcient model simulation.
The third session Medical Informatics Applications and Tools comprised four full papers and
one oral presentation about medical application of informatics. In the ﬁrst paper Using visual
analytics to support the integration of expert knowledge in the design of medical models and
simulations, Philippe J. Giabbanelli and Piper J. Jackson described how a Visual Analytics
(VA) approach can be useful when dealing with conceptual stage medical models. Diﬀerent
case studies were considered and analyzed using diﬀerent modelling tools (e.g., system dynamics or network modelling), hence emphasizing the relevance of such an approach for diﬀerent
techniques. In the second paper Mining Mobile Datasets to Enable the Fine-Grained Stochastic
Simulation of Ebola Diﬀusion, Nicholas Vogel et al. proposed a model for stochastic simulation
of Ebola diﬀusion. Simulations are based on the interactions of multi-scale models, describing
diﬀerent aspects that could be involved in the Ebola diﬀusion, including models for cellular
level, individual level and workplace and family level, population level, at the abstract governmental policy level. The simulation provided results in alignment with Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention predictions. In the third paper A Novel O(n) Numerical Scheme for
ECG Signal Denoising, Salvatore Cuomo et al. presented a novel numerical scheme for ECG
Signal denoising that belongs to Inﬁnite Impulse Response (IIR) noise reduction algorithms,
hence with low computational requirements. The presented scheme does not require a direct
application of the Fast Fourier Transform and allows for an easy implementation on mobile
computing devices. In the fourth paper Syncytial Nature as Basis for Diversity in Spike Shapes
and their Propagation in Detrusor Smooth Muscle, Shailesh Appukuttan and Rohit Manchanda
presented a three-dimensional electrical model of smooth muscle syncytium, based on the compartmental modeling technique. Moreover, an investigation of the origin of the various spike
shapes is provided. In the oral presentation The Potential of Machine Learning for Epileptic Seizures Prediction, Antonio Dourado et al. discuss the potential of Machine Learning for
predicting epileptic seizures. They discuss the use of classiﬁers to detect the pre-ictal time,
happening some minutes before the seizure.
The program co-chairs sincerely thank the Program Committee members and external Reviewers, for the time and expertise they put into the reviewing work, the ICCS organization,
for providing the opportunity to arrange the BBC workshop in conjunction with the ICCS 2015
conference, and all the workshop attendees.
June 2015
Stefano Beretta
Mario Cannataro
Riccardo Dondi

682

