Procedia Computer Science
Volume 51, 2015, Pages 2908–2912
ICCS 2015 International Conference On Computational Science

Clustering Heterogeneous Semi-Structured Social Science
Datasets
D.B. Skillicorn1 and C. Leuprecht2
1

2

School of Computing, Queen’s University
Kingston, Canada
skill@cs.queensu.ca
Political Science and Economics, Royal Military College of Canada
Kingston, Canada
leuprecht-c@rmc.ca

Abstract
Social scientists have begun to collect large datasets that are heterogeneous and semi-structured,
but the ability to analyze such data has lagged behind its collection. We design a process to
map such datasets to a numerical form, apply singular value decomposition clustering, and
explore the impact of individual attributes or ﬁelds by overlaying visualizations of the clusters.
This provides a new path for understanding such datasets, which we illustrate with three realworld examples: the Global Terrorism Database, details of every terrorist attack since 1970; a
Chicago police dataset, details of every drug-related incident over a period of approximately a
month; and a dataset describing members of a Hezbollah crime/terror network within the U.S.
Keywords: clustering, hashing, terrorism, crime, Global Terrorism Database, Chicago policing, Hezbollah

1

Introduction

There are an increasing number of social-science datasets of substantial size (thousands of
records and hundreds of attributes). Such datasets typically contain highly heterogeneous
information in a semi-structured form (that is, deﬁned records, attributes and ﬁelds, but freeform information within them). Excel spreadsheets are often the format of choice.
Social scientists who want to analyze such data face two major diﬃculties. First, the contents
of the ﬁelds can be extremely heterogeneous: dates or time intervals, explicitly numerical data
(e.g. ages), coded numeric data (e.g. 0 or 1 for presence or absence), categorical data (e.g.
country), and short textual ﬁelds (e.g. brief descriptions). Standard statistical machinery, such
as signiﬁcance testing, is diﬃcult or impossible to apply to such data. Often entries are missing,
2908

Selection and peer-review under responsibility of the Scientiﬁc Programme Committee of ICCS 2015
c The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V.

doi:10.1016/j.procs.2015.05.474

Clustering Heterogeneous Semi-Structured Social Science Datasets

Skillicorn and Leuprecht

with the corresponding locations left empty. This may mean that the corresponding value does
not apply, or that it was not collected, and the dataset size usually precludes manual checking.
Second, the data is large enough that all but the most simple analysis requires tools and
techniques in which most social scientists are not trained. As a result there are a number of
large datasets, to which knowledge-discovery techniques could be applied, that are actually used
only for querying.
The contribution of this paper is the development of techniques that can be used to convert
such large, heterogeneous datasets into a usable numerical form, the application of clustering
to the resulting data, and forms of analysis by overlaying that make it possible to interpret the
meaning of clusters in terms of the domain from which the data comes.

2

Technical Approach

We use the following analysis pipeline: Hash each entry to produce a true numeric value,
replacing the original values, of whatever form, with numeric values that correspond in some
useful way. For consistency, we apply the same algorithm for all input attribute types: we treat
each entry as a string, convert each character to a ﬂoating-point value and compute the mean
of these values. Thus the length of the input representation does not have much impact.
The eﬀect of this hashing function is to capture similarity and diﬀerence, rather than magnitude. This does not necessarily preserve the ordering – large magnitudes may be hashed to
small numbers, and vice versa. Normalize each column of the dataset by converting the values
in each column to z-scores, (subtracting the column mean from each entry, and then dividing
each entry by the column standard deviation). Since the magnitudes of the hashed entries for
each attribute are unpredictable, this maps the values of each attribute to roughly the same
range, enabling meaningful comparisons among attributes.
Cluster the records using singular value decomposition [3]. If the numeric dataset has
n records and m attributes, then each record has a natural representation as a point in mdimensional space. Singular value decomposition can be regarded as a transformation of this
space in a way that reveals its greatest variation. This decomposition can be truncated into
some smaller number of dimensions, k < m, with the loss of as little structure as possible. If
k = 2, 3 then each of the n records can be represented as a point in 2- or 3-dimensional space,
and directly visualized.
Truncation reduces the eﬀect of any one attribute on the geometric embedding, as long as
many attributes are broadly correlated with many other attributes. This property of the SVD
means that inconsistencies introduced by the hashing tend not to distort the results as much
as might, at ﬁrst glance, be expected.
Overlay the clustered points by colors derived from the values, in each record, of one of the
attributes. Repeat for each attribute in turn. If there is an association between point positions
and attribute values, this will be visible as a pattern in the overlaid rendering.

3

Datasets

We use three datasets to illustrate the power of the technique. The ﬁrst is the Global Terrorism
Database [4], which contains records describing every terrorist attack between 1970 and 2011
(in the version we use). For each attack, data concerning timing, geographical location, form
of attack, form of target, demographics of attackers, motives and claims, weapons used, casualties, and costs are included when appropriate. The dataset contains 104,687 records and 117
2909

Clustering Heterogeneous Semi-Structured Social Science Datasets

(a) Basic clusters

(b) Kidnapping

(c) # terrorists killed

Skillicorn and Leuprecht

(d)
types

Nationalities/target

Figure 1: Overlays of interesting attributes for the GTD clustering
attributes. It has been studied by many groups: the paper by Godwin et al. [2] uses a form of
visualization; the paper by Enders et al. [1] applies a kind of calibration to adjust for known
issues (largely ﬁxed in recent releases) and to examine temporal patterns of frequencies. The
paper by Shaﬁq et al. [5] attempts prediction from the GTD data, but uses only a few (and
the easiest to code) attributes.
The second dataset is drawn from a collection of Chicago police reports (https://data.
cityofchicago.org/). From this we select only reports of drug incidents. Data concerning
time, location, descriptions, and coordinates are included. The dataset contains 35,479 records
and 13 attributes.
The third dataset is a collection of records describing 181 members of two connected Hezbollah networks in the U.S.. For each member, 59 attributes were collected. These range from
demographics such as place of birth and marital history, to activities associated with the group’s
criminal, terrorist, and smuggling activities.

4

Results

The most striking property of Figure 1a, which represents all terrorist attacks over more than
40 years, is that there are clusters (rather than one big blob or points scattered across the
entire space). There are 8 main clusters (labelled with the letters A–H), and these clusters are
themselves organized into a “double hinge” structure.
In other ﬁgures, the variation with respect to some interesting attributes are shown as color
variations. Figure 1b shows the variation associated with an attribute about the outcomes for
hostages in a kidnapping. Other attributes associated with kidnapping and hostage-taking,
associated ransom attributes, and duration of incident attributes, show this same variation.
Figure 1c shows the variation associated with whether or not the incident was claimed. This
direction is also associated with the number of deaths and wounded among the terrorists,
presumably because attribution can be inferred from dead and wounded participants. Figure 1d
shows the variation associated with target type and number of targets. These attributes are also
strongly correlated with terrorist nationalities, so we can conclude that targeting and terrorist
nationality are correlated. This may reﬂect the geography of opportunity, but may capture
something deeper.
We can now assign meanings to the clusters in Figure 1a. Clusters A and B are hostagetaking, while C–H are more conventional attacks. Clusters A, C, E, and G are diﬀerentiated
from B, D, F, and H by properties of the terrorist groups responsible, primarily whether they
were degraded by the attack. Clusters A, B, C, D are diﬀerentiated from E and F and also from
2910

Clustering Heterogeneous Semi-Structured Social Science Datasets

(a) Basic clusters

(b) Beat

(c) Domestic or not

(e) FBI codes

(f) Primary description

(g) Time of day

Skillicorn and Leuprecht

(d) Arrests

Figure 2: Overlays of interesting attributes for the Chicago dataset
G and H by the type of target and number of targets – the top layer are single target events,
the second layer (E and F) are two target events, and the third layer are three target events.
(In fact, part of the diﬀuse structure of G and H is caused by the presence of a few four target
attacks.)
Figure 2a shows the clustering of Chicago drug incident records. Again, the clustering is
strong than might have been expected from such disparate records.
Figure 2b shows the overlay of the beat in which each incident occurred. It is clear that this
attribute has little to do with the macroscopic clustering, but that it (and related geography)
explain some of the microscopic structure within each cluster. The next four attributes: whether
or not the incident was domestic (Figure 2c), whether or not an arrest resulted (Figure 2d),
the FBI code associated with the incident (Figure 2e), and the primary description (Figure 2f)
show that the macroscopic clustering has a Y shape. Domestic versus non-domestic variation
goes from lower-right to upper-left; arrests vary from lower-left to upper-right, and both FBI
codes and primary code for the incident vary from left to right, with greater variation in the
FBI incident codes. Figure 2g shows that time of day does not correlate with macroscopic
clustering but does with the internal structure of every cluster in a way exactly orthogonal to
the beat attribute. This hints that more cluster might be detectable in a higher-dimensional
clustering.
Figure 3a shows the clustering of individuals in the Hezbollah dataset. Again, there is signiﬁcant structure. Figures 3b, 3c, 3d, and 3e show common vertical variation shows connections
between the kinds of criminal acts carried out by some members, and their demographics related to origin and apparent occupation. Figures 3f and 3g show common horizontal variation
related to marriages. One major activity of this group was creating sham marriages as a way
to get residency in the U.S. and several members were married multiple times in attempts to
make this happen. Unsurprisingly this is correlated with education, since presumably those
with better education had other paths to residency status.
2911

Clustering Heterogeneous Semi-Structured Social Science Datasets

5

(a) Basic clusters

(b) Charges

(c) Citizenship

(e) Occupation

(f) First marriage

(g) Education

Skillicorn and Leuprecht

(d) Location of plot or incident

Discussion

Large, semi-structured, wildly heterogeneous datasets are common in the social sciences. These
properties make analytics diﬃcult, and many are treated simply as databases to be queried
(“How many cases like this are present?”). However, there is much useful data implicit in such
datasets. We have shown that hashing, despite its simplistic assumptions, can convert such data
to more readily analyzable form, especially when it is combined with a clustering technique that
is insensitive to moderate inconsistencies. The resulting clusterings, as we have shown in the
examples, reveal much more implicit structure than might be expected. The use of overlaying
makes it possible to infer what aspects of the original data explain the visible variation and
clusters. This opens up a large class of data, currently mostly ignored, to sophisticated analysis.
Acknowledgement. The authors would like to thank Hillary Ryde for collecting the
Hezbollah network data used here.

References
[1] W. Enders, T. Sandler, and K. Gaibulloev. Domestic versus transnational terrorism: Data, decomposition, and dynamics. Journal of Peace Research, 48(3):319–337, 2011.
[2] A. Godwin, R. Chang, R. Kosara, and W. Ribarsky. Visual analysis of entity relationships in global
terrorism database. In Defense and Security 2008, Proceedings of SPIE Vol 6893, 2008.
[3] G.H. Golub and C.F. van Loan. Matrix Computations. Johns Hopkins University Press, 3rd edition,
1996.
[4] G. LaFree. The global terrorism database: Accomplishments and challenges. Perspectives on
Terrorism, 4(1), 2010.
[5] S. Shaﬁq, W. Haider Butt, and U. Qamar. Attack type prediction using hybrid classiﬁer. In
Advanced Data Mining and Applications, volume 8933, pages 488–498. Springer Lecture Notes in
Computer Science, 2014.

2912

