Procedia Computer Science
Volume 51, 2015, Pages 2957–2961
ICCS 2015 International Conference On Computational Science

A decision support system for emergency ﬂood
embankment stability
Magdalena Habrat, Michal Lupa, Monika Chuchro, and Andrzej Le´sniak
AGH University of Science and Technology, Cracow, Poland
lesniak@agh.edu.pl

Abstract
This article presents a concept of decision support system for emergency ﬂood embankment
stability. The proposed methodology is based on the analysis of data from both a ﬂood embankment measurement network and generated through numerical modeling. Decisions about
the risk of embankment failure are made based on this analysis. The authors present both
the general concept of the system as well as a preliminary detailed description of the system
components.
Keywords: automatic data analysis, decision-making system, time series analysis

1

Introduction

Protection against ﬂooding in built-up areas is especially important due to the increasing number of ﬂoods in urban areas and the increasing scale of economic and social consequences caused
by ﬂoods. Flood threat monitoring systems have been the subject of research in the framework
of two European projects: UrbanFlood and Ijkdijk [1, 3, 5, 7, 8]. These projects developed
experimental ﬂood embankments with mounted sensor networks, which measure pore pressure,
temperature and inclination [7]. These three parameters make it possible to assess the stability
of ﬂood embankments. The same necessity has been also recognized in Poland and in response
to these needs the strategic project, implemented by an academic-industrial consortium and
funded by the National Centre of Research and Development within the Applied Research Programme that has been launched. In order to create an automatic system to assess the state
of ﬂood embankment in Poland the Computer System for Monitoring River Levees (ISMOP)
project was established [9, 6]. The main purpose of the project is to enable the development of
a complex system that can help the authorities protect civilians against ﬂooding by providing
current information about the dynamics and intensity of processes within ﬂood embankments.
An experimental ﬂood embankment (a full-size ﬂood embankment at Czernich´ow near Krakow)
will be built as a part of the ISMOP project. This project is particularly important because
it will provide future monitoring network in the critical areas of the ﬂood disaster. The constructed embankment is built n the test area, nonetheless in the case of success of the project,
Selection and peer-review under responsibility of the Scientiﬁc Programme Committee of ICCS 2015
c The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V.
doi:10.1016/j.procs.2015.05.495

2957

A decision support system for emergency ﬂood ...

Habrat, Lupa, Chuchro and Le´sniak

Figure 1: The cross-section of the embankment together with the location of measurement
network
these solution will be implemented across the country. The installed measurement network
involves more than 50 points sensors and two optical ﬁber sensors stretched along the embankment. The point sensors are distributed at diﬀerent heights, so that the measurements can be
carried out in cross sections. Time step in measurements may be changed during the experiment from 1 to 60 minutes. The idea is to examine the varability of the temperature as well as
the pore pressure values on the embankment stability and capture the changes of parameters
in the moment of embankment failure. A cross-section of the experimental ﬂood embankment
with the arrangement of sensors s shown in Fig. 1.

2

An outline of the system for the analysis of ﬂood data

Evaluation of experimental ﬂood embankments condition will be based on the analysis of data
retrieved from sensors located inside the ﬂood embankment (Fig. 1), and measurements performed on and around its surface. The analysis will also involve the use of data retrieved from
numerical modelling, which depicts possible changes in ﬂood embankment behavior due to various internal parameters and variable external conditions. The proposed work ﬂow divides data
processing algorithms into modules (Fig. 2). Data measured with the use of real sensors will be
converted and interpreted automatically with methods suitable for the analysis of multivariate
time series. Synthetic data is processed and interpreted in model based modules, which use
method of comparison and evaluation of model scenarios of ﬂood embankment behavior. Information about the current condition of the ﬂood embankment (and the short-term forecast) is
obtained in the decision support module.

2.1

A data-driven module for anomaly detection

This data-driven module is used for detecting anomalies in a given time-frame of measurements
from the sensors placed in the experimental ﬂood embankment. The anomaly is deﬁned as a
deviation from of the standard system behaviour [4]. Input data to the anomaly detection
module are time series of constant length. For each sensor we have a time series of 100 observations (25h window length) of two parameters: temperature and pore pressure, with information
of sensor type and sensor position. The output data contain an anomaly report. The report
contains information about the possibility of anomaly occurrence in time series for every sensor,
with graphical presentation of results. In ISMOP project the preprocessed data were analyzed
in the anomaly detection module based on algorithm: validated data were stored in a database;
incorrect or missing data were replaced; data transformation was performed, including standardization necessary for the proper performance of the Fourier transform; the decomposition
of the time series into a few systematic components was performed, it is particularly useful for
data from temperature sensors placed in the subsurface of the embankment, for which there
is a periodicity associated with daily and seasonal cyclicality; a fast Fourier transform (F F T )
2958

A decision support system for emergency ﬂood ...

Habrat, Lupa, Chuchro and Le´sniak







historical experiments








	



actual experiment

)"#"
% 

*" 
! "
"





" !

	



	









 !

SELF
TRAINING

RULES

# !"
!
# !"$"%& #$%
' ( ""'"$

Figure 2: A model of proposed solution for a system construction for the analysis of ﬂood data
was performed on the n observations of time series and a periodogram was analyzed to detect
changes in amplitude for a particular harmonic; non-stationarity in a time series could also be
detected by a time-varying periodogram used for the analysis, thereby indicating the occurrence
of harmful changes in the structure of the embankment; detection of non-stationarity in the
periodogram is achieved by analysis of changes in the high frequency range (rapidly rising and
falling spectral density values). The value was calculated according to the determination of
the model residuals, which is the diﬀerence between time series and the constructed model. If
the calculated value of the coeﬃcient of determination is higher than 0.5, the residuals of the
model are normally distributed, and the variance of the residuals is constant in time than in the
analyzed time window, there is no anomaly. There is an anomaly if any of the above conditions
are not fulﬁlled in the analyzed time window. Information about the presence or absence of
anomalies for a given time frame is measured by sensors in an experimental embankment and
forwarded to the decision-making system to be compared with synthetic data.

2.2

Application of model-driven method to determine the synthetic
scenarios of embankment behavior

The second module of the system is used to identify synthetic models of embankment behavior
and to reproduce the behavior of embankments at failure risk, by deﬁning a set of models
describing changes in the dynamic state of the embankment. There are two types of input
data for model driven module: time series from real data from sensors and time series from
corresponding for sensors nodes. In the ﬁrst iteration of comparison of real data with simulated
data we got time series of 100 samples. In each iteration time series length increases, until the
similarity measure exceeds the threshold. Output data contain information to which scenario
time series from sensor are the most similar with information, about the scenario result. Also
some graphical representation of results. This stage of dynamic modeling involves preparation of
many simulation scenarios. A scenario is referred to as one type of ﬂood wave transition (freshetstabilization of the water level (plateau)-falling water level). Each simulation relates to sensor
values for three cross-sections of the embankment. Embankment stability is analyzed with
the use of parameters (computed density, pore pressure, water saturation, plastic deformation
rate, temperature, horizontal stress, vertical stress, shear stress, displacement and vertical and
horizontal ﬂow) calculated during the simulation. The aim of the authors was also to read
simulated parameters at the moment of embankment rupture. In this way the rules deﬁning
the moment of disaster were generated. The detailed description of the method is avalible at
preview reasearch and publications [9, 6, 2, 7]. These rules were then used in the decision2959

A decision support system for emergency ﬂood ...

Habrat, Lupa, Chuchro and Le´sniak

making system. Simulations are created using 2D FLAC Itasca software v7.0.

2.3

A description of a decision making module for the analysis of
ﬂood risk

The authors assume that the decision-making system is the ﬁnal module in the proposed system
for the analysis of ﬂood embankment conditions(Fig. 2). It is based on the following assumptions: the rule based system will contain information obtained from human experts and the
knowledge based systems will contain information obtained from self-study and automatic exploration of input knowledge. Input data comes initially from the real data anomaly detection
module as well as numerical models of the behavior of ﬂood embankments. It will be feeded
with a set of scenarios from a model-driven method. The dynamic numerical models of the ﬂood
embankment (with simultaneous determination of failure risk), and also the use of data analysis
in the time window (anomaly detecion module) will be compared in order to ﬁnd the similarity
between the behavior of the embankment’s state. In this way, the method can determine a
set of models that match the measurements (RISKN ). Secondly, this interpretative system is
supported by historical data, i.e. information about previously conducted experiments (according to the assumptions of the ISMOP project). This data are the basis of analogies between
the current condition of an embankment (and previous scenarios, thereby driving the systems
conclusions of its behavior during deﬁning various experimental conﬁgurations of boundary conditions during the experiment, RISKN and knowledge from historical data (temporary called
HD) – it evaluates a new state RISKN + HD). The next data source is the weather forecasts
of e.g. The National Institute of Meteorology and Water Management (IMGW). The role of
the IMGW is to provide weather forecasts so the system can deﬁne any possible dangers, which
may aﬀect the stability of a ﬂood embankment, resulting from e.g. increased precipitation,
which may aﬀect the humidity of a ﬂood embankment. It will be supplied by the forward
inference with the manual rules (ER depends on precise statements about general rules of ﬂood
embankment maintenance (e.g. a sudden increase of pore pressure may cause instability) from,
for example, geotechnical experts e.g.:
IF embnk_dislocation = high AND weather_forecast = heavy_rainfall THEN flood_emergency;

The results (RISKN + HD + ER) will provide last information on the possible embankment’s
state. The ﬁnal number of states will depend on the number of expert rules, which are not yet
fully deﬁned, due to the preliminary phase of the project. The idea of a self-training system
assumes that further rules are obtained during the systems lifetime (knowledge is obtained
all the time and used immediately). This involves automatic evaluation of recognized anomalies in accordance with available models of ﬂood embankment behavior. Based on the above,
the system, in Author’s opinion, will be able to calculate possible behavior scenarios of the
embankment.

3

Conclusions

The system presented and described above is still under development and testing. Because of the
very interesting results of Projects Ijkdijk and UrbanFlood, the idea of the proposed ISMOP
system is also based on application of combination data driven methods and model driven
methods [1, 3, 5, 8]. Some components of the proposed system currently work using knowledge
taken from experiments performed on various hydro engineering objects [3, 1], or using the
results of numerical modelling. The numerical models used for the simulation of dynamical
2960

A decision support system for emergency ﬂood ...

Habrat, Lupa, Chuchro and Le´sniak

processes, the adequacy of the assumed geomechanical parameters, as well as the correctness of
the mathematical model of dynamical processes inside the simulated embankments are currently
being tested. The essential novelty of the proposed method of embankment analysis is the
application of the results of numerical simulations, which are calculated in advance and stored
in a special database. The result of each numerical simulation is a real time rendering of the
real processes of water inﬁltration, temperature change and stability loss of the earthen dam.
Appropriate simulations can be identiﬁed in a database much quicker than individual numerical
modelling can be evaluated, therefore making real time identiﬁcation possible. The database
containing the results of simulations of possible models allows allows creating rules, on which the
decision support system relies on. It is also important that the applied rules are veriﬁed using
data and results from past and future experiments performed on experimental embankments.

Acknowledgments
This work is ﬁnanced by the National Centre for Research and Development (NCBiR), Poland,
project PBS1/B9/18/2013 - (no 180535). This work was co-ﬁnanced by the AGH - University
of Science and Technology, Faculty of Geology, Geophysics and Environmental Protection, as
a part of a statutory research project.

References
[1] Bartosz Balis, Marek Kasztelnik, Marian Bubak, Tomasz Bartynski, Tomasz Gubala, Piotr
Nowakowski, and Jeroen Broekhuijsen. The urbanﬂood common information space for early warning
systems. Procedia Computer Science, 4:96–105, 2011.
[2] Monika Chuchro, Michal Lupa, Anna Pi¸eta, Adam Pi´
orkowski, and Andrzej Le´sniak. A concept of
time windows length selection in stream databases in the context of sensor networks monitoring.
In New Trends in Database and Information Systems II, pages 173–183. Springer, 2015.
[3] Valeria V Krzhizhanovskaya, GS Shirshov, NB Melnikova, Robert G Belleman, FI Rusadi,
BJ Broekhuijsen, BP Gouldby, J Lhomme, Bartosz Balis, Marian Bubak, et al. Flood early warning
system: design, implementation and computational modules. Procedia Computer Science, 4:106–
115, 2011.
[4] Mark Last, Abraham Kandel, and Horst Bunke. Data mining in time series databases, volume 57.
World scientiﬁc, 2004.
[5] BE Pengel, VV Krzhizhanovskaya, NB Melnikova, GS Shirshov, AR Koelewijn, AL Pyayt, and
II Mokhov. Flood early warning system: sensors and internet. 2013.
[6] Anna Pi¸eta, Monika Chuchro, Michal Lupa, Adam Pi´
orkowski, and Andrzej Le´sniak. A model of
a system for stream data storage and analysis dedicated to sensor networks of embankment monitoring. In Khalid Saeed and Vaclav Snasel, editors, Computer Information Systems and Industrial
Management, volume 8838 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages 514–525. Springer Berlin
Heidelberg, 2014.
[7] Adam Pi´
orkowski and Andrzej Le´sniak. Using data stream management systems in the design of
monitoring system for ﬂood embankments. Studia Informatica, 35(2):297–310, 2014.
[8] AL Pyayt, II Mokhov, AP Kozionov, VT Kusherbaeva, B Lang, VV Krzhizhanovskaya, and RJ Meijer. Data-driven modelling for ﬂood defence structure analysis. Comprehensive Flood Risk Management: Research for Policy and Practice, page 77, 2012.
[9] The ISMOP Team.
ISMOP: Computer system for monitoring river levees.
[online].
http://http://www.ismop.edu.pl.

2961

