Procedia Computer Science
Volume 51, 2015, Pages 2217–2226
ICCS 2015 International Conference On Computational Science

A Role for Network Science in Social Norms Intervention
Clayton A. Davis1 , Julia R. Heiman2 , and Filippo Menczer1
1

2

Center for Complex Networks and Systems Research, Indiana University School of Informatics and
Computing, Bloomington, Indiana, U.S.A
claydavi@indiana.edu
The Kinsey Institute for Research in Sex, Gender and Reproduction, Indiana University School of
Psychological & Brain Sciences, Bloomington, Indiana, U.S.A

Abstract
Social norms theory has provided a foundation for public health interventions on critical issues
such as alcohol and substance use, sexual violence, and risky sexual behavior. We assert that
modern social norms interventions can be better informed with the use of network science
methods. Social norms can be seen as complex contagions on a social network, and their
propagation as an information diﬀusion process.
We observe instances where the recommendations of social norms theory match up to theoretical predictions from information diﬀusion models. Conversely, the network science viewpoint
highlights aspects of intervention design not addressed by the existing theory. Information about
network structure and dynamics are often not used in existing social norms interventions; we
argue that these factors may be contributing to the lack of eﬃcacy of social norms interventions
delivered via online social networks. Further, delivery via online social networks may enable
novel intervention designs employing realtime feedback.
Keywords: Network Science, Social Norms, Contagion Models, Complex Contagion, Behavior Change

1

Introduction

About one in ten deaths among working-age adults in the US are attributable to excessive
drinking [27]. The CDC reports nearly 1 in 5 women reported experiencing rape at some time
in their lives, with more than 40% of those victims having been raped before age 18 [3]. The
CDC estimates that nearly 20 million new sexually transmitted infections occur every year in
the US, resulting in nearly $16 billion in health care costs [8]. With such massive impacts,
these issues of alcohol and substance use, sexual violence, and sexually transmitted infections
are targets for public health interventions in the US.
Due to the social nature of substance use and sexual relationships, harms reduction strategies have included social norms interventions. Social norms refers to what is perceived to be
“normal” behavior of peers, and these beliefs inﬂuence our behavior in turn [2]. Individuals
often overestimate the prevalence of risky behaviors amongst their peers, which can lead to
Selection and peer-review under responsibility of the Scientiﬁc Programme Committee of ICCS 2015
c The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V.

doi:10.1016/j.procs.2015.05.499

2217

A Role for Network Science in Social Norms Intervention

Davis, Heiman, and Menczer

increased risky behavior in the individual [22]. The social norms approach to intervention seeks
to correct these misperceptions, reducing peer pressure and consequently the frequency of these
behaviors [2, 4, 18, 20]. For example, President Obama’s recent “It’s On Us” campaign uses
the language of social norms theory:
Most men are not comfortable with violence against women, but often don’t speak
out because they believe that other men accept this behavior. By getting men
involved, we can change this way of thinking and create new social norms [29].
While the social norms approach is based in a rich theory, the theory does little to illuminate
implementation details of interventions such as speciﬁcally who to target and for how long. The
current body of best practices is largely informed by empirical results, and a common criticism
of the social norms approach is the lack of rigorous scientiﬁc support for its claims [2, 14]. The
classic theory of social norms also seems to produce poor outcomes when applied to online
social networks (OSNs), leading to debate about its applicability and usefulness going forward
[6, 24]. Since intervention recommendations are largely based on empirical results, social norms
interventions are largely discussed in particular contexts. As a result, lessons learned in a
substance use intervention, for example, are often of limited use when applied to a sexual
violence intervention. Leaders in the ﬁeld have recently begun calling for better methods for
comparing and evaluating interventions across application domains [1, 6, 18].
This position paper proposes ﬁlling these gaps by using network models to test, reﬁne, and
recommend intervention strategies based on social norms. Recent research on information diﬀusion in social networks provides a way forward for designing interventions on OSNs, illuminating
dynamics that the classic theory of social norms fails to capture. Network models of intervention also open the door to novel designs utilizing realtime feedback mechanisms. Finally, a
key feature of network models is their domain-independence. By focusing on the information
diﬀusion and dynamics of underlying social networks, network models of intervention will allow
for better, more principled recommendations across application domains.

2
2.1

Background
Models of Human Behavior

The theory of reasoned action is a framework to describe human behavior, widely used in social
science and public health contexts [15]. It states that an individual’s behavioral intentions are
controlled by a combination of attitude and social norms [15]. In this context, attitude refers
to the cost-beneﬁt analysis of the situation based on the individual’s beliefs.
Interventions targeting social norms can focus on the injunctive norm: “your peers think
that inappropriately touching someone in a bar is wrong, so you shouldn’t do it”, and/or the
descriptive norm: “inappropriately touching someone in a bar is not something that your peers
do, so you shouldn’t either” [20].
These types of interventions are based on the theory of social norms popularized by Alan
Berkowitz and H. Wesley Perkins. The theory describes situations in which individuals misperceive the attitudes and/or behavior among a group of peers or community members. Alcohol,
tobacco, and illegal substance use have long been the targets of social norms interventions [2, 20].
Recently, social norms interventions have been gaining momentum as tools for targeting sexual
violence and risky sexual behaviors, presumably due to increased attention [4, 18].
2218

A Role for Network Science in Social Norms Intervention

2.2

Davis, Heiman, and Menczer

Contagion Models of Information Diﬀusion

A meme is deﬁned as “an idea, behavior, or style that spreads from person to person within
a culture.”1 The diﬀusion of a meme through a social network is often likened to the spread
of a virus or contagion – hence the phrase “going viral.” Among theoretical models of social
contagion, the simplest and most widely studied is the independent cascade model (ICM)
[17, 19]. In this class of models, each exposure to a meme leads to an independent chance
of a target individual adopting that meme. Once a node adopts the meme, it can expose all
of its neighbors. The neighbors can also spread the meme, and so on, potentially leading to
large information cascades. In the context of behavior-change models, nodes in the network are
people, and behaviors are the memes being transmitted.
While the ICM models are useful, we assert that they are inadequate to model social norms
as they lack mechanisms to account for social reinforcement. Previous studies of behavior
spreading on OSNs have suggested social reinforcement as being important to the diﬀusion
process [9, 28]. As compared to the simple contagion models of ICM, complex contagion models
require multiple sources of exposure for a node to adopt a meme [10]. The linear threshold model
incorporates a simple form of social reinforcement by linking the probability of adopting a meme
to the proportion of neighbors exhibiting the meme [17, 19].

3

Model: Social Norms as Complex Contagion

Let us conceptualize social norms as a linear threshold model (LTM) with a concrete example of
binge drinking.2 Consider a target node on a network connected to other nodes via a friendship
relation. The target node might perceive binge drinking to be “normal” if most (> 50%) friends
exhibit binge drinking behavior. At that point, the target node may exhibit binge drinking
behavior. This is illustrated in Figure 1 where, given this example, pink could represent binge
drinking behavior.
To this simple instance of an LTM, one can add model features. The 50% of normality
in the example is a model parameter, one that may well diﬀer between individuals. Past the
threshold, the strength of the eﬀect may depend on the proportion of peers exhibiting the given
behavior, i.e. via peer pressure.
While the actual modeling of interventions is proposed work, empirically-derived recommendations for social norms interventions match up in several ways with theoretical predictions of
this class of network models with social reinforcement. These matches are described in the
intervention design sections of this paper.

4

Case Study: STI Reduction in Young Adults

As a case study in how the proposed work could be eﬀective, we oﬀer the following motivating
example of reducing sexually transmitted infection (STI) incidence among young adults.
As mentioned in the introduction, the CDC estimates that nearly 20 million new STIs occur
each year in the US, resulting in nearly $16 billion in health care costs. Not mentioned above
is the fact that young adults aged 15-24 are disproportionally likely to acquire one of these
infections. This age group represents a quarter of the sexually active population but contracts
1 “meme.”

Mirriam-Webster.com. 2015.
National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism deﬁnes binge drinking as a pattern of drinking
that brings a person’s blood alcohol concentration (BAC) to 0.08 grams percent or above. This typically happens
when men consume 5 or more drinks, and when women consume 4 or more drinks, in about 2 hours.
2 The

2219

A Role for Network Science in Social Norms Intervention

Davis, Heiman, and Menczer

(b)

(a)

(c)

Figure 1: A given node can change state in a linear threshold model due to either node (b) or
edge (c) dynamics. Arrows in (b) and (c) highlight changes from (a).

half of all new STIs [8]. While harmful on their own, STIs increase a person’s risk for acquiring
and transmitting HIV and can lead to severe reproductive health complications. All of these
factors combine to make STI prevention among young adults a high priority.
Eﬀorts toward reducing STI incidence focus on encouraging protective behaviors and/or
discouraging risky ones. Protective behaviors include discussing condom use with potential
partners and wearing condoms during sex; risky behaviors include early sexual debut, having
multiple concurrent sexual partners, using drugs and/or alcohol during sex, and pressuring or
being pressured into having sex [4, 18].
Given the high importance members of this age group place on the perception of their peers,
focusing on social norms is a natural choice when targeting this subpopulation [11]. Social norms
are an established target for adolescent substance use prevention eﬀorts, but recent research has
suggested it as a useful intervention strategy in the context of sexual behavior [13]. Sheana Bull
et al. demonstrated the existence of misperceptions in both types of STI risk factors: youth and
young adults underestimate the frequency of protective behaviors amongst their peers whilst
overestimating the incidence of risky behaviors [4]. This twofold misperception makes the social
norms approach particularly applicable because interventions can possibly target both norms
simultaneously. Young and Jordan show that OSN users’ perceptions of social norms – and
their behavioral intentions – regarding risky sexual practices are inﬂuenced by their peers’ OSN
activity [35].
Given the age group and scope of the problem, interventions taking place on OSNs are
2220

A Role for Network Science in Social Norms Intervention

Davis, Heiman, and Menczer

particularly desirable. Unfortunately, previous attempts at OSN social norms interventions to
reduce STI risk have not resulted in lasting behavior change, with eﬀect returning to baseline
at the six-month follow-up [16, 34]. As detailed in the following section on intervention design,
we assert that classical social norms theory is inadequate for this type of intervention, and that
a network science approach to the problem can provide a way forward.

5

Intervention Design

Given a contagion model of social norms, an intervention is deﬁned as intentionally changing
the behavior of some subset of nodes and then observing the evolution of the network. In
silico simulation of these interventions allows for repeatedly tweaking and testing intervention
strategies, eventually deciding on the strategy that presents the best result.
The success or failure of a modeled intervention is evaluated by criteria such as persistence
and virality. A persistent intervention creates a lasting impact on the collective state of the
network. Ideally, this would mean that nodes changed from undesirable behaviors to desirable
ones and did not subsequently return to their previous undesirable state. A viral intervention
would cascade through the network, spreading the desired behavior to many more nodes beyond
the initial targets.

5.1

Community Structure and Composition

One of the more concrete recommendations of the “classic” theory of social norms is that
interventions should be concentrated on tight social groups, e.g. a sports team, as opposed to
looser ones like that of a college dorm [2, 14]. This matches with predictions from complex
contagion models of behavior change [9].
Tight social communities are deﬁned qualitatively as having more intra-community links
than inter-community links. In the case of a simple contagion, tight communities can have
the eﬀect of “trapping” a spreading contagion by keeping it inside the community, repeatedly
exposing the same people [31, 32]. In the case of complex contagion, communities can have the
opposite eﬀect. Since complex contagions require multiple exposures to spread, strong community structures can serve to incubate complex contagions with their local, intra-community
spreading [21]. A complex contagion on a network without community or cluster structure is
more likely to die out without spreading to many other nodes; however, complex contagions
can still fall victim to trapping, presenting a tradeoﬀ to be optimized.
With a model of the contagion and the social network, practitioners could simulate interventions targeting diﬀerent social communities in order to optimize the spread of the desired
behavior. The converse is also possible: if a speciﬁc community group needs to be targeted,
this allows practitioners a principled way to tweak the intervention messaging, i.e. contagion,
in order to optimize its spread.

5.2

Network Dynamics

Another key feature made measurable by OSNs is the structure and dynamics of the social
network itself. By structure, we mean the network structure of nodes and edges, and by
dynamics we mean the creation/destruction of edges in the network over time.
Most eﬀorts at social norms interventions taking place on OSNs have not taken advantage
of the underlying structure of the social network [5, 7, 16]. When OSN structure has been
2221

A Role for Network Science in Social Norms Intervention

Davis, Heiman, and Menczer

considered in the literature, the researchers are treating the network connectivity as static
when in reality OSN structure is quite dynamic [6, 9, 25].
As previously described in the case study section, previous sexual health interventions delivered via OSNs have failed to produce lasting results, their eﬀectiveness dropped oﬀ by the
six-month follow-up [16, 34]. A linear threshold model of social norms leads to novel hypotheses
about the source of this phenomenon. Figure 1 shows the two ways by which node state can
change in a linear threshold model: in response to other node state changes, as in 1(b), or in
response to changes in the network conﬁguration, as in 1(c). Note that Fig. 1(c) demonstrates
how network dynamics can cause a change in node state even when all other node states remain constant. This observation suggests a hypothesis as to how OSN-delivered social norms
interventions can fail to engender persistent change. The classic hypothesis is that the message
fails to “stick” and people simply return to pre-intervention baselines. Instead one might posit
that once the intervention messaging stops spreading, the dynamics of the network take over,
and the natural mixing of OSNs is responsible for driving the return of the previous social norm
misperception.
The dynamic nature of networks, and OSNs in particular, is well-studied in network science.
In social networks, not only do dynamics inﬂuence the node state as illustrated in Fig. 1, but
Weng has demonstrated the converse: that node state also inﬂuences dynamics [33].
An intervention taking dynamics into account would recognize and plan for the social mixing
that happens during and after the intervention. Such an intervention could even take advantage
of network dynamics by seeking to create reinforcing social links between individuals demonstrating the desired behavior. These aspects of intervention design are traditionally ignored in
the social norms literature, except perhaps in the case of campus alcohol use: these interventions sometimes provide alternatives to “the party scene,” thereby having a homophilous eﬀect
[20].

5.3

In-situ Evaluation

Whether or not an intervention is designed based on network principles, the idea of intervention
can be described in terms of network state. When planning an intervention, practitioners have
knowledge about initial state of the network, i.e. information about the social network and of
the expression of the target behavior. The goal of the intervention is then to drive the network
to a desired state with respect to behavior exhibited by the network nodes. Thus an intervention
strategy consists of a plan of which nodes to target with which messages and for how long.
Traditionally, when interventions are staged, either surveys or interviews are used to measure
the behavior of members of the target population. These “active” measurements are usually
done before the and after the intervention, then usually again for a follow-up after a few months.
The classic theory does little to illuminate what a target population should look like during
the course of an intervention. As a result, traditional social norms interventions are largely
restricted to staging an intervention, stopping to evaluate, and repeating if necessary and/or
possible.
Staging interventions on OSNs and/or using OSN data for measuring behavior opens up
a whole new space of possibilities by using constant “passive” observation of OSN behavior.
These measurements can be taken of large swathes of the target population in real- or near-real
time. This real-time picture of the intervention as it is taking place in the real world allows for
in-situ evaluation of intervention progress. Since network simulations of interventions can show
temporal dynamics, practitioners can compare the measurements from the real-life network to
the simulations in order to evaluate whether or not the intervention is on track to meet its
2222

A Role for Network Science in Social Norms Intervention

Davis, Heiman, and Menczer

goals. If desired, this could allow practitioners to make strategic adjustments to an ongoing
intervention when necessary.
For example, suppose practitioners were performing a sexual health intervention on a college
campus aimed at encouraging protective behaviors including condom use. The designers of
the intervention select the swim team as a good target for intervention due to their strong
community ties and co-ed composition. After the intervention messaging was delivered, realtime observation of OSN behavior indicates that the swim team was receptive to the message
but attitudes towards condom use have not changed among non-team peers. Instead of having
to wait to perform surveys and collect results, campus health professionals are instead able to
respond quickly and target another related group with the intervention messaging. This time
they target a dorm where many swim team members live. Because the swim team is already
exhibiting the desired behavior, the intervention messaging spreads much more easily in the
large dorm than it would have otherwise, and the desired behavior “breaks out” and begins to
spread to the campus at large.
The advantage that in-situ evaluation provided in this hypothetical situation is that the
follow-up eﬀort could be made before the eﬀect of the initial intervention wore oﬀ, thus making
the two eﬀorts mutually reinforcing. With a traditional intervene-evaluate-revise cycle, the
practitioners may have had to start again from baseline, costing more money, time, and eﬀort.
Theoretical support for in-situ evaluation of intervention comes from Lilian Weng’s work
on predicting successful memes in social networks [32]. Her work deﬁnes key features based on
network structure that predict virality such as audience size, community structure, and speed
of growth. Measuring and targeting these kinds of metrics may allow practitioners to maximize
the chance of an intervention going viral and producing the desired culture change.

5.4

Real-time Feedback

Classic social-norms interventions rely on discrete interventions and discrete measurement of
eﬀect. The previous section describes how continuous measurement can enable more eﬀective discrete interventions. Naturally one is led to consider the corresponding possibility of
continuous intervention.
Berkowitz describes how individualized normative feedback – feedback to the participant
based on his or her behavior/beliefs/state – is the gold standard of intervention techniques [2].
It produces good results but has traditionally been diﬃcult and/or costly to implement.
With continuous and centralized behavior measurement available via OSNs, a practitioner
simultaneously observe the behaviors of large numbers of intervention targets without the traditional survey-response cycle. Even if a survey is necessary to better measure the state of a
participant, online surveys can often be completed in minutes or less and feedback provided
just as fast. This low cost and quick turnaround potentially allows for more opportunities for
individualized normative feedback.
Advances in content and sentiment analysis may even allow practitioners to provide individualized normative feedback algorithmically, without a human in the loop [12]. At this point,
the engineering deﬁnition of feedback comes into view. Recall the network conception of intervention described in the previous subsection; a comprehensive social norms intervention taking
place on an OSN could include feedback mechanisms that continually measure and respond in
order to drive the network state towards the desired conﬁguration.
A hypothetical example of this kind of feedback could be constructed around mental health
services and stigma. Major depression is one of the most common mental disorders in the US,
aﬀecting almost 7% of US adults in 2012 [26]. Despite the prevalence of mental health disorders
2223

A Role for Network Science in Social Norms Intervention

Davis, Heiman, and Menczer

in general and depression in particular, signiﬁcant stigma exists in the US with respect to mental
health care [23]. Recent results have demonstrated how it may be possible to predict depression
in people via their OSN behavior [12, 30]. One could imagine a system that observes the OSN
behavior of a target population, looking for signs of depression. When the system detects an
individual displaying these signs, it would send a PSA-style message to the individual. This
message would not identify the individual, but would instead provide information about the
prevalence of mental health issues among the population, seeking to correct the misperception
of that social norm. The aim would be to reduce the perceived stigma of seeking treatment.
Messaging could also potentially be delivered to peers of the individual, so as to increase peer
support and decrease stigma. IRB issues abound in this hypothetical, but it demonstrates the
idea.
Current models and theories for intervention are ill-equipped for in-situ evaluation and
modiﬁcation, much less this kind of control via real-time feedback [24]. By conceptualizing and
simulating these novel types of intervention, network models of intervention can help move the
theory forward.

6

Conclusion

Social norms theory has provided a foundation for public health interventions on critical issues
such as alcohol and substance use, sexual violence, and risky sexual behavior. We assert that
modern social norms interventions, often taking place at least partly on OSNs, can be better
informed with the use of tools from network science.
In support of this position, we frame social norms as a type of complex contagion on a social
network, and the propagation of social norms as an information diﬀusion process. Interventions
are then conceptualized as attempts to create lasting and wide-ranging change in the state of
the network. With a model of the social contagion and the underlying network, practitioners
could ideally experiment with simulations each representing diﬀerent intervention strategies,
selecting the best for implementation.
In so doing, we observe instances where the recommendations of social norms theory match
up to theoretical predictions from information diﬀusion models, such as targeting interventions
to community groups. In these instances where network science predictions match the traditional advice, the network models oﬀer explanations as to the reason for the eﬀectiveness of the
strategies.
The network science viewpoint also highlights aspects of intervention design that the classic
theory does not address, including the potential role of network dynamics in decreasing intervention eﬀectiveness over time. The ability to simulate network models of intervention, coupled
with increased monitoring and measuring abilities oﬀered by OSNs, enable more detailed evaluation during the course of an intervention. Real-time monitoring via OSNs also opens the door
to real-time feedback mechanisms.
Additionally, network models of intervention would be more amenable to comparison across
application domains, answering a demand expressed by leaders in the ﬁeld. In order to highlight
the cross-domain applicability of these ideas, hypothetical examples from multiple diﬀerent
application domains were used in this position paper to illustrate the concepts at hand.
With President Obama’s “It’s On Us” campaign, increasing numbers of young people contracting STIs, and increasing numbers of campus campaigns against alcohol use and sexual
violence, there has never been more attention focused on these public health issues. We argue
that social norms interventions can continue to contribute to their solutions; however in order
to do so we must update the theory with tools from social networks and information diﬀusion.
2224

A Role for Network Science in Social Norms Intervention

Davis, Heiman, and Menczer

References
[1] Susannah Allison, Jose a. Bauermeister, Sheana Bull, Marguerita Lightfoot, Brian Mustanski,
Ross Shegog, and Deb Levine. The intersection of youth, technology, and new media with sexual
health: Moving the research agenda forward. Journal of Adolescent Health, 51(3):207–212, 2012.
[2] Alan D Berkowitz. An Overview of the Social Norms Approach. In Changing The Culture of
College Drinking, chapter 13, pages 193–215. Cresskill, NJ, 2005.
[3] Michele C. Black, Kathleen C. Basile, Matthew J. Breiding, Sharon G. Smith, Mikel L. Walters,
Melissa T. Merrick, Jieru Chen, and Mark R. Stevens. The National Intimate Partner and Sexual
Violence Survey (NISVS): 2010 Summary Report. Technical report, National Center for Injury
Prevention and Control, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Atlanta, GA, 2011.
[4] Sandra R. Black, Sarah Schmiege, and Sheana Bull. Actual versus perceived peer sexual risk
behavior in online youth social networks. Translational Behavioral Medicine, 3:312–319, 2013.
[5] Sheana Bull, Katherine Pratte, Nancy Whitesell, Cornelis Rietmeijer, and Mary McFarlane. Eﬀects
of an internet-based intervention for HIV prevention: the youthnet trials. AIDS and Behavior,
13:474–487, 2009.
[6] Sheana S Bull. Sexually transmitted disease prevention campaigns in the 21st century: new
frontiers in social media. Sexually transmitted diseases, 41(3):158–60, 2014.
[7] Sheana S Bull, Deborah K Levine, Sandra R Black, Sarah J Schmiege, and John Santelli. Social
media-delivered sexual health intervention: a cluster randomized controlled trial. American journal
of preventive medicine, 43(5):467–74, November 2012.
[8] CDC. 2013 Sexually Transmitted Diseases Surveillance, 2013.
[9] Damon Centola. The spread of behavior in an online social network experiment. Science (New
York, N.Y.), 329(September):1194–1197, 2010.
[10] Damon Centola, V´ıctor M. Egu´ıluz, and Michael W. Macy. Cascade dynamics of complex propagation. Physica A: Statistical Mechanics and its Applications, 374:449–456, 2007.
[11] Deborah Christie and Russell Viner. Adolescent development. BMJ (Clinical research ed.),
330(7486):301–4, February 2005.
[12] Munmun De Choudhury and Michael Gamon. Predicting Depression via Social Media. In Proceedings of the Seventh International AAAI Conference on Weblogs and Social Media, pages 128–137,
2013.
[13] Marla E. Eisenberg, John W. Toumbourou, Richard F. Catalano, and Sheryl a. Hemphill. Social Norms in the Development of Adolescent Substance Use: A Longitudinal Analysis of the
International Youth Development Study. Journal of Youth and Adolescence, pages 1486–1497,
2014.
[14] Jeanne M Far and John A Miller. The Small Groups Norms-Challenging Model: Social norms
interventions with targeted high-risk groups. In The social norms approach to preventing school
and college age substance abuse: A handbook for educators, counselors, and clinicians, pages 111–
132. Jossey-Bass, San Francisco, CA, US, 2003.
[15] Martin Fishbein and Icek Ajzen. Predicting and changing behavior: the reasoned action approach.
Psychology Press, New York, 2010.
[16] Kylene Guse, Deb Levine, Summer Martins, Andrea Lira, Jenna Gaarde, Whitney Westmorland,
and Melissa Gilliam. Interventions using new digital media to improve adolescent sexual health:
a systematic review. The Journal of adolescent health : oﬃcial publication of the Society for
Adolescent Medicine, 51(6):535–43, December 2012.
[17] Nathan O Hodas and Kristina Lerman. The simple rules of social contagion. Scientiﬁc reports,
4:4343, 2014.
[18] Ian W Holloway, Shannon Dunlap, Homero E Del Pino, Keith Hermanstyne, Craig Pulsipher,
and Raphael J Landovitz. Online Social Networking, Sexual Risk and Protective Behaviors: Considerations for Clinicians and Researchers. Current addiction reports, 1(3):220–228, September

2225

A Role for Network Science in Social Norms Intervention

Davis, Heiman, and Menczer

2014.
[19] David Kempe and Jon Kleinberg. Maximizing the Spread of Inﬂuence through a Social Network.
In International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining, pages 137–146, 2003.
[20] Mt Moreira, La Smith, and D Foxcroft. Social norms interventions to reduce alcohol misuse in
University or College students. The Cochrane Library, (1), 2010.
[21] Azadeh Nematzadeh, Emilio Ferrara, Alessandro Flammini, and Yong-Yeol Ahn. Optimal Network
Modularity for Information Diﬀusion. Physical Review Letters, 113(August):088701, 2014.
[22] H Wesley Perkins. Variation in perceived college drinking norms and its impact on alcohol abuse
: A nationwide study. Journal of Drug Issues, 26(4):961–974, 1996.
[23] B. a. Pescosolido. The Public Stigma of Mental Illness: What Do We Think; What Do We Know;
What Can We Prove? Journal of Health and Social Behavior, 54:1–21, 2013.
[24] William T. Riley, Daniel E. Rivera, Audie a. Atienza, Wendy Nilsen, Susannah M. Allison, and
Robin Mermelstein. Health behavior models in the age of mobile interventions: Are our theories
up to the task? Translational Behavioral Medicine, 1:53–71, 2011.
[25] Daniel E. Rivera, Michael D. Pew, and Linda M. Collins. Using engineering control principles
to inform the design of adaptive interventions: A conceptual introduction. Drug and Alcohol
Dependence, 88, 2007.
[26] SAMHSA. Results from the 2012 NSDUH: Mental Health National Findings, 2013.
[27] Mandy Stahre, Jim Roeber, Dafna Kanny, Robert D Brewer, and Xingyou Zhang. Contribution
of excessive alcohol consumption to deaths and years of potential life lost in the United States.
Preventing chronic disease, 11:E109, January 2014.
[28] Bogdan State and Lada Acamic. The Diﬀusion of Support in an Online Social Movement: Evidence
from the Adoption of Equal-Sign Proﬁle Pictures. In Proc. of 18th ACM Conf. on Computer
Supported Cooperative Work and Social Computing (CSCW), pages 1741–1750, Vancouver, BC,
2015.
[29] The White House. FACT SHEET: Launch of the Its On Us Public Awareness Campaign to Help
Prevent Campus Sexual Assault, 2014.
[30] Ingrid A van de Leemput, Marieke Wichers, Ang´elique O J Cramer, Denny Borsboom, Francis
Tuerlinckx, Peter Kuppens, Egbert H van Nes, Wolfgang Viechtbauer, Erik J Giltay, Steven H
Aggen, Catherine Derom, Nele Jacobs, Kenneth S Kendler, Han L J van der Maas, Michael C
Neale, Frenk Peeters, Evert Thiery, Peter Zachar, and Marten Scheﬀer. Critical slowing down as
early warning for the onset and termination of depression. Proceedings of the National Academy
of Sciences of the United States of America, 111(1):87–92, January 2014.
[31] Lilian Weng, Filippo Menczer, and Yong-Yeol Ahn. Virality prediction and community structure
in social networks. Scientiﬁc reports, 3:2522, 2013.
[32] Lilian Weng, Filippo Menczer, and Yong-Yeol Ahn. Predicting Successful Memes using Network and Community Structure. In Proc. of 8th AAAI Intl. Conf. on Weblogs and social media
(ICWSM), page 10, 2014.
[33] Lilian Weng, Jacob Ratkiewicz, Nicola Perra, Bruno Gon¸calves, Carlos Castillo, Francesco Bonchi,
Rossano Schifanella, Filippo Menczer, and Alessandro Flammini. The role of information diﬀusion
in the evolution of social networks. Proceedings of the 19th ACM SIGKDD international conference
on Knowledge discovery and data mining - KDD ’13, page 356, 2013.
[34] Michele L. Ybarra, Sheana S. Bull, Tonya L. Prescott, Josephine D. Korchmaros, David R. Bangsberg, and Julius P. Kiwanuka. Adolescent Abstinence and Unprotected Sex in CyberSenga, an
Internet-Based HIV Prevention Program: Randomized Clinical Trial of Eﬃcacy. PLoS ONE, 8(8),
2013.
[35] Sean D Young and Alexander H Jordan. The inﬂuence of social networking photos on social norms
and sexual health behaviors. Cyberpsychology, behavior and social networking, 16(4):243–7, 2013.

2226

