Procedia Computer Science
Volume 51, 2015, Pages 2843–2847
ICCS 2015 International Conference On Computational Science

Onedata - a Step Forward towards Globalization of Data
Access for Computing Infrastructures
Lukasz Dutka1 , Michal Wrzeszcz1,2 , Tomasz Licho´
n1 , Rafal Slota1 , Konrad
Zemek1 , Krzysztof Trzepla1 , Lukasz Opiola1 , Renata Slota1,2 , and Jacek
Kitowski1,2
1

AGH University, Academic Computer Centre Cyfronet AGH, Krakow, Poland
2
AGH University, Department of Computer Science, Krakow, Poland
{wrzeszcz,rena,kito}@agh.edu.pl, dutka@cyfronet.pl

Abstract
To satisfy requirements of data globalization and high performance access in particular, we
introduce the originally created onedata system which virtualizes storage systems provided
by storage resource providers distributed globally. onedata introduces new data organization
concepts together with providers’ cooperation procedures that involve use of Global Registry as
a mediator. The most signiﬁcant features include metadata synchronization and on-demand
ﬁle transfer.
Keywords: virtual ﬁle system, heterogeneous storage systems, Grid, distributed systems

1

Introduction

Exchange of data, information and knowledge make individual’s activities more versatile and
eﬃcient. The similar phenomena are also observed in research with increasing popularity of
Open Science and Science 2.0 paradigms. A kind of common space is required to make the work
more ﬂexible and easy to perform. Modern scientiﬁc research is guided by several paradigms
including 4th paradigm [1]. In addition, popularity of Storage as a Service (STaaS) model
creates requirements for global, high performance access to data which is eﬀective, simple and
convenient.
Commercial tools for simple global data sharing and processing already exist but they are
not suitable for a large part of scientiﬁc community. The simplest way of processing data by
a geographically and organizationally distributed team is use of Cloud that oﬀers fast storage,
e.g. Amazon which provides both storage and computing power. However, many scientists have
already accumulated large datasets on storages granted by computer centres that support their
research, since they could not obtain funding for use of commercial environments. For these
reasons, reorganization of datasets and resources is often an impossible task.
Selection and peer-review under responsibility of the Scientiﬁc Programme Committee of ICCS 2015
c The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V.
doi:10.1016/j.procs.2015.05.445

2843

Onedata - Globalization of Data Access

Dutka, Wrzeszcz at al

This paper covers solutions used in originally created onedata system which virtualizes
storage systems in the PL-Grid Infrastructure, spanning across ﬁve biggest academic computer
centers in Poland [2]. onedata is an extension of VeilFS system that was designed to coordinate
data access inside a federation [3]. To introduce our new concept of data access globalization,
ﬁrstly we categorize and describe currently existing services for ﬁle storage and sharing in
Section 2. Next, in Section 3 we identify challenges connected with elimination of federation
barriers to make data access global. A description of onedata - our concept of data access globalization - is included in Section 4, while Section 5 contains information about implementation
and concludes the paper.

2

State of the Art

The following categories of currently existing services for ﬁle storage and sharing can be identiﬁed: (i) tools for easy anytime/anyplace data access, (ii) high-performance parallel ﬁle systems,
(iii) services to provide fast data movement, (iv) data management systems.
Tools for easy anytime/anyplace data access like Dropbox, OneDrive and Google Drive [4]
mainly feature ease of access. They oﬀer client applications for the most popular operating
systems, which mount the virtual ﬁlesystems locally and transparently handle synchronization
with the cloud storages. The tools impose rigorous limits on storage size and transfer speed.
While this is still suﬃcient to handle typical user’s data, they are unsuitable for data-intensive
scientiﬁc research. Anytime/anyplace data access limited to particular distributed infrastructure can be provided by LFC (LCG File Catalog) [5]. Although, it provides common ﬁlesystem
functionality, it is impossible to use LFC similarly to a regular Unix-like ﬁlesystem. GFAL-FS
(a FUSE-based implementation of a ﬁlesystem over LFC) supports read-only mode alone. Dedicated command line utilities allow writing as well, but do not provide as elastic and convenient
data access as a typical ﬁle system.
Among high-performance parallel ﬁle systems that support geographically distributed organizations, FAX [6], PanFS [7] and GlusterFS [8] should be mentioned. There are signiﬁcant
diﬀerences between those systems in terms of data access. PanFS uses multiple metadata servers
in order to locate and deliver particular data while FAX uses centralized endpoint called redirector. GlusterFS uses an elastic hash algorithm that allows each node to access data without
usage of metadata or location servers.
Storage services that aid with access to data stored at several storages that belong to
multiple organizations are already available to the user. Globus Connect is just one example of
such services [9], built on GridFTP protocol to provide fast data movement and data sharing
capabilities inside the deploying organization. Globus Connect does not abstract out the access
to existing data resources and focuses on data transfer as opposed to data storage, and therefore
does not implement the concept of location transparency.
Parrot [10] is a tool that allows using POSIX ﬁlesystem interface to access data on a remote
storage. It employs ptrace debugging interface to intercept system calls performed by existing
programs. Remote data can be accessed like local ﬁles, but overheads introduced by ptrace are
substantial. The iRODS [11] data management system supports geographical distribution of
data within single federation. Unfortunately, the users have to manage the data location by
themselves, which is a serious drawback. Syndicate Drive [12] is a virtual cloud storage system
while Storj [13] is a peer-to-peer cloud storage network allowing users to transfer and share data
without reliance on a third party data provider. Although these solutions contain algorithms
that speed-up data access, they require complete data download before usage, and therefore
are diﬃcult to be used in computing infrastructures.
2844

Onedata - Globalization of Data Access

Dutka, Wrzeszcz at al

To the best of our knowledge, none of the existing services and tools possesses all needed
functionalities to provide global, easy and eﬃcient access to data in organizationally distributed environment. Tools for easy anytime/anyplace data access are not eﬃcient enough for
data-intensive scientiﬁc research. Although tools for eﬀective distributed data processing allow
execution of data-intensive scientiﬁc research (see also [14]), they require central coordination
and often dedicated storage resources. As a result, usage of instances provided by several organizations requires manual data management. Price to be paid for decentralized management
of storage services is either manual management of data location or low eﬃciency.

3
3.1

From Federation to Globalization
Federation - our ﬁrst step to globalization

Our previous research focused on simpliﬁcation of data access in federation. The VeilFS system
uniﬁes data access despite the geographical distribution of computational resources or heterogeneity of the actual storages used by the computing centrers. The decision where ﬁles are stored
is made by the system. When needed, the system migrates ﬁles completely transparently to
the user.
The users access the data stored within VeilFS through one of the provided user interfaces:
FUSE client, which implements a ﬁle system in user space to cover the data location and exposes
a standard POSIX ﬁle system interface, Web-based GUI, which allows data management via
any Internet browser, REST or CDMI API. FUSE clients installed at computing nodes of the
infrastructure have often direct access to storage systems. Hence, the FUSE client operates on
the data locally whenever possible to provide eﬃciency suﬃcient for HPC applications.
A federation model assumes that its members trust each other and here VeilFS is a perfect
tool for data access and management simpliﬁcation. However, when storage and computing
resources providers do not trust each other, new challenges appear.

3.2

Challenges

More and more people use services oﬀered by more than one organization. It implies new,
diverse requirements and several challenges that have to be faced by developers to provide data
access software that fulﬁlls these requirements. We identiﬁed these challenges below.
Uniform and coherent view on data. Users need uniform and coherent view on all data
stored on the storage systems of all organizations, called data providers. Working on resources
of one provider, the user should be able to see and access his/her data stored on resources of
other providers. The provider has to know where the user’s data may be found and transfer
this data when needed even when providers do not trust one another.
Data sharing. Users often share data among themselves with some viable alternatives: a
part of data may be shared only with the closest collaborators while other data may be made
available to anyone. Users may also want to make their data available to particular person
who is not known to provider of resources where the data is stored. Thus appropriate data and
access permissions organization is needed.
Eﬃciency. Some users execute computations on their data hence fast on-demand data
transfer has to be possible and the delays in data access should not be high not to waste
computing power. Going beyond the federation, network delay and bandwidth becomes burning
issue (data centers within federation are usually link with fast network). Thus, the bandwidth
and the latency need to be controlled and optimized.
2845

Onedata - Globalization of Data Access

Dutka, Wrzeszcz at al

To meet this challenges and provide data access globalization we have designed onedata.
onedata in the part concerning virtualization of storage systems in a single data center is based
on the VeilFS system (see [3]).

4

Onedata - Concept of Data Access Globalization

To hide the complexity of data distribution and provide data and permissions organization,
onedata introduces concepts of spaces and providers. Spaces are logical data containers for
storing user ﬁles. Providers contribute to onedata with storage resources. A space can be
supported by many providers, hence data collected in a space may be stored on multiple heterogenous storages that belong to many providers. However, access to all data in a space
remain transparent for the user in terms of data location. Spaces may be shared by many
users. Additionally, to simplify administration and access control, the users may be associated
in groups.
Implementing spaces concept in global scale, an independence of providers is a challenge.
The providers do not have to trust each other so to go beyond federations, a mediator trusted
by providers is needed. We call this mediator Global Registry. Global Registry is a component
of onedata that stores information about entities in the system, e.g., who the user is, which
spaces he/she is a member of, and where to ﬁnd other providers supporting his/her data. It
serves as an entry point for users and supports cooperation between providers. To address
authorization issues, Global Registry also serves as a certiﬁcate authority.
All providers supporting the same space need to be aware of a ﬁle metadata within the
space. Because of that onedata is equipped with a subsystem that synchronizes ﬁle meta-data
- DBSync. Since a ﬁle meta-data changes very rapidly, synchronization has to be made in an
eﬃcient way. For this reason, system aggregates information about changes in database and
propagates it only to interested providers (i. e. providers that support the space connected with
particular change). If any conﬂict of metadata occurs, it is automatically resolved on the basis
of revision numbers to ensure that each provider has the same visible database state. When
the user needs conﬂictless synchronization, he/she can use locks.
To address the need for fast data transfer, onedata includes a specialized module named
rtransfer. The rtransfer module supervises a number of gateway modules. Each gateway module
is running on a diﬀerent node of a cluster. To transfer data, connections are formed between
many gateway nodes. Requests to rtransfer can include information about their priority. This
information is used to order transfer operations, so that data a user wants to view right now
will be fetched before handling prefetching requests.

5

Implementation and Conclusions

Cooperation between providers is necessary in order to achieve global data access with minimal performance loss. As a number of simultaneously transferred between providers ﬁles and
metadata may by very high so server applications that manage data have to be massively parallel. For this reason we used the modiﬁed server application of VeilFS described in [3][15]. In
comparison with VeilFS, the onedata server application has more complicated authentication
and authorization procedures. While VeilFS worked within federation (common authentication
mechanism), onedata uses Global Registry and custom solution based on OpenID.
As a result of combining Global Registry, spaces, multiple cooperating providers and space
members, we obtain a safe, commonly available, shareable, eﬃcient and easy to use middleware
2846

Onedata - Globalization of Data Access

Dutka, Wrzeszcz at al

for using distributed storage systems. A onedata release has been successfully deployed at ACC
Cyfronet AGH and available to use by anyone associated with the PL-Grid infrastructure. A
multi-provider version of our system is currently under development and a beta version is
expected to be released soon. Recognizing that data processing and managing in large scale
environments is a major problem which the research community will face in the near future, we
believe that onedata will be a complete product solving the data access problems in large scale
computational environment where distributed data becomes hard to maintain as the diversity
of storage systems rises.

Acknowledgments
This research is supported partly by the European Regional Development Fund program
no. POIG.02.03.00-12-137/13 as part of the PLGrid Core and the AGH-UST grant no.
11.11.230.124. MW is grateful for AGH-UST grant no. 15.11.230.153.

References
[1] A.J.G. Hey, S. Tansley, and K.M. Tolle. The fourth paradigm: data-intensive scientiﬁc discovery.
Microsoft Research Redmond, WA, 2009.
[2] R. Slota, L. Dutka, B. Kryza, D. Nikolow, D. Krol, M. Wrzeszcz, and J. Kitowski. Storage
Systems for Organizationally Distributed Environments - PLGrid PLUS Case Study. Lecture
Notes in Computer Science, 8384:724–733, 2014.
[3] L. Dutka, R. Slota, M. Wrzeszcz, D. Krol, and J. Kitowski. Uniform and Eﬃcient Access to Data
in Organizationally Distributed Environments. Lecture Notes in Computer Science, 8500:178–194,
2014.
[4] Jane McCallion. Dropbox vs OneDrive vs Google Drive: what’s the best cloud storage service of 2014?
Online, accessed 11.01.2015. http://www.pcpro.co.uk/features/389929/
dropbox-vs-onedrive-vs-google-drive-whats-the-best-cloud-storage-service-of-2014.
[5] Jean-Philippe B. Baud, James Caey, Sophie Lemaitre, Caitriana Nicholson, David Smith, and
Graeme Stewart. LCG Data Management: from EDG to EGEE. In UK e-Science All Hands
Meeting, Nottingham, UK, 2005.
[6] R. Gardner, S. Campana, G. Duckeck, J. Elmsheuser, A. Hanushevski, F. Honig, J. Iven, F. Legger,
I. Vukotic, and W. Yang. Data Federation Strategies for ATLAS using XRootD. In CHEP2013,
Amsterdam, Netherlands, 2013.
[7] PanFS Storage Operating System website. Online, accessed 11.01.2015. http://www.panasas.
com/products/panfs.
[8] GlusterFS community website. Online, accessed 11.01.2015. http://www.gluster.org/about/.
[9] B. Allen. Globus Online: Radical Simpliﬁcation of Data Movement via SaaS. Comp. Inst., The
University of Chicago, 2011. Preprint CI-PP-5-0611.
[10] D. Thain and M. Livny. Parrot: Transparent User-Level Middleware for Data-Intensive Computing. Scalable Computing: Practice and Experience, 6(3):9–18, 2005.
[11] D. Hunich and R. Muller-Pfeﬀerkorn. Managing Large Datasets with iRODS - a Performance
Analysis. In Proc. of IMCSIT, pages 647—-654. IEEE, 2010.
[12] Syndicate drive website. Online, accessed 11.01.2015. http://syndicatedrive.com/.
[13] Storj website. Online, accessed 11.01.2015. http://storj.io/.
[14] R. Slota, D. Nikolow, K. Skalkowski, and J. Kitowski. Management of Data Access with Quality
of Service in PL-Grid Environment. Computing and Informatics, 31(2):463–479, 2012.
[15] M. Wrzeszcz, L. Dutka, R. Slota, and J. Kitowski. VeilFS – A New Face of Storage as a Service.
In eChallenges e-2014 Conference Proceedings, 2014.

2847

