Procedia Computer Science
Volume 51, 2015, Pages 366–373
ICCS 2015 International Conference On Computational Science

Using Criteria Reconstruction for Low-Sampling
Trajectories as a Tool for Analytics
Edison Ospina1, Francisco Moreno1, and Iván Amón Uribe2
1

Universidad Nacional de Colombia, Medellín, Colombia.
ecospinaa@unal.edu.co, fjmoreno@unal.edu.co
2
Universidad Pontificia Bolivariana, Medellín, Colombia.
ivan.amon@upb.edu.co

Abstract
Mobile applications equipped with Global Positioning Systems have generated a huge quantity of
location data with sampling uncertainty that needs to be handled and analyzed. Those location data can
be ordered in time to represent trajectories of moving objects. The data warehouse approach based on
spatio-temporal data can help on the analysis. For this reason, we consider the problem of personalized
reconstruction of low-sampling trajectories and include the criteria of movement as a dimension of
analysis in a trajectory data warehouse. We enhance the analytics using dimensional modelling and
graphical analysis in order to provide mechanisms to help decision makers. For example, analysts may
formulate queries such as What are the top 5 most traversed streets between 07:00:00 am and 09:00:00
pm on August 9, 2014 (Saturday) if the trajectories are reconstructed using the touristic criterion? The
answer to this query may help users to identify, e.g., city bottlenecks.
Keywords: Trajectory data warehouse, low-sampling trajectory, personalized trajectory reconstruction

1 Introduction
Today, a lot of applications with incorporated Global Positioning Systems (GPS) deliver huge
quantities of spatio-temporal data concerning moving objects (MO), which in turn have generated the
need for the storage, representation, exploration, and analysis of this type of data. Trajectories of MOs
can be derived from this data. However, silent durations may be present, i.e., time durations when no
data are available for describing the movement of a MO [1]. As a result, the movement during silent
duration needs to be described and reconstructed using dedicated techniques of data imputation.
A novel and relevant task when considering the analysis of MOs is the reconstruction of trajectories
based on the MO preferences and the geographical space where the movement occurs. In [2] the authors
offer a brief taxonomy to build the “best” trajectory based on criteria such as shortest distance, time,
touristic (points of interest, POIs), and simplicity of the road network (RN). Because the problem of
route reconstruction considering a set of criteria other than distance is still an open research issue, in [3]
a function called traj for reconstructing low-sampling trajectories based on user criteria is proposed: an
366

Selection and peer-review under responsibility of the Scientiﬁc Programme Committee of ICCS 2015
c The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V.

doi:10.1016/j.procs.2015.05.256

USING CRITERIA RECONSTRUCTION OF LOW-SAMPLING TRAJECTORIES AS A TOOL
FOR ANALYTICS
Francisco Moreno, Edison Ospina and Iv´
an Am´
on Uribe

imputation process is carried out for reconstructing trajectories of a set of MOs in a RN. The inclusion
of the movement criteria in the reconstruction of trajectories is an important contribution and it will be
even greater when low-sampling trajectory data is not only reconstructed but analyzed for discovering
new knowledge.
In this short paper, we propose several analytics possibilities for reconstructed trajectories using
tools such as graphic and data warehouse (DW) approaches. To the best of our knowledge, this work is
the first attempt to use the different criteria reconstruction of trajectories to identify the opportunities of
analytical tasks over low-sampling trajectories. The rest of this paper is organized as follows. In Section
2, we summarize related works. In Section 3, we describe the proposal of analysis addressed here and
in Section 4, we conclude the paper and propose future work.

2 Previous Works
Several research works have focus on the management of uncertainty using historical data of a MO
[4] or a set of MOs [5] to infer their possible routes. Although uncertainty it is a hard task to face, the
movement of a MO can be reconstructed using criteria based approaches [6] from the personalized
routing theory [7] and using the space where it occurs [2]. Those criteria are grouped in four general
criteria [6]: speed (time, distance), safeness, simplicity, and attractiveness (scenic path POIs-based). A
personalized route planning system provides a route based on minimizing a combination of those criteria
[8] [9] [10].
The problem of trajectory reconstruction is usually addressed from describing the trajectory by a set
of GPS points temporally ordered [4][11]. In [3], criteria are used for reconstructing trajectories using
routing theory [12] over a graph representing the underlying RN. However, most route planners do not
consider the time dimension, i.e., they only generate a sequence of geo-referenced data points without
timestamps. Although in [3], uncertainty is handled using a criteria based method for reconstructing
trajectories, analytical tasks are not provided with those huge location data.
The need for reconstructing trajectories has a reason: it is a previous step for a better analysis of
trajectory data in knowledge discovery environments [13][14]. A great challenge for the knowledge
discovery (both, of the environment where the movement occurs and the objects in consideration [15])
using spatio-temporal data [14] is the availability of techniques that enable the analysis of trajectories
[16], especially the ones characterized by the uncertainty [17]. Conceptualization in analytics over
trajectories is reviewed in the arising field of Trajectory Data warehouse (TDW) [11] as a way to deal
with this analysis proposal. DW approaches might be used to deal with these huge volumes of data:
elements such as hierarchies and aggregations, and techniques such as mining and visualization have
been adapted to the spatio-temporal data to support such analysis into a concept called Spatio-Temporal
Data Warehouse (STDW) [18]. A special case of a STDW is related to the integration of the movement
described by a MO, i.e., a TDW. The main objective of a TDW is to transform raw data of trajectories
to valuable information to support decision-making process of applications based on MOs [11].
With regard to the measures related to trajectories, those have aspects that have to be analyzed. In
[19] some of them are distinguished: (1) Numeric: such as average of the speed, direction, and duration
of the trajectory, (2) Spatial: such as the geometric shape of the trajectory, and (3) Temporal: such as
the timing of the movement.
There are several open research issues regarding to TDW operations for enhancing traditional ones
(OLAP) [11]. Pelekis, Nikos, et al. [19] propose some of them: trajectory clustering, extraction of a
representative trajectory from a set of trajectories, and operators to propagate/aggregate the uncertainty
and imprecision of the data.

367

USING CRITERIA RECONSTRUCTION OF LOW-SAMPLING TRAJECTORIES AS A TOOL
FOR ANALYTICS
Francisco Moreno, Edison Ospina and Iv´
an Am´
on Uribe

3 Analysis Proposal
The transformation of raw trajectories into valuable information is a requirement that can be useful
for decision-making purposes [19]. This is the reason for low-sampling trajectory imputation process,
i.e., the reconstruction of low-sampling trajectories for knowledge extraction and analysis tasks [13].
Therefore, we extend here the approach of Ospina [3] for analytic tasks to explore how analysis change
when different movement criteria are incorporated for reconstructing low-sampling trajectories.
Given (a) users check-in records describing a set of 2D low-sampling trajectories76 = {Ti} and (b)
a user criteria preference c, Ospina [3] claim that a “good” route should (a) meet the user criteria
preferences, and (b) returns a more detailed trajectory T’i , i.e., the application of the traj function
according to a criterion c, between two low-sampled observations Lij and Lij +1 of Ti returns a set of points
with timestamps derived from the edges of the resulting reconstructed route. That is, Ti is transformed
into a non-low-sampled trajectory T’i. The first stage of the imputations process (trajectory
reconstruction) uses the RN and a reconstruction criterion c for finding the segments that the trajectory
possibly traversed.
The trajectory reconstruction proposed by Ospina [3] is applied to a set of trajectories to impute
missing data in a preprocessing stage. This approach is extended here for analytic tasks to determine
how analysis change when a reconstruction criterion is incorporated when reconstructing low-sampling
trajectories. We use analysis tools such as graphical and TDW approaches to accomplish this task.

3.1 A Graphical Analysis
A basic visual analysis of the reconstructed trajectories for each criterion offers a simple analytic
perspective for the reconstruction proposed here. Check-in data in the city of Medellín, Colombia on
August 14, 2014 is used for exemplifying our visual analysis. The function traj is applied to the set of
low-sampling trajectories using criteria such as distance, time, and touristic (scenic path POIs-based).
People use the distance as the most important criterion for route choosing, even without route planning
systems, the path with the shortest distance is intuitively chosen with a minimum previous knowledge
of the RN structure; however, the presence of known POIs (touristic criterion) may generate a longer
path. Similarly, time is a criterion that depends of several factors such as length (the time is directly
proportional to the length of road), average speed (higher in main avenues than in small streets), quality
of roads, and weather conditions.
The resulting reconstructed trajectories are shown in Figure 1-a, Figure 1-b, and Figure 1-c when
distance, time, and touristic criteria are applied, respectively. Note that some road segments of the RN
are not used when the criterion changes, see some examples highlighted with the gray dashed ellipses
in Figure 1-a, Figure 1-b, and Figure 1-c. Some of those road segments can be the representative ones
for each criterion such as in Figure 1-b, where that segment seems to be the fastest choice when time
criterion is considered. In addition, note that some road segments remains used whatever the criterion
of movement is used. See examples highlighted with the red dashed ellipses in Figure 1-a, Figure 1-b,
and Figure 1-c. Common segments in all the criteria can be considered as possible bottlenecks because
they do not change when the criterion of movement change.

368

USING CRITERIA RECONSTRUCTION OF LOW-SAMPLING TRAJECTORIES AS A TOOL
FOR ANALYTICS
Francisco Moreno, Edison Ospina and Iv´
an Am´
on Uribe

(b)

(a)

(c)
Figure 1: Reconstructed trajectories with (a) distance, (b) time, and (c) touristic criteria;
on August 4, 2014.

3.2 A Trajectory Data Warehouse Analysis
Another possible tool for showing the change of the analysis according to different criteria of
reconstruction is a TDW, where the criteria can be considered dimensionally. Here, the traj function is
used in a data preprocessing step in the stage of data transformation. Every low-sampled trajectory is
imputed and marked for each criteria and then stored in the fact table, i.e., each trajectory is
reconstructed and stored in the DW as many times as the number of criteria are incorporated to the
analysis.
The challenge, after storing the trajectory data is to make the right analysis that could extract useful
knowledge for the users [21]. Considering that a trajectory represents a spatial object whose location
changes in time [19] [22], a TDW should include a spatial and a temporal dimension describing
geography and time, respectively [20] [22]. Another dimensions regarding to conventional data about
MOs include demographic data, such as gender, age, and occupation.
In Figure 2 we show our TDW model. Our model is composed by the MO dimension
(dimMovingObject) that stores the objects that describes the trajectory; the trajectory dimension
(dimTrajectory) that stores the ID for each raw trajectory to differentiate them from its reconstructed
369

USING CRITERIA RECONSTRUCTION OF LOW-SAMPLING TRAJECTORIES AS A TOOL
FOR ANALYTICS
Francisco Moreno, Edison Ospina and Iv´
an Am´
on Uribe

ones; the criteria dimension (dimCriteria) that stores the description for each reconstruction criterion;
the time dimension (dimTime); the geometric dimension of the underlying RN (dimRoadNetwork); and
the fact table of the reconstructed trajectories (factTrajectory) that stores a set of measures of interest
for each segment/edge that make up the reconstructed trajectory.

Figure 2: Dimensional Model of our data warehouse.

The idea behind this proposal is the aggregation of each measure along each criteria and evidencing
the change of the analysis if a specific reconstruction criterion is considered such as the total distance
when the criterion of POIs is used or the total fuel consumption if the time criterion is considered. The
measures are properties of interest about each one of the segments of the trajectories. As it is shown in
Figure 2, the level of granularity, i.e., the detail of the units of data in the DW, is given by the segment
between imputed observations and the time intervals determined by those observations.
Next, some analytical questions are solved using the reconstructed trajectories. If the comparison of
fuel consumption using a reconstruction criterion against another is considered, a measure of fuel
consumption for each segment traveled can be defined. Suppose that the set of MOs analyzed here are
vehicles of the same type and use 10 Liters / 100km. In Figure 3, fuel consumption is sliced by criterion
and day between August 4, 2014 and August 10, 2014. In addition, measures such as CO2 emissions
can be used for analysis in function of distance traveled.
As we have done with the fuel consumption and CO2 emissions, we performed a series of queries
and show some results to explore the analytical possibilities in function of the reconstruction criterion
variation, e.g., “What are the top 5 most traversed streets between 07:00:00 am and 09:00:00 pm on
August 9, 2014 (Saturday) according to touristic criterion?” The correspondent query and the results
are shown in Figure 4.

370

USING CRITERIA RECONSTRUCTION OF LOW-SAMPLING TRAJECTORIES AS A TOOL
FOR ANALYTICS
Francisco Moreno, Edison Ospina and Iv´
an Am´
on Uribe

Figure 3: Fuel Consumption (liters / 100km) sliced by day and criteria

Figure 4: The top 5 most used segment streets on August 9, 2014 according to
touristic criterion.

371

USING CRITERIA RECONSTRUCTION OF LOW-SAMPLING TRAJECTORIES AS A TOOL
FOR ANALYTICS
Francisco Moreno, Edison Ospina and Iv´
an Am´
on Uribe

4 Conclusions and Future Work
In this short paper, we lay the groundwork for enhance the analysis of trajectories where lowsampling is present. We extend the approach proposed by Ospina [3] for analytic tasks to find how the
analysis may change when the movement criterion is incorporated to reconstruct low-sampling
trajectories.
The results showed here evidenced the change of the analysis when different reconstruction criteria
are considered. A simple graphical analysis can find the segments in the RN with the most concurrence
of MOs during a period. This approach can be useful for support decision-making in traffic applications
or in companies with location based advertising for making advertising campaigns or in tourism
companies for determining the routes with the most touristic POIs visited. The analysis supported by
TDW including the criteria as a dimension for measuring trajectory characteristics such as distance
travel or fuel consumption can also be helpful for companies, e.g., logistics for expenses saving or traffic
control division for determining the segments with the most MOs flow.
Although a DW approach has been followed here, in the last years a new paradigm has been adopted
to deal with huge amount of data: Big Data. The big data is about finding new value within and outside
conventional data sources as a complementary extension to current TDW architectures to support new
data types [23]. Our proposal can be enhanced by Big Data techniques and data mining tasks can also
be carried out over the fact table factTrajectory showing the variation of the mining analysis over all
trajectories when the reconstruction criteria is changed.

References

[1]

[2]

[3]

[4]

[5]
[6]
[7]

[8]

372

C.-C. Hung, L.-Y. Wei and W.-C. Peng, "Clustering Clues of Trajectories for Discovering
Frequent Movement Behaviors," in Behavior Computing, Springer London, 2012, pp. 179196.
E. da Silva, C. de Baptista, L. Menezes and A. Paiva, "Personalized path finding in road
networks," in Networked Computing and Advanced Information Management, 2008. NCM '08.
Fourth International Conference on, Gyeongju, 2008.
E. Ospina and F. Moreno, "Trajectory Reconstruction using Personalized Routing over a
Graph," in 13th International Conference of Numerical Analysis and Applied Mathematics,
Rhodes, 2014.
K.-P. Chang, L.-Y. Wei, M.-Y. Yeh and W.-C. Peng, "Discovering personalized routes
from trajectories," in LBSN '11 Proceedings of the 3rd ACM SIGSPATIAL International
Workshop on Location-Based Social Networks, Chicago, Illinois, 2011.
Z. Chen, H. T. Shen and X. Zhou, "Discovering popular routes from trajectorie," in Data
Engineering (ICDE), 2011 IEEE 27th International Conference on, Hannover, 2011.
H. Hochmair, "Towards a classification of route selection criteria for route planning tools,"
in Developments in Spatial Data Handling, Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2005, pp. 481-492.
A. S. Niaraki and K. Kim, "Ontology based personalized route planning system using a
multi-criteria decision making approach," Expert Systems with Applications, vol. 36, no. 2, pp.
2250-2259, 2009.
S. Nadi and M. R. Delavar, "Multi-criteria, personalized route planning using quantifierguided ordered weighted averaging operators," International Journal of Applied Earth
Observation and Geoinformation, vol. 13, no. 3, p. 322–335, 2011.

USING CRITERIA RECONSTRUCTION OF LOW-SAMPLING TRAJECTORIES AS A TOOL
FOR ANALYTICS
Francisco Moreno, Edison Ospina and Iv´
an Am´
on Uribe

[9]

E. Ospina and F. Moreno, "Personalized Trajectory Reconstruction Problem with LowSampling Data," in The Seventh International Conference on Advanced Geographic
Information Systems, Applications, and Services, Lisbon, 2014.
[10]
R. G. Golledge, "Path selection and route preference in human navigation: A progress
report," in Spatial Information Theory A Theoretical Basis for GIS, Springer Berlin
Heidelberg, 1995, pp. 207-222.
[11]
S. Orlando, R. Orsini, A. Raffaetà, A. Roncato and C. Silvestri, "Trajectory data
warehouses: design and implementation issues," Journal of Computing Science and
Engineering, vol. 1, no. 2, pp. 211-232, 2007.
[12]
E. Dijkstra, "A note on two problems in connexion with graphs," Numerische Mathematik,
vol. 1, no. 1, pp. 269-271, 1959.
[13]
L. Wang-Chien and J. Krumm, "Trajectory preprocessing," in Computing with spatial
trajectories, Springer New York, 2011, pp. 3-33.
[14]
S. Rinzivillo, F. Turini, V. Bogorny, C. Körner, B. Kuijpers and M. May, "Knowledge
Discovery from Geographical Data," in Mobility, Data Mining and Privacy, Springer Berlin
Heidelberg, 2008, pp. 243-265.
[15]
N. Andrienko, G. Andrienko, N. Pelekis and S. Spaccapietra, "Basic Concepts of
Movement Data," in Mobility, Data Mining and Privacy, Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2008,
pp. 15-38.
[16]
F. Giannotti, M. Nanni, F. Pinelli and D. Pedreschi, "Trajectory pattern mining," in KDD
'07 Proceedings of the 13th ACM SIGKDD international conference on Knowledge discovery
and data mining, San Jose, California, 2007.
[17]
K. Zheng, Y. Zheng, X. Xie and X. Zhou, "Reducing Uncertainty of Low-Sampling-Rate
Trajectories," in International Conference on Data Engineering, Washington, DC, 2012.
[18]
L. Gómez, B. Kuijpers, B. Moelans and A. Vaisman, "A survey of spatio-temporal data
warehousing," International Journal of Data Warehousing and Mining (IJDWM) , vol. 5, no.
3, pp. 28-55, 2009.
[19]
N. Pelekis, A. Raffaeta, M.-L. Damiani, C. Vangenot, G. Marketos, E. Frentzos, I. Ntoutsi
and Y. Theodoridis, "Towards trajectory data warehouses," in Mobility, Data Mining and
Privacy, Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2008, pp. 189-211.
[20]
R. Kimball and M. Ross, The data warehouse toolkit: the complete guide to dimensional
modelling, US: John Wiley & Sons, 2002.
[21]
M. Lv, L. Chen, Chen and Gencai, "Mining user similarity based on routine activities,"
Information Sciences, vol. 236, no. 1, pp. 17-32, 2013.
[22]
Y. Bédard, T. Merrett and a. J. Han, "Fundamentals of spatial data warehousing for
geographic knowledge discovery," in Geographic data mining and knowledge discovery,
Florida, Taylor & Francis Group, 2001, pp. 53-73.

373

