Procedia Computer Science
Volume 51, 2015, Pages 1897–1906
ICCS 2015 International Conference On Computational Science

Transition Metal Nitride Catalysts for Electrochemical
Reduction of Nitrogen to Ammonia at Ambient
Conditions
Younes Abghoui and Egill Skúlasson
Science Institute and Faculty of Physical Sciences, VR-III, University of Iceland, IS-107 Reykjavík,
Iceland
yoa2@hi.is and egillsk@hi.is

Abstract
Computational screening for catalysts that are stable, active and selective towards electrochemical
reduction of nitrogen to ammonia at room temperature and ambient pressure is presented from a range
of transition metal nitride surfaces. Density functional theory (DFT) calculations are used to study the
thermochemistry of cathode reaction so as to construct the free energy profile and to predict the
required onset potential via the Mars-van Krevelen mechanism. Stability of the surface vacancy as
well as the poisoning possibility of these catalysts under operating conditions are also investigated
towards catalyst engineering for sustainable ammonia formation. The most promising candidates
turned out to be the (100) facets of rocksalt structure of VN, CrN, NbN and ZrN that should be able to
form ammonia at -0.51 V, -0.76 V, -0.65 V and -0.76 V vs. SHE, respectively. Another interesting
result of the current work is that for the introduced nitride candidates, hydrogen evolution is no longer
the competing reaction; thus, high formation yield of ammonia is expected at low onset potentials.
Keywords: DFT calculations, Electrochemical synthesis of ammonia, Electrochemical reduction of N2 to NH3,
Transition metal nitride catalysts

1 Introduction
Ammonia is one of the highly produced chemicals in the globe, which is primarily used in
production of fertilizer [1, 2]. Since hundred years ago, ammonia has been synthesized mainly through
the Haber-Bosch process where gaseous nitrogen and hydrogen are passed over a Ru- or Fe-based
catalyst at high pressure and high temperature to form NH3 as: [3]
N2(g) + 3H2(g)  2NH3(g)

Selection and peer-review under responsibility of the Scientiﬁc Programme Committee of ICCS 2015
c The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V.

doi:10.1016/j.procs.2015.05.433

(1)

1897

Transition Metal Nitride Catalysts for Electrochemical Reduction of Nitrogen to Ammonia at
Ambient Conditions
Younes Abghoui and Egill Sk´
ulason

The required hydrogen gas for this process is often provided by natural gas, which leads to
increased production of various greenhouse gases. The alternative is to produce hydrogen from water
splitting, which is a cleaner but very energy intensive process. The Haber-Bosch process is in stark
contrast to the function of the enzyme nitrogenase in bacteria in which ammonia is produced from
solvated protons, electrons and atmospheric nitrogen at ambient conditions. The active site of the
enzyme is a MoFe7S9N cluster that catalyzes the electrochemical reaction:
N2 + 8H+ + 8e−  2NH3 + H2

(2)

The source of energy for this reaction is at least 16 adenosine triphosphate (ATP) molecules [4],
which are used to increase the chemical potential of the electrons and the protons. Therefore, it is
possible that this natural process could be emulated in a man-made and commercial installation.
Instead of a separate hydrogen production process, the protons could come from an acidic solution
while the electrons would be driven to the electrode surface by an applied electric potential. Various
potential routes for ammonia synthesis at ambient conditions are currently being explored (see Refs.
1,2 and 8 for recent reviews). To increase the yields of ammonia, solid-state proton conductors have
been employed; resulting in up to 78% conversion of cathodic supplied nitrogen to ammonia [5, 6].
Ionic liquids or molten salts also promote ammonia formation from low current efficiencies up to 72%
at high temperatures [7, 8, 9]. While having achieved low-pressure ammonia synthesis, the
abovementioned studies still suffer from the requirement of relatively high temperatures, which leads
to increased product decomposition. Another drawback is the use of complex and expensive
electrolytes that hinder commercialization. To the best of the authors’ knowledge, the first
observations of ammonia synthesis at milder conditions were reported with homogeneous catalysts
with tungsten [10] and zirconium [11] as the central atoms. However, for the sake of distributed use of
ammonia, simpler methods are needed, ideally using heterogeneous catalysis, which allows for facile
isolation of product.
With advancements in the field of computations and modeling, theoretical investigations have
provided deeper insight into catalysis [12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26]. The
use of computations can thus facilitate rational catalyst design, by enabling whole classes of material
to be assessed for their suitability as catalysts. The simplest catalyst for electrochemical ammonia
formation is a pure transition metal catalyst. In a recent theoretical study, electrochemical formation of
ammonia on a range of flat and stepped transition metal surfaces was studied [27]. It was found that
many metals require a relatively small overpotential of -0.5 to -1 V vs. SHE to form ammonia in 1 M
aqueous electrolyte (pH = 0) at room temperature. However, the hydrogen evolution reaction (HER)
can be very fast and severely hinder the production of ammonia unless the surface is covered with Nadatoms, rather than H-adatoms. It was found that the majority of metals are likely covered with Hadatoms at the onset potential of ammonia formation. This is less likely for the early transition metals,
however these are known to readily form oxides. Another study used a similar approach on transition
metal Nano-clusters [28] to enhance the ammonia activity compared to HER. However, the presence
of water in the electrochemical environment will reduce the efficiency of catalyst by blocking its
active site due to preferential adsorption of oxygen rather than nitrogen [29].
In the present study, transition metal nitride catalysts are investigated for electrochemical
formation of ammonia at ambient conditions. These materials offer the potential advantage of being
able to form ammonia by way of a Mars-van Krevelen mechanism [30], in which a surface N atom is
reduced to NH3 and the catalyst later regenerated with gaseous N2, rather than adsorbing N2 to the
catalyst surface in the first step. Density functional theory (DFT) calculations are used to study the
thermodynamics of the cathode reaction. Free energy diagrams are constructed for the electrochemical
protonation of surface nitrogen or metal atoms to obtain onset potentials required for the ammonia
synthesis on rocksalt and zincblende transition metal mononitride structures. The effect of an external

1898

Transition Metal Nitride Catalysts for Electrochemical Reduction of Nitrogen to Ammonia at
Ambient Conditions
Younes Abghoui and Egill Sk´
ulason

potential is included using the computational standard hydrogen electrode [12] and the lowest onset
potential required to reduce N2 to ammonia is estimated for each nitride.

2 Methodology
Mononitrides of the naturally occurring d-block metals are considered in the present study, in both
the rocksalt (RS) and zincblende (ZB) structures. The low index facets are considered for each crystal
structure, the (100) facets of the RS structure and the (110) facets of the ZB structure. Each nitride
surface is modeled by 40 atoms in five layers, with each layer consisting of four metal atoms and four
nitrogen atoms. The bottom two layers are fixed whereas the top layers as well as the adsorbed species
are allowed to relax. Boundary conditions are periodic in the x and y directions and surfaces are
separated by 12 Å of vacuum in the z direction. The structural optimization is considered converged
when the forces in any direction on all moveable atoms are less than 0.01 eV/Å. A previous study
showed several of the 3d mononitrides to be either antiferromagnetic (RS structure of VN, CrN, MnN,
FeN and ZB structure of MnN) or ferromagnetic (ZB structure of VN, CrN) at their equilibrium lattice
constants and as such are treated as spin-polarized [31]. The RPBE lattice constants are also taken
from that study. The calculations are conducted with density functional theory (DFT) using the RPBE
exchanges correlation functional [32]. A plane wave basis set with an energy cutoff of 350 eV is used
to represent the valence electrons with a PAW [33] representation of the core electrons as
implemented in the VASP code [34]. Activation energies are calculated as the highest point along the
minimum energy path (MEP) calculated using the climbing image nudged elastic band method (CINEB) [35]. The self-consistent electron density is determined by iterative diagonalization of the KohnSham Hamiltonian, with the occupation of the Kohn-Sham states being smeared according to a FermiDirac distribution with a smearing parameter of kBT = 0.1 eV. A 4 × 4 × 1 Monkhorst-Pack k-point
sampling is used for all the surfaces.

3 Results and Discussion
3.1 Stability of the surface nitrogen vacancy
In the Mars-van Krevelen mechanism considered in the present work, a surface nitrogen atom is
reduced to form NH3 after which the resulting vacancy is replenished by a gaseous N2 molecule. For
this replenishment to occur, the N-vacancy needs to be stable at the surface. If this is not the case, the
N-vacancy may migrate to the bulk of the catalyst, that is, the reacted nitrogen on the surface is
replaced with more nitrogen from the catalyst itself, rather than with gaseous N2. This process can, in
principle, continue until all the nitrogen atoms of the metal nitride have reacted and formed NH3,
leaving only the pure metal. The stability of the N-vacancy at the surface of the catalyst is estimated
by comparing the difference in energy of a nitride slab with a single N-vacancy in the surface layer
(Evac,1) and to that of a single N-vacancy in the first subsurface layer (Evac,2). The minimum energy
configuration of each of these slabs is found and the energy difference (∆Evac = (Evac,2) - (Evac,1)) used
as an estimation of the thermodynamic stability of the vacancy at the surface of the nitride. Activation
barriers for vacancy migration (Ea,vac) are also calculated and both ∆Evac and Ea,vac are presented in Fig.
1. It is found that, for most of the nitrides, it is thermodynamically favorable for the vacancy to
migrate to the bulk, with ∆Evac less than or close to zero. However, it is clear that many of the nitrides
exhibit a high activation barrier for vacancy migration and are thus likely to demonstrate a stable
surface vacancy. All nitrides with an activation barrier for a vacancy migration of > 1 eV is retained

1899

Transition Metal Nitride Catalysts for Electrochemical Reduction of Nitrogen to Ammonia at
Ambient Conditions
Younes Abghoui and Egill Sk´
ulason

for further screening, since a barrier of such magnitude is unlikely to be overcome at room
temperature.

4

rocksalt (100)
zincblende (110)

TiN

YN

Ea,vac / eV

3
HfN
2

VN
OsN

1

TaN

NbN

ZrN

CrN

RuN
MoN
IrN
AgN

0
-2

ScN

MnN
FeN
RhN
CoN
PdN

CuN

NiN

-1

0

1

ΔE vac / eV
Figure 1: Energy differences (∆Evac) of a vacancy at the surface layer and in the first subsurface layer of a nitride
and the associated activation barrier of vacancy migration (Ea,vac). The dashed line at Ea,vac = 1 eV represents the
cutoff above which metal nitrides are considered sufficiently stable for further study.

3.2 Catalytic activity
The rate-determining step (RDS) and our measure of the catalytic activity towards NH3 formation
on each nitride is identified as the elementary reaction step with the largest increase in free energy.
When this elementary step can be eliminated by applying a bias, it is referred to as the onset potential,
which is the bias that needs to be applied in order to shift the free energy landscape in such a way that
all reaction steps become downhill in free energy. The catalytic activity is studied for the nitrides that
exhibit stable vacancy on the surface (with Ea,vac > 1 eV, Fig.1) where at each H addition step every
possible adsorption site is investigated, including other N atoms, metal atoms and bridging sites.
For VN and RuN (shown in Fig. 2) as well as for CrN, each added H adds to the same N atom,
forming one NH3, then the second, with only 6(H+ + e−) required to form 2NH3. For ZrN, allowing the
H to bind to any surface site results in firstly a surface Zr atom being protonated, and then an N atom.
The protonation of N is the RDS in NH3 formation. A similar case is seen for NbN, where two
neighboring Nb atoms are protonated before the RDS, which is protonation of the first surface N. For
MnN, 3(*NH2) and 1(*NH) form before the first ammonia is released and 9(H+ + e−) are needed to
form 2NH3. In this case, no metal atoms are protonated. In contrast, for MoN and OsN, H atoms cover
all the metal atoms on the surface as well as surface N atoms and 12(H+ + e−) and 13(H+ + e−) are

1900

Transition Metal Nitride Catalysts for Electrochemical Reduction of Nitrogen to Ammonia at
Ambient Conditions
Younes Abghoui and Egill Sk´
ulason

Figure 2: Free energy diagram for NH3 formation via Mars-van Krevelen mechanism on the (100) facet of RS
structure of VN and the (110) facet of ZB structure of RuN. For VN the rate-determining step is the first
protonation step with ∆G = 0.51 eV. The blue line indicates the free energy of all the stable intermediates
calculated at zero potential. The red line represents the free energy of all the stable intermediates at the onset
potential. For RuN the RDS is to release the ammonia with ∆G = 0.41 eV. As the RDS involves no protonelectron transfer, no bias is applied and the free energy landscape of RuN is depicted only at zero potential.

needed to form 2NH3. For MoN, to form NH is the RDS. For OsN addition of N2(g) to fill the Nvacancy is endothermic, which corresponds to an increase in free energy that cannot be surpassed by
an external applied bias as no proton-electron transfer is involved at this step. For such cases that
require more than the minimum 6(H+ + e−) to form 2NH3, a lower faradaic efficiency is likely to be
observed. For TiN, YN, ScN, HfN and TaN an unconstrained mechanism yields a full H coverage on
the surface with no NH3 formation. The catalytic activity of these nitrides are thus instead being
considered as potential hydrogen evolution catalysts, the results of which are beyond the scope of the
present study. After exclusion of those nitrides that do not form NH3 (TiN, TaN, ScN, YN and HfN),

1901

Transition Metal Nitride Catalysts for Electrochemical Reduction of Nitrogen to Ammonia at
Ambient Conditions
Younes Abghoui and Egill Sk´
ulason

eight metal nitride catalysts are considered potentially active towards NH3 formation and presented in
Fig. 3. The RuN from ZB as well as the six RS nitrides shown in Fig.3 should make ammonia
electrochemically under ambient conditions whereas ZB OsN likely requires high pressure to fill the
N-vacancy in order to complete the catalytic cycle of ammonia formation.

1.0

rocksalt(100)
zincblende(110)
A-DOsH

A

BNH

A

ZrHANH
A,B

NH3(g)BNH

NbHANH
A

0.5

MoH
NH

A,BNH CNH
2
DNH
2

8(H+ + e-)

8(H+ + e-)

6(H+ + e-)

6(H+ + e-)

9(H+ + e-)

12(H+ + e-)

NH3(g)

6(H+ + e-)

0.0

B

NH

A

13(H+ + e-)

ΔGRDS / eV

DNH
2
A,CN
A,CNH
3(g)

A-D

OsN

RuN

ZrN

NbN

CrN

VN

MnN

MoN

Figure 3: Free energy change (∆GRDS, in eV) of the rate-determining step of NH3 formation on transition metal
nitride catalysts. At each H addition step every possible adsorption site is investigated including other N atoms,
metal atoms and bridging sites and at least 6(H+ + e−) are needed to form 2NH3. The labels above each bar
indicate the species formed in the rate-determining step, the notation of which is explained in Fig. 2. The labels in
each bar indicate the number of protons and electrons required to make 2NH3.

3.3 Poisoning of the surface vacancy
As previously discussed, in the Mars-van Krevelen mechanism considered in this work a surface N
is reacted, leaving a surface vacancy at the surface and for the catalytic cycle to complete, this vacancy
must be filled with N2(g). However, there exists the possibility of the vacancy rather being filled with
H atoms or O atoms from the aqueous electrolyte, both of which would block this surface site for
completion of the catalytic cycle. In the present section the competition between N, O and H for filling
the surface vacancy is investigated by considering the free energy of filling the vacancy with O or H
relative to N (∆G(∗N−∗X), where X = O or H). These free energies are referenced to N2, H2O and H2 in
the gas phase and are calculated at the onset potential for each nitride. A negative value of ∆G(∗N−∗X)
indicates that it is thermodynamically favorable to fill the vacancy with N, rather than O or H. The
values of ∆G(∗N−∗X) are shown in Fig. 4 for all the catalytically active nitrides. It can be observed that
N atoms bind more strongly to the surface vacancy than O atoms by over 1 eV for most nitrides.
Hence, it is not likely for the surface vacancy to be poisoned by O atoms. For poisoning by H, though,
the surface vacancy in MnN, MoN and RuN is likely to be filled by H, rather than N. For the
remaining nitrides, ZrN, NbN, CrN and VN, the vacancy is likely refilled by N and thus the catalytic
cycle may continue to form the second NH3. These results are as expected as when the bias is tuned

1902

Transition Metal Nitride Catalysts for Electrochemical Reduction of Nitrogen to Ammonia at
Ambient Conditions
Younes Abghoui and Egill Sk´
ulason

towards more negative values, the electropositive O species bind weaker on the surface compared to
H2O in the gas phase, as they would rather form bonds with the surface when the bias is more positive:
H2O + ∗ ∗O + 2H+ + 2e−

(3)

Conversely, the H adsorption free energy becomes more negative when the bias is lowered:
H + + e−  ∗ H

1

(4)

X = Oxygen
X = Hydrogen

ΔG(*N -*X) / eV

0

-1

-2

RuN

ZrN

NbN

CrN

VN

MnN

MoN

Figure 4: Free energy of adsorption of O or H (relative to N) to the surface vacancy of catalytically active nitrides
(∆G(∗N−∗X), in eV). Free energies are calculated relative to N2(g), H2(g) and H2O(g). All free energies are
evaluated at the calculated onset potential for each nitrides: ZrN, -0.76 V; NbN, -0.65 V; CrN, -0.76 V; VN, -0.51
V; MnN, -0.54 V; MoN, -0.83 V; and RuN, -0.41 V.

4 Summary and Conclusions
In this paper, first principles calculations are used to screen for nitrogen reduction electrocatalysts
that efficiently form ammonia at ambient conditions and in aqueous electrolyte. The most promising
nitride catalysts are the (100) facets of rocksalt structure of ZrN, NbN, CrN and VN. The suggested
catalysts should have stable N-vacancy at the surface and not be poisoned by oxygen or hydrogen
from the aqueous electrolyte. In contrast to previous studies where relatively high onset potentials are
required for ammonia formation, and hydrogen evolution is a competing reaction, the most promising
RS candidates presented in this paper only need a low applied bias to form ammonia and the
competing HER is suppressed. Therefore, a significant amount of ammonia compared with hydrogen
gas can be expected. Furthermore, at the onset potential, the N-vacancy is stable towards both

1903

Transition Metal Nitride Catalysts for Electrochemical Reduction of Nitrogen to Ammonia at
Ambient Conditions
Younes Abghoui and Egill Sk´
ulason

protonation and oxidation from water and it should get easily repaired with atmospheric nitrogen
injected to the system at ambient conditions. Other crystal facets and other mechanisms of ammonia
formation on these nitride catalysts are currently being studied to further investigate the catalytic
capability of this class of catalyst.

5 Acknowledgements
Financial support is acknowledged from the Icelandic Research Fund, Nordic Energy Research by
way of the Nordic Initiative for Solar Fuel Development, the Icelandic Student Innovation Fund, and
the Research Fund of the University of Iceland. The calculations were in part carried out on the Nordic
high performance computer (Gardar).

References
[1] S. Giddey, S. P. S. Badwal, and A. Kulkarni. Review of electrochemical ammonia production
technologies and materials. Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 38 (2013) 14576−14594.
[2] I. A. Amar, R. Lan, C. T. G. Petit, and S. Tao. Solid-state electrochemical synthesis of ammonia:
a review. J. Solid State Electrochem., 15 (2011) 1845−1860.
[3] V. Smil. Global Population and the Nitrogen Cycle. Sci. Am., 277 (1997) 76−81.
[4] J. M. Berg, J. L. Tymoczko, and L. Stryer. Biochemistry, W. H. Freeman, New York (2002)
988−990.
[5] G. Marnellos and M. Stoukides. Ammonia synthesis at atmospheric pressure. Science, 282
(1998) 98−100.
[6] G. Marnellos, S. Zisekas, and M. Stoukides. Synthesis of Ammonia at Atmospheric Pressure
with the Use of Solid State Proton Conductors. J. Catal., 193 (2000) 80−87.
[7] T. Murakami, T. Nishikiori, T. Nohira, and Y. Ito. Electrolytic synthesis of ammonia in molten
salts under atmospheric pressure. J. Am. Chem. Soc., 125 (2003) 334−335.
[8] T. Murakami, T. Nohira, T. Goto, Y. H. Ogata, and Y. Ito. Electrolytic ammonia synthesis from
water and nitrogen gas in molten salt under atmospheric pressure. Electrochim. Acta., 50 (2005)
5423−5426.
[9] T. Murakami, T. Nohira, Y. Araki, T. Goto, R. Hagiwara, and Y. H. Ogata. Electrolytic
Synthesis of Ammonia from Water and Nitrogen under Atmospheric Pressure Using a BoronDoped Diamond Electrode as a Nonconsumable Anode. Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 10 (2007)
E4−E6.
[10] J. Catt, A. J. Pearman, and R. L. Richards. The reduction of mono-coordinated molecular
nitrogen to ammonia in a protic environment. Nature, 253 (1975) 39−40.
[11] J. Pool, E. Lobkovsky, and P. Chirik. Hydrogenation and cleavage of dinitrogen to ammonia
with a zirconium complex. Nature, 427 (2004) 527−530.
[12] J. K. Nørskov, J. Rossmeisl, A. Logadottir, L. Lindqvist, J. R. Kitchin, T. Bligaard, and H.
Jnsson. Origin of the overpotential for oxygen reduction at a fuel-cell cathode. J. Phys. Chem. B,
108 (2004) 17886−17892.
[13] J. Greeley and M. Mavrikakis. Alloy catalysts designed from first principles. Nat. Mater., 3
(2004) 810−815.

1904

Transition Metal Nitride Catalysts for Electrochemical Reduction of Nitrogen to Ammonia at
Ambient Conditions
Younes Abghoui and Egill Sk´
ulason

[14] K. Honkala, A. Hellman, I. N. Remediakis, A. Logadottir, A. Carlsson, S. Dahl, C. H.
Christensen, and J. K. Nørskov. Ammonia synthesis from first-principles calculations. Science,
307 (2005) 555−558.
[15] J. Hafner and C. Wolverton. Toward Computational Materials Design : The Impact of Density
Functional. MRS Bull, 31 (2006) 659−668.
[16] F. Abild-Pedersen, J. Greeley, F. Studt, J. Rossmeisl, T. Munter, P. Moses, E. Skúlason, T.
Bligaard, and J. Nørskov. Scaling Properties of Adsorption Energies for Hydrogen-Containing
Molecules on Transition-Metal Surfaces. Phys. Rev. Lett., 99 (2007) 0161051−0161054.
[17] F. Studt, F. Abild-Pedersen, T. Bligaard, R. Z. Srensen, C. H. Christensen, and J. K. Nørskov.
Identification of non-precious metal alloy catalysts for selective hydrogenation of acetylene.
Science, 30 (2008) 1320−1322.
[18] H. J. Freund and G. Pacchioni. Oxide ultra-thin films on metals: new materials for the design of
supported metal catalysts. Chem. Soc. Rev., 37 (2008) 2224−2242.
[19] J. Greeley, I. E. L. Stephens, A. S. Bondarenko, T. P. Johansson, H. A. Hansen, T. F. Jaramillo,
J. Rossmeisl, I. Chorkendorff, and J. K. Nørskov. Alloys of platinum and early transition metals
as oxygen reduction electrocatalysts. Nat. Chem., 1 (2009) 552−556.
[20] J. K. Nørskov, T. Bligaard, J. Rossmeisl, and C. H. Christensen. Towards the computational
design of solid catalysts. Nat. Chem., 1 (2009) 37−46.
[21] J. K. Nørskov, F. Abild-Pedersen, F. Studt, and T. Bligaard. Density functional theory in
surface chemistry and catalysis. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 108 (2011) 937−943.
[22] J. G. Howalt, T. Bligaard, J. Rossmeisl, and T. Vegge. DFT based study of transition metal
nano-clusters for electrochemical NH3 production. Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 15 (2013)
7785−7795.
[23] V. Tripkovic, M. Vanin, M. Karamad, M. E. Bjrketun, K. W. Jacobsen, K. S. Thygesen, and J.
Rossmeisl. Electrochemical CO2 and CO Reduction on Metal-Functionalized Porphyrin-like
Graphene. J. Phys. Chem. C, 117 (2013) 9187−9195.
[24] A. Verdaguer-Casadevall, D. Deiana, M. Karamad, S. Siahrostami, P. Malacrida, T. W. Hansen,
J. Rossmeisl, I. Chorkendorff, and I. E. L. Stephens. Trends in the electrochemical synthesis of
H2O2: enhancing activity and selectivity by electrocatalytic site engineering. Nano Lett., 14
(2014) 1603−1608.
[25] A. A. Peterson, F. Abild-Pedersen, F. Studt, J. Rossmeisl, and J. K. Nørskov. How copper
catalyzes the electroreduction of carbon dioxide into hydrocarbon fuels. Energy Environ. Sci., 3
(2010) 11311−1315.
[26] Y. Abghoui, A. L. Garden, V. F. Hlynsson, S. Björgvinsdóttir, H. Ólafsdóttir, and E. Skúlason.
Enabling electrochemical reduction of nitrogen to ammonia at ambient conditions through
rational catalyst design. Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 17 (2015) 4909-4918.
[27] E. Skúlason, T. Bligaard, S. Gudmundsdóttir, F. Studt, J. Rossmeisl, F. Abild-Pedersen, T.
Vegge, H. Jónsson, and J. K. Nørskov. A theoretical evaluation of possible transition metal
electro-catalysts for N2 reduction. Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 14 (2012) 1235−1245.
[28] J. Howalt, T. Bligaard, J. Rossmeisl and T. Vegge. DFT based study of transition metal nanoclusters for electrochemical NH3 production. Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 15 (2013) 7785−7795.
[29] J. Howalt and T. Vegge. The role of oxygen and water on molybdenum nanoclusters for electro
catalytic ammonia production. Beilstein J. Nanotechnol., 5 (2014) 111−120.
[30] P. Mars and D. W. Van Krevelen. Special supplement to chemical engineering science. Eng.
Sci., 3 (1954) 41−45.

1905

Transition Metal Nitride Catalysts for Electrochemical Reduction of Nitrogen to Ammonia at
Ambient Conditions
Younes Abghoui and Egill Sk´
ulason

[31] V. F. Hlynsson, E. Skúlason, and A. L. Garden. A systematic, first-principles study of the
structural preference and magnetic properties of mononitrides of the d-block metals. J. Alloys
Compd., 603 (2014) 172−179.
[32] B. Hammer, L. Hansen, and J. Nørskov. Improved adsorption energetics within densityfunctional theory using revised Perdew-Burke-Ernzerhof functionals. Phys. Rev. B, 59 (1999)
7413−7421.
[33] P. Blchl. Projector augmented-wave method. Phys. Rev. B, 50 (1994) 17953−17979.
[34] G. Kresse and J. Hafner. Ab. initio molecular dynamics for liquid metals. Phys. Rev. B, 47
(1993) 558−561.
[35] G. Henkelman, B. P. Uberuaga, and H. Jonsson. A climbing image nudged elastic band method
for finding saddle points and minimum energy paths. J. Chem. Phys., 113 (2000) 9901−9904.

1906

