Procedia Computer Science
Volume 51, 2015, Pages 2938–2942
ICCS 2015 International Conference On Computational Science

Co-Clustering Based Approach for Indian Monsoon
Prediction
Moumita Saha and Pabitra Mitra
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Kharagpur, India
moumita.saha2012@gmail.com, pabitra@gmail.com

Abstract
Prediction of Indian monsoon is a challenging task due to complex dynamics and variability
over the years. Skills of statistical predictors that perform well in a set of years are not as good
for others. In this paper, we attempt to identify a set of predictors that have high skills for a
cluster of years. A co-clustering algorithm, which extracts groups of years, paired with good
predictor sets for those years, is used for this purpose. Weighted ensemble of these predictors
are used in ﬁnal prediction. Results on past 65 years data show that the approach is competitive
with state of art techniques.
Keywords: Indian monsoon prediction, co-clustering, ensemble methods

1

Introduction

Monsoon is inﬂuenced by a number of global climatic parameters. Variability of Indian monsoon
is high and the correlation between Indian monsoon and predictor global climatic parameters
changes over time. It is challenging to depict the variation as well as the predictor climatic
parameters inﬂuencing Indian monsoon. Selection of separate predictor set for diﬀerent clusters
of monsoon years is essential, which is accomplished by co-clustering technique [1]. The method
results in clustering the years of study into groups with distinct predictor climatic parameters
for each group, which are important for prediction of Indian monsoon.
In our work, we ﬁrst select global climatic parameters which are strongly correlated with Indian
monsoon. It is followed by co-clustering of years into groups with diﬀerent feature predictor
climatic parameters. Prediction model is designed for each cluster for forecasting annual Indian
rainfall. Finally, weighted ensemble of forecast given by respective models for each cluster is
performed to acquire ﬁnal forecast rainfall for the country. The proposed approach shows its
imprint and ascertain its superiority in prediction of Indian monsoon.
2938

Selection and peer-review under responsibility of the Scientiﬁc Programme Committee of ICCS 2015
c The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V.
doi:10.1016/j.procs.2015.05.485

Co-Clustering Based Approach for Indian Monsoon Prediction

2

Saha and Mitra

Co-Clustering Based Approach

Global Climatic Predictors of Indian Monsoon: A set of global predictors are selected
from the studies made by Indian Meteorological Department (IMD) [3, 4]. Selected predictors
include Equatorial Paciﬁc Ocean sea level pressure (SLP )(A1 ), North Atlantic Ocean SLP
(A2 ), East Asia surface pressure (SP ) (A3 ), North West Europe SP (A4 ), North Atlantic
Ocean sea surface temperature (SST ) (A5 ), Equatorial South Eastern Indian ocean SST (A6 ),
Indonesia SST (A7 ), North Central Paciﬁc zonal wind (A8 ), Ni˜
no 3.4 SST (A9 ), pressure
gradient between Madagascar and Tibetan low (A10 ), East Asia SST (A11 ), Europe land
surface air temperature (A12 ), Madagascar SLP (A13 ), North Central Paciﬁc Ocean SLP
(A14 ), and Tibetan low SP (A15 ).
Data Sources: Sea surface temperature (SST ) is obtained from NOAA OI SST V2 (www.
esrl.noaa.gov/ psd/ ). Surface pressure (SP ), air temperature, and zonal wind velocity are collected from NCEP Reanalysis Derived data (www.esrl.noaa.gov/ psd/ ). Ni˜
no 3.4 is acquired
from National Center for Atmospheric Research (www.climatedataguide.ucar.edu/climatedata/overview-climate-indices). Sea level pressure (SLP ) is obtained from 20th Century Reanalysis data (www.esrl.noaa.gov/psd/ ). Annual Indian rainfall is collected from Indian Institute of
Tropical Meteorology, Pune (www.imdpune.gov.in/ research/ncc/longrange/ data/data.html ).
All the monthly data are collected for time-period 1948-2012.
Co-Clustering of Years and Predictors: Spectral co-clustering method [1] is used for dual
clustering of years and predictors into homogeneous groups. It treats input data matrix as a
bipartite graph and approximates the normalized cut by generalized eigen value decomposition
of laplacian of the graph. Set of co-clusters are obtained, where each row and each column
belongs to exactly one co-cluster.

3

Cluster Based Ensemble of Predictions

Separate models are built for every clusters of years with suitable predictor sets, which are
obtained by co-clustering method. Models used are as following– (i) ﬁtted ensemble of regression
tree with bagging algorithm (RegTreeB ), (ii) ensemble of bagged decision tree (DecTreeB ), and
(iii) multiple regression (MultipleReg). Final prediction is provided by weighted ensemble of
c
predictions given by models designed for all clusters (P redf inal = i=1 Wi P i, where P redf inal
is the ﬁnal forecast, Wi and Pi are the weight assigned and prediction made by model built for
ith cluster, and c is the total number of clusters). Ensemble techniques used are as following.
• Simple arithmetic mean (Ens1 ): Equal weights are assigned to all models (Wi = 1c ).
• Weighed ensemble in linear order (Ens2 ): Weight is taken as a function of distance of test
year from the cluster center in linear order (Wi = d1i , where di is the euclidean distance
of test year from cluster center of cluster i ).
• Weighted ensemble in quadratic order (Ens3 ): Weight is assigned in quadratic order
(Wi = exp d1i ).
• Pearson correlation of past prediction (Ens4 ): Pearson correlation between predicted
values by cluster model and actual value for the last 10 years is taken as weight for the
prediction of the concurrent test year.
2939

Co-Clustering Based Approach for Indian Monsoon Prediction

Saha and Mitra

The schematic diagram of the proposed co-clustering-based ensemble method for prediction of
Indian monsoon is shown in Figure 1.

Figure 1: Proposed co-clustering based ensemble approach for prediction of Indian monsoon

4

Experimental Results and Analysis

Dual Clustering of Predictors and Years: Indian summer monsoon rainfall occurring in
months of June, July, August, and September, is considered for period 1948-2012 with 15 global
predictor attributes (discussed in Section 2) for clustering. Co-clustering algorithm performs
dual clustering of predictor set and years of study simultaneously. Number of clusters is chosen
as 3, which is evaluated empirically from cluster quality measure. The predictor attributes and
number of years in diﬀerent clusters as obtained by co-clustering method are shown in Table 1.
Table 1: Co-clustering results of years cluster with appropriate predictor attributes
Clusters
Cluster 1
Cluster 2
Cluster 3

Predictor attributes
A1, A3, A5, A6, A7, A9, A11, A13, A14
A4
A2, A8, A10, A12, A15

Number of years
33
12
20

Prediction of Indian Rainfall: Annual Indian summer monsoon rainfall (ISMR) is predicted using three models, namely, RegTreeB, DecTreeB, and MultipleReg. Models are built for
each obtained cluster of years with its speciﬁc predictor set separately. Rainfall is expressed in
terms of long period average of rainfall (LPA). Twenty years from 1993 to 2012 is considered
as test-period. Final forecast of ISMR is presented as ensemble of forecasts given by individual
cluster’s model. Mean absolute errors for individual cluster and ensemble models are elaborated
2940

Co-Clustering Based Approach for Indian Monsoon Prediction

Saha and Mitra

in Table 2. Ensemble models surpass individual cluster’s models. It is also noted that weighted
ensemble models outrun the simple mean ensemble model. All ensemble mean absolute errors
by RegTreeB and DecTreeB are found to be around 5.0%, which are appreciable for predicting
complex phenomenon of monsoon. In addition, EnsModel 4 which assigns weight according to
model’s eﬃciency in prediction over the past years performs best with mean absolute error of
5.0% for test period 1993-2012. The inter-annual variability of predicted and actual rainfall in
terms of LPA is shown in Figure 2. It is observed that predicted values are closer to actual
rainfall values during the considered test-period.
Table 2: Mean
Models
Clus1
RegTreeB
5.9
DecTreeB
6.2
MultipleReg 10.3

absolute errors (%) in prediction of Indian monsoon
Clus2
Clus3
Ens1
Ens2
Ens3
5.9
6.7
5.5
5.1
5.3
6.1
7.5
5.7
5.3
5.5
6.9
10.4
8.2
6.8
6.4

Ens4
5.0
5.6
6.7

Comparison with State of Art Method: Proposed co-clustering-based ensemble model is
compared with existing Indian Meteorological Department’s (IMD) 16-parameter power regression model [2] and 8 and 10-parameter models [3], which give root mean square errors of 10.8%,
7.6%, and 6.4%, respectively, for period 1996-2002. Proposed model Ens4 with weighted ensemble of cluster models’ prediction gives least root mean square error of 5.4%. Other proposed
models, namely, Ens1, Ens2, and Ens3 give root mean square errors of 6.2%, 5.8%, and 6.1%,
respectively, outperforming all the three past IMD models(shown in Figure 3).

Figure 2: Actual and predicted rainfall as % of
LPA by Ens2 of RegTreeB model

Figure 3: Comparison of proposed ensemble
models with IMD’s existing models [2, 3]

Comparison of Proposed Approach against Non-Clustered Approach: Proposed
clustering-based ensemble models are compared with– (i) non-clustered, non-ensemble model
with all ﬁfteen predictors and all years of study, (ii) non-clustered, non-ensemble model with
reduced clustered predictors obtained by co-clustering approach and all years of study. The
result of comparison are shown in Table 3. The results clearly evince an improvement in pre2941

Co-Clustering Based Approach for Indian Monsoon Prediction

Saha and Mitra

diction by proposed co-clustering-based ensemble approach over non-clustered general method.
Table 3: Comparison of proposed co-clustering-based ensemble models (Clus Ens) against nonclustering methods (Non Clus) (mean absolute errors(%))
Conditions
Error
Error
Error
Error
Error
Error

5

(Non Clus) with all attributes
(Non Clus) for clusters’ attributes
of Ens1 (Clus Ens)
of Ens2 (Clus Ens)
of Ens3 (Clus Ens)
of Ens4 (Clus Ens)

RegTreeB
7.1
7.6
5.5
5.1
5.3
5.0

Prediction Models
DecTreeB
MultipleReg
8.9
28.7
8.0
8.4
5.7
8.2
5.3
6.8
5.5
6.4
5.6
6.7

Conclusions

Indian monsoon is a dynamic and complex phenomenon. India being an agricultural land,
prediction of monsoon is very important for economic stability of the country. High variability
in the monsoon process, makes the prediction task more challenging. It is highly diﬃcult for
a single model to frame such non-linearity. The article addresses this task by dual clustering of years and predictor parameters using co-clustering. Co-clustering approach clusters the
years into groups with appropriate set of predictors for each groups. Three diﬀerent models,
namely, RegTreeB, DecTreeB, and MultipleReg are utilized for framing each clusters exclusively.
Final forecast of monsoon is given by weighted ensemble of prediction given by cluster models. Ensemble model gives an mean absolute error of 5.0%, which is quite appreciable task for
prediction of complex monsoon process. Finally, the prediction skill of proposed method is compared with existing 16 -parameter power regression model [2], and 8 -parameter, 10 -parameter
models [3] used by IMD. The proposed approach gives root mean square error of 5.4%, which
outperforms all three existing IMD models. The improvement of the clustering-based ensemble
approach over non-clustered general approach is evident. Ensemble MultipleReg model shows
an improvement of 20% in prediction over the non-clustered approach.
It is inferred that the proposed clustering and multi-model ensemble help in improvement in
accuracy of prediction of monsoon process. Our future directions include identiﬁcation of more
global climatic predictors inﬂuencing Indian monsoon and their inclusion in prediction model.
Also, other non-linear models are lined to be explored for even better prediction of Indian
monsoon.

References
[1] I. S. Dhillon. Co-clustering documents and words using bipartite spectral graph partitioning. In
Proceedings of the seventh ACM SIGKDD International conference on Knowledge discovery and
data mining, pages 269–274. ACM, 2001.
[2] V. Gowariker, V. Thapliyal, S.M. Kulshrestha, G.S. Mandal, N. Sen Roy, and D.R. Sikka. A
power regression model for long range forecast of southwest monsoon rainfall over India. Mausam,
42(2):125–130, 1991.
[3] M. Rajeevan, D.S. Pai, S.K. Dikshit, and R.R. Kelkar. IMD’s new operational models for long-range
forecast of southwest monsoon rainfall over India and their veriﬁcation for 2003. Current Science,
86(3):422–431, 2004.
[4] M. Rajeevan, D.S. Pai, R. A. Kumar, and B. Lal. New statistical models for long-range forecasting
of southwest monsoon rainfall over India. Climate Dynamics, 28(7-8):813–828, 2007.

2942

