Available online at www.sciencedirect.com

Procedia Computer Science 18 (2013) 2396 – 2405

International Conference on Computational Science, ICCS 2013

Identiﬁcation and visualization of dominant patterns and
anomalies in remotely sensed vegetation phenology using a
parallel tool for principal components analysis
Richard Tran Millsa,b,∗, Jitendra Kumara , Forrest M. Hoﬀmana,c ,
William W. Hargroved , Joseph P. Sprucee , Steven P. Normand
a Oak

Ridge National Laboratory, Oak Ridge, TN, USA
of Tennessee, Knoxville, TN, USA
c University of California, Irvine, CA, USA
d Eastern Forest Environmental Threat Assessment Center (EFETAC), Southern Research Station, USDA Forest Service, Asheville, NC, USA
e NASA Stennis Space Center, Bay St. Louis, MS, USA
b University

Abstract
We investigated the use of principal components analysis (PCA) to visualize dominant patterns and identify anomalies in a
multi-year land surface phenology data set (231 m × 231 m normalized diﬀerence vegetation index (NDVI) values derived from
the Moderate Resolution Imaging Spectroradiometer (MODIS)) used for detecting threats to forest health in the conterminous
United States (CONUS). Our goal is to ﬁnd ways that PCA can be used with this massive data set to automate the process of
detecting forest disturbance and attributing it to particular agents. We brieﬂy describe the parallel computational approaches
we used to make PCA feasible, and present some examples in which we have used it to visualize the seasonal vegetation
phenology for the CONUS and to detect areas where anomalous NDVI traces suggest potential threats to forest health.
Keywords: phenology; MODIS; NDVI; remote sensing; principal components analysis; singular value decomposition; data
mining; anomaly detection; high performance computing; parallel computing

1. Introduction
Early identiﬁcation of forested areas threatened by insects, disease, drought, or other agents can be critical
to preventing long-term or irreversible damage to forest ecosystems. With well over 600 million acres of forest
and wildlands in the United States, however, it is impossible for federal and state agencies to regularly monitor
any signiﬁcant fraction of these lands through aerial surveys and ground-based inspections, causing many threats
to go unnoticed until it is too late to easily take action to mitigate or correct them. To address this problem,
a collaboration led by the USDA Forest Service, in cooperation with NASA Stennis Space Center, USGS, and
the Department of Energy Oak Ridge National Laboratory, has been been developing ForWarn, a forest change
recognition and tracking system that uses high-frequency, moderate resolution satellite data to monitor changes in
forest cover and health. ForWarn comprises the ﬁrst tier of a broader National Early Warning System for Forest
Health Threats, which helps direct higher-resolution, second-tier aerial and ground-based surveys.
∗ Corresponding

author. Tel.: +1-865-241-3198
E-mail address: rmills@ornl.gov, rtm@utk.edu.

1877-0509 © 2013 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. Open access under CC BY-NC-ND license.
Selection and peer review under responsibility of the organizers of the 2013 International Conference on Computational Science
doi:10.1016/j.procs.2013.05.411

Richard Tran Mills et al. / Procedia Computer Science 18 (2013) 2396 – 2405

2397

ForWarn identiﬁes changes in forest state through analysis of satellite-derived data indicating the temporal
variation of vegetation “greenness”, i.e., the ecosystem phenology. Speciﬁcally, it uses Normalized Diﬀerence
Vegetation Index (NDVI) values derived from the Moderate Resolution Imaging Spectroradiometer (MODIS)
sensors aboard NASA’s Aqua and Terra satellites as a proxy for vegetation phenology. Leaf cells strongly absorb
solar radiation in the photo synthetically active radiation range (wavelengths of 400 to 700 nm) and scatter radiation in the near-infrared spectral region (wavelengths > 700 m). NDVI exploits these diﬀerences in reﬂectances
to provide a measure of vegetation canopy “greenness”:
NDVI =

σnir − σred
σnir + σred

(1)

These spectral reﬂectances are ratios of reﬂected over incoming radiation, σ = Ir /Ii , hence they take on values
between 0.0 and 1.0. As a result, NDVI varies between −1.0 and +1.0. Dense vegetation cover is 0.3–0.8, soils
are about 0.1–0.2, surface water is near 0.0, and clouds and snow are negative. ForWarn utilizes NDVI values
derived from the 231 m × 231 m resolution MOD 13 Gridded Vegetation Indices products from the Aqua and
Terra satellites, which are generated every 16 days; because the Aqua and Terra products are staggered in time,
a new MOD 13 product is available every 8 days. These products are further processed by NASA Stennis Space
Center into a smoothed and quality-controlled data set that provides 46 NDVI values per year at every location.
ForWarn is currently providing interactive forest disturbance detection maps though the U.S. Forest Change
Assessment Viewer website.1 These maps are computed through raster map arithmetic approaches in which current NDVI values are compared with values from some historical baseline. E.g., the current maximum NDVI
observed over a 24-day window at a given location may be compared with the maximum NDVI for the same
location/window observed over a set of previous years. Such approaches have demonstrated their utility at identifying several types of forest disturbances [1], but a potential diﬃculty is identiﬁcation of appropriate parameters
(maximum NDVI, 20% “spring” NDVI, window size, years to use in establishing the historical baseline, etc.).
This has prompted us to explore geospatiotemporal data-mining techniques that use high-performance computing
to analyze the entire MODIS-based NDVI history for the entire contiguous United States (CONUS) to establish a
potential basis for determining what constitutes “normal” seasonal and inter-seasonal variation expected at a given
geographic location, and for determining what constitutes a departure from “normal” that is signiﬁcant enough to
merit further scrutiny.
One set of approaches we have explored are based on k-means cluster analysis of the entire NDVI history for
the CONUS. These approaches are described in more detail in [2, 3], but we summarize them here. For each year
and each grid cell in the CONUS, the NDVI values are arranged into an observation vector of 46 NDVI values
representing the seasonal NDVI trace for that year/location. All of these observation vectors are combined into a
data matrix with 46 columns and hundreds of millions of rows (each year corresponds to 146.4 million rows). The
data are then standardized (the column mean is subtracted from each element of a column, and each element is
divided by the column standard deviation) and then clustered using a highly-parallel k-means clustering code [4].
The resulting cluster assignments are then mapped back to each map cell and year from which each observation
came, yielding one map per year in which each cell is classiﬁed into one of k clusters or “phenoclasses”, which can
be viewed as forming a dictionary of prototypical annual NDVI traces that are derived from the full spatiotemporal
extent of the observations comprising the input data set. Disturbance or recovery can be detected by analyzing the
history of phenoclass assignment in a variety of ways, such as looking for signiﬁcant deviation from the statistical
mode of cluster assignments or looking for a large Euclidean distance between the currently assigned cluster
centroid and those from a prior year or years (which we have termed the transition distance).
Our experiments with these clustering-based approaches have shown that they are eﬀective at identifying a
wide range of disturbances, particularly those involving high mortality events such as ﬁre, storms, or mountain
pine beetle outbreaks. Identifying slower-acting agents, such as hemlock woolly adelgid, that cause a gradual
decline in forest health is more diﬃcult. Also, the annual phenology of some areas is highly inﬂuenced by
interannual climate variability: grasslands, for instance, experience rapid greenup after precipitation and do not
1 http://forwarn.forestthreats.org/fcav

2398

Richard Tran Mills et al. / Procedia Computer Science 18 (2013) 2396 – 2405

have smooth annual cycles. These areas tend to display a large transition distance from year to year even when
there is essentially no real change in the vegetation health. To remedy these shortcomings of our cluster analysisbased approaches, we have been exploring the use of principal components analysis (PCA) to complement these
approaches. In this paper we present some of the initial PCA-based approaches we have tried and the results of
some of our experiments with them.
2. Principal Components Analysis
PCA can be regarded as a procedure for computing the most meaningful or natural basis for expressing a data
set. For a given n-dimensional data set, it determines a set of orthonormal basis vectors or axes (the principal
components) that are a linear combination of the original basis and possesses the following property: the ﬁrst axis
explains the greatest amount of the variance of the data set as possible on a single axis, while the second explains
the next largest portion of the variance possible, and so forth. Formally, the ﬁrst principal component v1 points in
the direction of maximum variance in the (mean-centered) m × n data matrix X:
v1 = arg max Var(Xv).

(2)

||v||=1

Because Var(X) = ||X||2 if X is mean-centered, this is equivalent to
v1 = arg max ||Xv||.

(3)

||v||=1

Given any k − 1 principal components, the kth principal component maximizes the variance of the “residual” data
that do not map onto the ﬁrst k − 1 components:
k−1

vk = arg max ||(X −
||v||=1

Xvi vTi )v||

(4)

i=1

The principal components can be determined by computing the eigenvectors and eigenvalues of the covariance
1
matrix (or correlation matrix, if the data are standardized, as in the case of our NDVI dataset) CX = m−1
XT X. (For
an excellent and highly intuitive explanation of why, see [5].) Ordering the eigenvectors vi by magnitude of their
corresponding eigenvalues λi , these eigenvectors comprise the principal components. The projection of the data
matrix onto the ith principal component is given by Xvi , and the proportion of variance explained on this axis is
λi / nj=1 λ j (which is equivalent to λi /n in the case of a standardized data matrix).
The construction of the principal components allows one to easily examine the intrinsic dimensionality of
a data set, and PCA is routinely used for dimensionality reduction and to extract the dominant trends in a data
set. If a set of the ﬁrst p components explains most of the variance, the data can be largely represented using
this reduced basis. Recalling that the principal component vectors are formed from linear combinations of the
original variables, the individual elements (that is, the coeﬃcients of the linear combination) of the most signiﬁcant
principal components can be examined to determine the relative contributions of the original variables to the total
variance of the data set. In section 4 we illustrate how PCA can help us understand and visualize some of the
dominant trends in our national phenology data set.
Although PCA is commonly employed to extract the dominant structure or trends of a data set, it also has
utility in identifying anomalous features of the data set. If the ﬁrst p components that together explain most of the
variance can be considered as a vector basis for the subspace of “normal” behavior, the n − p remaining vectors
can be considered to span the subspace of “abnormal” behavior. In section 5 we explore how these notions can be
used to separate NDVI traces into “normal” and “abnormal” components.
3. Computing the PCA for Large Data Sets
We have stated that PCA can be performed by computing the eigenpairs of the covariance matrix of the
mean-centered data matrix X. In practice, computing the PCA in this manner may be undesirable because of the

2399

Richard Tran Mills et al. / Procedia Computer Science 18 (2013) 2396 – 2405

round-oﬀ errors introduced in forming the matrix-matrix product XT X. Instead, the PCA is usually computed by
forming the singular value decomposition (SVD)
A = UΣVT

(5)

1
X, which is related to the covariance matrix of the data set by AT A = CX . The columns of
of the matrix A = √n−1
V (the right singular vectors) form the principal components of X and the non-zero entries of the diagonal matrix
Σ are the square roots of the eigenvalues of CX .
Our national phenology data set is very large: each year consists of 46 NDVI values at each of 144.6 million
grid points. In single precision, each year of data is about 27 GB in size, so the size of the data set for the
entire 12 years of the MODIS NDVI record is 324 GB. Working with even a fraction of this data set requires
distributed memory parallelism due to both wall-clock time and memory constraints, so we have constructed a
Message Passing Interface (MPI)-based code to perform the PCA and data projection. Our (dense) matrices and
vectors are distributed across a logically two-dimensional MPI process grid (our code supports a 2D grid, but for
the matrix dimensions here we choose a processor grid that consists of only one column) using a standard blockcyclic partitioning, and routines from the PLAPACK [6] library are used to perform linear algebra operations on
these objects.
PLAPACK includes a routine, PLA SVD, that calculates the thin SVD by ﬁrst reducing the matrix A to bidiagonal form (A = U1 BVT1 ) through a series of unitary Householder reﬂections, and then computing the SVD
of the bidiagonal matrix B = U2 ΣVT2 . The singular vectors of A are then U = U1 U2 and V = V1 V2 . The reduction to bidiagonal form happens in parallel, and the SVD computation of the (very small) bidiagonal matrix
is performed sequentially via the DBDSQR routine in LAPACK. We originally used the PLA SVD routine, before
realizing that because our matrices are extremely “tall and skinny” (the number of rows m is in the millions while
then number of columns n is only 46), it is signiﬁcantly more eﬃcient to use the Lawson-Hanson-Chan algorithm:
the Golub-Kahan algorithm used by PLA SVD requires approximately 4mn2 − 43 n3 operations, whereas LawsonHanson-Chan requires approximately 2mn2 + 2n3 ; the latter also has the additional advantage of being based on
QR factorization, which is a one-sided operation and therefore has better parallel eﬃciency than the two-sided
bidiagonalization process. With this approach, we do the following:
1. Form the reduced QR factorization A = QR (Q is orthonormal and R is upper-triangular); this is done in
parallel via the PLA QR routine that uses a sophisticated block (matrix-matrix multiply) based algorithm [7].
2. Perform an MPI Gather operation to gather the n × n matrix R to process 0.
3. Process 0 calls the serial LAPACK algorithm DGESVD to compute the SVD R = USVT . The matrices S
and V then hold the relevant portions of the SVD of A. (The left singular vectors can also be computed by
forming QU, but we do not need them for our PCA.)
4. Process 0 scatters V to the other processes according to the block-cyclic distribution.
5. If projection of the original data onto the principal component space is desired, call the PLA Gemm routine
to perform the parallel matrix-matrix multiply.

There is a serial bottleneck in the code where the SVD of R is computed, but this matrix is so small (only 46 × 46
for our NDVI data set) that this serial portion is essentially negligible. We note that the parallel eﬃciency of our
code could be increased by using the “communication-avoiding” Tall Skinny QR factorization algorithm presented
in [8].
4. Visualizing Dominant Patterns: Similarity Color Maps
The ﬁrst few principal components provide a useful means to visualize the dominant patterns in the yearly
phenoclass-assignment maps generated by our clustering tool. Taking the ﬁrst three components (which together
typically explain almost 95% of the variance), we apply a varimax rotation, which orthogonally rotates the components such that each will have large loadings on only a few of the original variables. Figure 1 displays the loadings
for the rotated components derived from a principal components analysis of all of the k = 1000 cluster centroids
for years 2000–2010 (we note that for our purpose here, working with the PCA of the full data set is not necessary,
as the maps we will generate quickly converge to the same visual appearance as k increases). One can see that the
three components correspond roughly to the ﬁrst third, middle third, and last third of the year, respectively. We

2400

Richard Tran Mills et al. / Procedia Computer Science 18 (2013) 2396 – 2405

Fig. 1. The loadings (coeﬃcients in the linear combination of the 46 original variables) along the three varimax-rotated principal axes. The
x-axis corresponds to the eight-day NDVI-acquisition windows and loadings are shown on the y-axis.

can then use these three components to construct maps of the yearly phenoclass assignments (cluster membership)
that use similarity colors [9] instead of random colors to indicate the cluster assignments: each cluster center is
projected onto the three rotated axes and then these scores are mapped onto the three channels of the red-greenblue color space. The similarity of the annual phenology of any two points on the map can then be compared by a
simple visual inspection of how closely they resemble each other in color.
Figure 2 depicts a similarity-colored map for the CONUS in year 2000 clustered at the k = 1000 level of
division. The ﬁrst varimax-rotated component (which we will refer to as PC1) has been assigned to blue, the
second (PC2) to green, and the third (PC3) to red. Several patterns can be discerned on this map. The agriculture
dominated (large amplitude, highly productive deciduous vegetation) in the Midwest and the highly irrigated
Central Valley of California are the greenest parts of the map. This makes sense because both display very high
NDVI during the growing season and peak just after mid-summer, so they score very highly onto PC2. The Central
Valley is a paler green, indicating that it scores higher on PC1 and PC3 than the Midwest, likely because some
crops are grown there year-round. The highly productive evergreen biomes in the Paciﬁc Northwest and the Gulf
Coast are purple because they have the highest NDVI outside of the growing season. The peaks of the Sierra
Nevada are an even darker purple, perhaps because they are snow-covered part of the year and their productivity is
more limited. The evergreens present in northern portions of Minnesota, Wisconsin, and Michigan also show up in
purple, as do the evergreen forests of Maine. The purple strip of ponderosa pine in central Arizona can also be seen.
Much of the Appalachians and Northeast are aquamarine because they score highly on PC1 and PC2, with streaks
of purple on ridgetops. These are mixed deciduous (PC2) and evergreen (PC1 + PC3) systems. Certain swamps,
wetlands, and lakes are dark olive drab because they have a constant and very low NDVI. Similarly, deserts are
dark yellow because they have constant and very low NDVI. Interestingly, urban areas are also somewhat purple,
probably because of managed vegetation that may be green year-round. We are unsure about why some canyon
lands show up as almost pure red to pink, except that absolutely nothing grows and PC3 is lowest for the longest
part of the year.
5. Principal Components for Anomaly Detection
Although PCA is most commonly employed to extract the dominant structure and trends of a data set, it can
also be useful for identifying anomalous features. If most of the variance of a data set can be explained using the
ﬁrst p principal components, observations that ﬁt the general patterns of the data will be well-represented in this
subspace and will score highly along these components. Observations that do not ﬁt the normal correlation structure, conversely, will have strong scores along the lower-order n − p components. Methods based on this property
of the PCA subspaces have been used for automated detection of anomalous traﬃc in computer networks [10, 11].

Richard Tran Mills et al. / Procedia Computer Science 18 (2013) 2396 – 2405

2401

Fig. 2. Phenoclass assignment map for year 2000 with k = 1000. Similarity colors are used to indicate cluster membership.

Here, we experiment with using the lower-order principal components to identify anomalous features within our
NDVI data set (possibly indicative of disturbance or recovery) via the following simple procedure: For a given
observation vector x, determine its representation y = [y1 , ..., yn ] (that is, its scores) in terms of the principal
components basis. Then calculate the function
p

f (y) =

y2i
,
λ
i=p−n+1 i

(6)

which we note is equivalent to the Mahalanobis distance from the origin in the space formed by the lower-order
principal components. If f (y) exceeds some threshold, then the observation vector is ﬂagged as anomalous. We
note that under the assumption of normality and for suﬃciently large sample size, f (y) follows a chi-squared
distribution, so this threshold could be used to identify outliers. However, here we have chosen this threshold
based on a user-speciﬁed quantile of the empirical distribution of the function.
It is important to note that this approach will ﬂag any observations that are somehow “unusual” for the collection of data from which the principal components have been calculated. Thus the choice of the spatiotemporal
subset of the NDVI dataset fed as input to the PCA calculation will aﬀect what constitutes a “normal” or “abnormal” observation. If, say, the entire NDVI data set is used in the PCA, a heavily disturbed region in Florida
with very low productivity may be classiﬁed as “normal” because it is very similar to many observations from the
Mojave Desert that are present in the data set; whereas it might be classiﬁed as abnormal using a set of principal
components computed from a subset of observations only from the humid Southeast. Clearly, the choice of both
temporal and spatial window over which the PCA is computed requires some judgement. We plan further exploration of this issue, but for the initial experiments described here we have chosen to work with PCAs computed
over single years and within a spatial domain conforming to the eco-climatic domains established by the National
Ecological Observatory Network (NEON). The NEON domains have been quantitatively delineated through multivariate geographic clustering of a national data set of eco-climatological variables [12, 13]; we choose to work
with those here because some degree of eco-climatological (and hence phenological) homogeneity can be expected

2402

Richard Tran Mills et al. / Procedia Computer Science 18 (2013) 2396 – 2405

Fig. 3. A portion of the PCA-based anomaly map (maps cells scoring in the 85th percentile are shown) for the Southern Rockies–Colorado
Plateau NEON Domain for year 2008, showing ﬂagged anomalies in Colorado and southern Wyoming. Aerial detection survey perimeters are
shown in black.

within each domain. We present several examples below in which the PCA-based anomaly detection approach
appears to have utility in identifying forest disturbances. In all of the examples, principal component vectors
10–46 are used as the basis for the “abnormal” space, which explains 5–10% of the variance in each domain. The
threshold for f (y) used to ﬂag observations as anomalous is chosen such that only those observations that fall into
a high percentile (we varied this for each domain) are ﬂagged. In all of the examples, certain features that are not
disturbances but possess very anomalous NDVI traces (e.g., bodies of water) show up very strongly.
Figure 3 depicts a portion of the PCA-based anomaly map computed for the Southern Rockies–Colorado
Plateau NEON Domain for year 2008. Any map cells that are colored-in have a Mahalanobis distance f (y) that is
in the 85th percentile. (This map, as well as the maps in Figures 4 and 6, is mostly intended as a binary map—that
is, a map cell is either ﬂagged as anomalous or not—but the anomalous cells are colored by score from low to high
in the order blue, green, yellow, and then red, as this aids in visual identiﬁcation of features.) Polygons outlined
in black enclose areas ﬂagged as damaged by aerial detection surveys (ADS). Forests in the region depicted have
been extensively damaged by a widespread mountain pine beetle outbreak that began in 2003 and has killed
very large numbers of ponderosa and lodgepole pines, as well as by both long-term and sudden aspen decline. We
observe very high correspondence between the areas we have ﬂagged as anomalous and the ADS polygons (which
we note are somewhat inexact by nature).
We have also examined the Southeast NEON Domain and found that hurricane-induced mortality can easily
be discerned in the vicinity of the Louisiana coast. Figure 4 depicts PCA-based anomaly maps for the years 2004–
2009, and Figure 5 depicts the entire NDVI history for a near-coastal location in southwestern Louisiana. This
area was strongly aﬀected by Hurricanes Katrina and Rita in 2005, and later by Hurricanes Ike and Gustav in 2008.
Strong anomalies appear in 2005, which decrease in 2006 as some recovery occurs. The 2007 map looks fairly
normal, and then strong anomalies again reappear in 2008. The appearance and disappearance of these strong
anomalies on the map correspond well with what one would expect to see based on the example NDVI trace.
Lastly, we present in Figure 6 a portion of the PCA-based anomaly map for the year 2010 in the Southern
Appalachians/Cumberland Plateau NEON Domain, centered roughly around the high-elevation border between

Richard Tran Mills et al. / Procedia Computer Science 18 (2013) 2396 – 2405

Fig. 4. Portions of the PCA-based anomaly maps (map cells scoring in the 90th percentile are shown) for the Southeast NEON Domain for
years 2004–2009, showing the area in the vicinity of the Louisiana coast. From left to right, the top row shows years 2004, 2005, and 2006,
respectively, and the bottom row years 2007, 2008, and 2009. The aﬀected
ﬀ
regions are circled in the 2005 and 2008 maps. The prominent red
features are water bodies.

Fig. 5. NDVI trajectory as viewed via the Forest Change Assessment Viewer for a location (close to the center of the circled region in Figure 4)
near the coast in southwestern Louisiana showing apparent hurricane-induced mortality from events in 2005 and 2008.

2403

2404

Richard Tran Mills et al. / Procedia Computer Science 18 (2013) 2396 – 2405

Fig. 6. At left, a portion of the PCA-based anomaly map (map cells scoring in the 90th percentile are shown) for the Southern Appalachians/Cumberland Plateau NEON Domain for year 2010. A variety of “unusual” features are shown in this map, including rivers, but many
are as yet unexplained, though potentially due to multiple factors. The arrow indicates a location thought to be aﬀected
ﬀ
by hemlock woolly
adelgid, and the corresponding NDVI trajectory as viewed via the Forest Change Assessment Viewer is shown at right. The decline in the
seasonal minimum with a smaller decline in the seasonal maximum is consistent with a shift in the dominance of evergreen toward deciduous
vegetation and an overall reduction in greenness due to a lower leaf density, respectively. The sudden drop in NDVI in 2010 is due to multiple
weeks of snow cover, an unusual event that prevents accurate remote sensing of snow-free vegetated NDVI.

Tennessee and North Carolina that runs along the crest of the Unaka Range. Several anomalous regions show
up on the map, mostly in coniferous forests in higher elevations. Attribution of these anomalies to any particular
agent is challenging, however. The health of these coniferous forests has been signiﬁcantly aﬀected
ﬀ
by several
factors, including acid rain, balsam woolly adelgid, and a progressive and serious problem with hemlock woolly
adelgid. We are particularly interested in identifying areas aﬀected
ﬀ
by hemlock woolly adelgid, which causes
decline spanning a number of years and may be diﬃcult to detect with our clustering-based methods. The right
side of Figure 6 shows an example NDVI trace from an area that may be aﬀected
ﬀ
by the hemlock woolly adelgid.
Such areas show up well in the anomaly maps, but most evergreen forests at higher elevations also show up.
Because these forests have been widely aﬀected
ﬀ
by various destructive agents, it is hard to say whether these show
up due to disturbance or simply due to factors such as the highly-variable mountain climate. Considerably more
investigation will be required to determine if this PCA-based technique can be useful in these regions. It may be
that selecting the Southern Appalachians NEON Domain as the spatial window for areas included in the PCA is
a bad choice because the high-elevation areas make up a relatively small portion; we may need to use a smaller
window that has a greater proportion of high-elevation areas. It may also be the case that such unsupervised PCAbased techniques are not useful on their own for identifying these agents; they may need to be used in conjunction
with clustering-based techniques or supervised classiﬁcation methods.
6. Conclusions and Future Directions
We developed a parallel tool for performing principal components analysis on large (dense) data sets and used
it to inspect both dominant patterns and anomalous observations in our NDVI data set. Using the ﬁrst three principal components to construct a table of similarity colors greatly aids interpretation of the geographic patterns in
seasonal vegetative phenology observed in the data set. Using the subspace of very low-order principal components to identify anomalous observations that correspond to forest disturbance appears promising: without using
any historical baseline, some types of disturbance—including some that are may not be high-mortality events—
show up very well. Considerably more experimentation with and validation and reﬁnement of this approach is
required, however. In our experiments thus far we have used only observations from the same NEON domain and

Richard Tran Mills et al. / Procedia Computer Science 18 (2013) 2396 – 2405

2405

the same year as input to the PCA tool; we clearly need to experiment with using both larger and smaller spatial
and temporal windows for selecting the input data set. Analyzing the entire data set will require some updates
and optimization of the parallel PCA tool: the data set has become large enough that updating the tool to support
64-bit indexing is necessary, and support for parallel I/O (the data are currently simply distributed by process 0)
is needed as well. Beyond experimenting with the PCA-based technique on its own, we also need to explore its
use in conjunction with the raster map arithmetic and clustering-based methods we have developed. Perhaps the
most interesting work is to explore the use of supervised PCA-based approaches: if a “dictionary” of observations
corresponding to many diﬀerent types of disturbances can be compiled, we might be able to classify new observations as belonging to a particular disturbance class by seeing how well they can be represented using the principal
components basis generated by PCA of the observations forming each disturbance class. Existing methods being
used in the ForWarn system are already fairly eﬀective at detecting disturbance, but attribution is much harder and
more time-consuming, so such an approach could prove very useful.
7. Acknowledgments
This research was sponsored by the U.S. Department of Agriculture Forest Service, Eastern Forest Environmental Threat Assessment Center. This research used resources of the National Center for Computational Science
at Oak Ridge National Laboratory, which is managed by UT-Battelle, LLC, for the U.S. Department of Energy
under Contract No. DE-AC05-00OR22725.
8. References
[1] W. W. Hargrove, J. P. Spruce, G. E. Gasser, F. M. Hoﬀman, Toward a national early warning system for forest disturbances using remotely
sensed phenology, Photogramm. Eng. Rem. Sens. 75 (10) (2009) 1150–1156.
[2] F. M. Hoﬀman, R. T. Mills, J. Kumar, S. S. Vulli, W. W. Hargrove, Geospatiotemporal data mining in an early warning system for forest
threats in the United States, in: Proceedings of the 2010 IEEE International Geoscience and Remote Sensing Symposium (IGARSS
2010), 2010, pp. 170–173, invited. doi:10.1109/IGARSS.2010.5653935.
[3] R. T. Mills, F. M. Hoﬀman, J. Kumar, W. W. Hargrove, Cluster analysis-based approaches for geospatiotemporal data mining of massive
data sets for identiﬁcation of forest threats, in: M. Sato, S. Matsuoka, P. M. Sloot, G. D. van Albada, J. Dongarra (Eds.), Proceedings of
the International Conference on Computational Science (ICCS 2011), Vol. 4 of Procedia Comput. Sci., Elsevier, Amsterdam, 2011, pp.
1612–1621. doi:10.1016/j.procs.2011.04.174.
[4] J. Kumar, R. T. Mills, F. M. Hoﬀman, W. W. Hargrove, Parallel k-means clustering for quantitative ecoregion delineation using
large data sets, in: M. Sato, S. Matsuoka, P. M. Sloot, G. D. van Albada, J. Dongarra (Eds.), Proceedings of the International
Conference on Computational Science (ICCS 2011), Vol. 4 of Procedia Comput. Sci., Elsevier, Amsterdam, 2011, pp. 1602–1611.
doi:10.1016/j.procs.2011.04.173.
[5] J. Shlens, A tutorial on principal component analysis, Systems Neurobiology Laboratory, University of California at San Diego.
URL http://www.snl.salk.edu/~shlens/pca.pdf
[6] P. Alpatov, G. Baker, C. Edwards, J. Gunnels, G. Morrow, J. Overfelt, R. A. van de Geijn, Y. jye J. Wu, Plapack: Parallel linear algebra
package (1997).
URL http://www.cs.utexas.edu/~plapack/
[7] J. Gunnels, G. Morrow, B. Riviere, R. V. D. Geijny, Plapack: High performance through high level abstraction, in: Proceedings of
ICPP98, 1998.
[8] J. Demmel, L. Grigori, M. Hoemmen, J. Langou, Communication-optimal parallel and sequential QR and LU factorizations, arXiv
preprint arXiv:0808.2664.
[9] W. W. Hargrove, F. M. Hoﬀman, Potential of multivariate quantitative methods for delineation and visualization of ecoregions, Environ.
Manage. 34 (5) (2004) s39–s60, doi:10.1007/s00267-003-1084-0.
[10] M. ling Shyu, S. ching Chen, K. Sarinnapakorn, L. Chang, A novel anomaly detection scheme based on principal component classiﬁer, in:
in Proceedings of the IEEE Foundations and New Directions of Data Mining Workshop, in conjunction with the Third IEEE International
Conference on Data Mining (ICDM03, 2003, pp. 172–179.
[11] A. Lakhina, M. Crovella, C. Diot, Diagnosing network-wide traﬃc anomalies, in: In ACM SIGCOMM, 2004, pp. 219–230.
[12] D. Schimel, W. Hargrove, F. Hoﬀman, J. McMahon, NEON: A hierarchically designed national ecological network, Front. Ecol. Environ.
5 (2) (2007) 59. doi:10.1890/1540-9295(2007)5[59:NAHDNE]2.0.CO;2.
[13] M. Keller, D. Schimel, W. Hargrove, F. Hoﬀman, A continental strategy for the National Ecological Observatory Network, Front. Ecol.
Environ. 6 (5) (2008) 282–284, Special Issue on Continental-Scale Ecology. doi:10.1890/1540-9295(2008)6[282:ACSFTN]2.0.CO;2.

