Available online at www.sciencedirect.com

Procedia Computer Science 18 (2013) 2288 – 2297

2013 International Conference on Computational Science

Canonical Multiattribute Utility Functions:
Enumeration, Verification, and Application
Yerkin G. Abdildin* and Ali E. Abbas
Department of Industrial and Enterprise Systems Engineering, College of Engineering,
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, 104 South Mathews ave., Urbana, IL 61801, USA

Abstract
In decisions with uncertainty and multiple objectives, the construction of a representative multiattribute utility function
(MUF) is of paramount importance. When the attributes of a decision problem exhibit some forms of utility independence,
the functional form is significantly simplified. When the complete utility independence conditions do not exist, it is still
possible to simplify the functional form. An important special case in this instance is known as canonical form. This paper
characterizes the number of canonical forms in a m
multiattribute decision problem and conducts experiments to determine
their applicability in a borehole restoration problem in the uranium extraction industry.
© 2013 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. Open access under CC BY-NC-ND license.
©
2013 The
Published
Elsevier B.V.
Selection
andAuthors.
peer review
under by
responsibility
of the organizers of the 2013 International Conference on Computational
Science
Keywords: Solving problems with uncertainties
u
; canonical forms; multiattribute utility functions; interdependencies of attributes; utility
independence; making decisions; deep borehole filter restoration problem; uranium mining

1. Introduction
Managers of large industrial projects often fface complex decisions associated with uncertainty and multiple
objectives. The construction of a representative multiattribute utility function (MUF) U(( 1 ,..., n ), which
represents the trade-off among n attributes becomes crucial in this case [1, 2]. However, the assessment of the
MUF can be a challenging task, because the number of questions for the decision maker (DM) quickly grows
with n. The construction of a MUF is simplified if the attributes exhibit some forms of utility independence
conditions [3].
To illustrate this concept, consider a decision problem with two attributes, X and Y , where the DM is
choosing between two risky projects A and B, while gambling on an attribute, X.. Attribute X is utility
independent (UI) of Y ,
between the two projects does not change as the fixed value of

* Corresponding author.
E-mail address: abdildin@illinois.edu

1877-0509 © 2013 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. Open access under CC BY-NC-ND license.
Selection and peer review under responsibility of the organizers of the 2013 International Conference on Computational Science
doi:10.1016/j.procs.2013.05.400

Yerkin G. Abdildin and Ali E. Abbas / Procedia Computer Science 18 (2013) 2288 – 2297

Y varies. If X UI Y and Y UI X , then the attributes are mutually UI [3], and the MUF is a combination of
single-attribute utility functions [3]. This UI approach is popular among practitioners for its simplicity [4, 5].
What if mutual UI conditions do not hold? In some cases, some weaker partial utility independence (PUI)
conditions are present, and so a general decomposition [6] allows us to decompose the MUF into lower-order
terms, and construct it as a sum of products of (conditional) utility functions. A class of independence
conditions that provides a simple decomposition with partial utility independence is referred to as the canonical
form and was introduced in [6].
The purpose of this paper is to characterise the number of canonical forms and conduct experiments to
determine their applicability in a borehole restoration problem, which is quite common in the uranium industry.
The experiments were conducted among the 105 experts from the uranium extraction industry. In our first
experiment, the majority (96%) of the experts determined PUI among the four attributes of this problem. In the
second (three-attribute) experiment with 33 of these experts, 30 individuals found PUI conditions and the other
three asserted mutual UI. We also assessed the complexities of the tests, and show that they were not difficult
for participants. To our knowledge, this is the first practical study on the verification of the applicability of
canonical forms of a multiattribute decision problem.
If a canonical form is not present, then there are different approaches to constructing the MUF. The analyst
can try grouping the attributes and testing for higher-order utility independence conditions in order to yield the
canonical form [6]. Alternatively, he can use the iterative decomposition algorithm [6], or eliminate possible
redundant or duplicate assessments by twos-complement exclusion algorithm [7]. Besides that, one can apply
the value-based approach [8], or the decomposition methods based on fractional hypercubes [9], interpolations
[10, 11], and multiattribute utility trees [12]. These methods are based on the expected utility of von Neumann
and Morgenstern [13] and were discussed in [14].
The organization of this paper is as follows. Section 2 briefly reviews the basic concepts. Section 3
characterizes the number of canonical forms. Section 4 presents the deep borehole filter restoration problem.
Section 5 provides exposition of experiments and their results. Section 6 concludes the paper.
2. Review of the basic concepts and definitions
Throughout this paper, we use capital letters to denote the attributes as X i , i 1,..., n, and small letters to
indicate their instantiations, xi . Also, xi0 and xi* will represent the least and most preferred values of attribute
X i , respectively. Xi will mean the complement of X i , the set of remaining attributes. The multiattribute
utility function U ( x1 ,..., xn ) will be normalized between U (x10 ,..., xn0 ) 0 and U (x1* ,..., xn* ) 1. Finally,
U ( xi | xi ) will designate a normalized conditional utility function

U ( xi | xi )

U ( xi , xi ) U ( xi0 , xi )
,
U ( xi* , xi ) U ( xi0 , xi )

and U(xi | xi ) 1 U(xi | xi ), the normalized conditional disutility function.
Let us start with the formal definition of the partial utility independence.
Definition 1 [6]: A set of attributes X K is utility independent (UI) of another set X I given X D , written
( X K UI X I | X D ), with X I X D X K , if preferences for joint lotteries over X K do not depend on the
instantiations of X I .
As an example, think about a decision problem with three attributes, X , Y , Z. Then, ( X UI Y | Z ) if the
gambling on X does not change as the fixed value of Y varies, given that the values of
Z in those gambles are identical. Thus, we can substitute the instantiation of the attribute Y , denoted y, with
its least preferred, y 0 , (or its most preferred, y* ) value in a normalized conditional utility function,
U(x | y, z) U(x | y0 , z), decreasing the order (size) of the assessment from three to two. Here, U (x | y0 , z)
requires two-dimensional assessments of ( X , Z ) when the attribute Y is fixed at instantiation y 0 .

2289

2290

Yerkin G. Abdildin and Ali E. Abbas / Procedia Computer Science 18 (2013) 2288 – 2297

Definition 2 [3]: If every attribute, X i , i 1,..., n, (n 2) is UI of its complement, X i , then the MUF takes
the multilinear form:
n
i 1 i

U ( x1 ,..., xn )

n

k Ui ( xi )

i 1

0
i

k Ui ( xi )U j ( x j ) ... k1..nU1 ( x1 ) U n ( xn ),

j i ij
*
i

U(x , xi0 ), and their sum is equal to one.
To illustrate, consider a decision problem with three attributes, X , Y , and Z. If each of these attributes are UI
where Ui (xi ) U (xi | x ), scaling constants ki

of their respective complements, then

U(x, y, z) kxUx (x) kyUy ( y) kzUz (z) kxy kxkyUx (x)U y ( y) kxz kxkzUx (x)Uz (z)
kyz ky kzUy ( y)Uz ( z) kxyz kx ky kzUx ( x)Uy ( y)Uz ( z),
where the constants kx , k y and kxy , for instance, are the following: kx U (x* , y0 , z0 ), ky U ( x0 , y* , z0 ), and
kxy U (x* , y* , z0 ) kx ky . The constant kxyz can be found by subtracting the other six constants from one.
Utility interdependencies among the attributes of a decision problem can be represented in the form of a
utility dependence matrix [6].
Definition 3 [6]: A utility dependence matrix is an n n incidence matrix corresponding to the n attributes
and their independence assertions. A vacant cell corresponding to row X i and column X j asserts the utility
independence relation ( Xi UI X j | Xij ) while a circle in the cell corresponding to row X i and column X j
does not assert any utility independence relations.
As an example, consider the utility dependence matrix (UDM) for a three-attribute problem in Fig. 1(a). It
asserts that attribute X 2 is UI from attributes X1 and X 3 , and attribute X 3 is UI from X3 . Hence, the PUI
conditions illustrated in the UDM imply:

U(x2 | x1 , x3 ) U(x2 | x10 , x30 ).
U(x3 | x1 , x2 ) U(x3 | x10 , x20 ).

The UDM is a handful representation for dealing with UI conditions and evaluating canonical forms. The
following definitions are provided for operational convenience.
Let r be the number of incomplete rows of a UDM, the rows with at least one vacant cell. In other words,
r is the cardinality of the set of attributes that provide at least one independence assertion, X K . Let i and j
be the indices of the cells of UDM.
Definition 4: A pair of cells (i, j ) and ( j, i) of a UDM constitutes a symmetric pair.
Definition 5 [6]: A UDM is said to be in a canonical form if one of these conditions holds:
(1)
r = 0 or 1
of the UDM are vacant.
(2)
For the UDM in Fig. 1(a), X K { X 2 , X 3 }, r 2, so we check only symmetric cells (2,3) and (3, 2), which
are vacant; hence, the UDM is canonical. The UDM in Fig. 1(b) is non-canonical, because X K {X1 , X 2 , X 3 },
r 3, and the first symmetric pair (1, 2) and (2,1) is non-vacant.

X1

X2

X1

X3

X1

X1

X2

X2

X3

X3

X2

X3

Fig. 1. Examples of the utility dependence matrix for three attributes: (a) canonical UDM, and (b) non-canonical UDM.

Yerkin G. Abdildin and Ali E. Abbas / Procedia Computer Science 18 (2013) 2288 – 2297

Low complexity

High complexity

Fig. 2. The complexity of a decision problem illustrated by the level of utility dependence of attributes

When the attributes of a decision problem do not have UI conditions, reflected by a UDM in the form of a
unit matrix (see Fig. 2, right matrix), the problem may become too complex to consider. As the number of
attributes grows, the difficulty of utility assessments the DM has to make, increases. Now, if the attributes have
mutual UI condition (identity matrix), then the complexity can be dramatically reduced. Even partial UI
conditions can considerably reduce the complexity and the DM can apply canonical MUFs. Therefore, the
assessment of UI conditions is very important.
There are different forms of PUI. Two additional forms will be used in this work: boundary independence
[12] and one-switch independence [15].
Definition 6 [12]: Attribute X is boundary independent of another attribute Y , written X BI Y , if

U (x | y0 ) U (x | y* ).

to gamble on X changes when the fixed
As an example of BI,
value of Y is different from its boundary values.
Definition 7 [15]: Attribute X exhibits one-switch independence from attribute Y , written X 1S Y , if
preference between any pair of gambles on X can switch at most once as the level of Y increases.
One-switch independence may occur
attribute Y. We will show examples of these partial UI conditions in the following sections. We are now ready
to enumerate the number of canonical forms.
3. Number of canonical forms
The purpose of this paper is to characterize the number of canonical representations of UDMs and verify the
applicability of canonical forms in practice. This may help the DM to better understand the complexity of a
decision problem and appropriately formulate it for further assessments. We are interested in the number of
available canonical UDMs for an n-attribute problem and its ratio to the total number of UDMs.
Theorem 1. The total number of possible canonical utility dependence matrices for an n-attribute decision
n
problem is equal to
C n 2( n r ) r n .
r 0 r
Proof. When a UDM is a unit matrix, i.e. r 0, then it is in the canonical form by definition. When r 1,
any of n rows of the UDM should have at least one vacant cell in (n 1) cells of the row, which results in
(2n 1 1)n canonical UDMs. If r 2, then UDM is canonical when all symmetric pairs in incomplete rows are
vacant, but their other (n r )r cells can be either vacant or non-vacant; hence, there are 2( n r ) r possible
canonical UDMs in each of the Crn n! r ! n r ! rows. So, the total number of canonical forms of UDM for
n
n
C n 2( n r ) r
C n 2(n r )r n. Q.E.D.
an n-attribute decision problem is equal to c 1 (2n 1 1)n
r 2 r
r 0 r
Theorem 1 tells us that the absolute number of canonical UDMs grows with the number of attributes.
Increasing variety of canonical forms will help the DM to choose the appropriate one for his decision problem.
It is interesting to know how the relative number of canonical forms alters with changes in the number of
attributes of a decision problem. Theorem 2 determines the convergence of the ratio of canonical UDMs to the
total number of UDMs as the number of attributes varies.
Theorem 2. Let n be the number of attributes of a decision problem, c be the number of UDMs in the
canonical form, and t be the total number of UDMs. Then, lim c
t 0.
n

2291

2292

Yerkin G. Abdildin and Ali E. Abbas / Procedia Computer Science 18 (2013) 2288 – 2297

Proof. The total number of possible UDMs for a decision problem with n 2 attributes is equal to 2n ( n 1).
To see this, recall that a UDM is a binary matrix with ones in the main diagonal. Therefore, only n(n 1) cells
of the UDM (except the cells in the main diagonal) can be either vacant or non-vacant; hence, the total number
n ( n 1)
.
of UDMs for a n n matrix is equal to t 2
n
C n 2( n r )r n.
From Theorem 1 we have the number of possible canonical UDMs c
r 0 r
Hence, we have
n

lim c t

n

r 0

lim

n

n!2( n r ) r
n
r! n r !
2n( n 1)

1 n2n

1

n n 1 22n

5

lim

...
2n( n

n

2
n!
2n /4 ... 1 n
2
((n / 2)!)

1)

.

Without loss of generality, we can assume that n is even. Then, since each of the terms of the summation is
less than or equal to the midterm
2
n!
(n 1)n! n2 /4
2n / 4 , the summation of n 1 terms can be approximated by
2 .
2
((n / 2)!)
((n / 2)!)2
n! const nn 1/ 2 e n , where 2
const e,
2

(n 1)n!2n / 4
((n / 2)!)2 2n( n 1)

2

(n 1)nn 1/ 2e n 2n / 4
c/t
2
((n / 2)n / 2 1/ 2 e n / 2 )2 2n n
; therefore, lim c
which converges to zero as n

n 1

,
n
0 is also holds. Q.E.D.
3 n2 / 4 2 n 1

2

t
n
By Theorem 2, the relative number of canonical UDMs decreases with the number of attributes, indicating
the increasing complexity of a decision problem with n. Theorem 2 implies that the DM should try to
aggregate the related attributes of a decision problem. This will substantially reduce the test size; provide an
easier determination and assessment of canonical forms. Having three-four the most important attributes may
be sufficient for many ultimate decision makers to make an informed decision.

4. The deep borehole filter restoration problem
Uranium mining is the first and an important step in the nuclear energy process chain. In 2011, 64 042
tonnes of uranium oxide U3O8 was produced worldwide [16]. According to the World Nuclear Association,
production from world uranium mines meets only 85% of demand for power generation. As the global demand
for nuclear energy grows, the decisions in uranium mining are becoming a problem of international concern.
One problem that often faces the managers in uranium extraction industry is a borehole restoration problem.
In this decision problem, the output of a borehole periodically (3-6 months) drops below the threshold. This
mainly happens due to the contamination or clogging of the deep borehole filter and uncertain geological
structure of the spot where the borehole is drilled. The damage control of the deep borehole filter can be
accomplished by airflow, chemical, physical, and pneumoimpulsive methods. Since none of these methods
have clear dominance, the managers make decisions either in an ad-hoc manner or using some economic
models.
The objectives, alternatives, and attributes. Clear objectives are vital in contemplating a choice of available
alternatives, and the appropriate attributes can serve as measures of the objectives. The fundamental objective
of the borehole restoration problem is to restore the rated output of uranium from a production borehole with
minimal additional expenses and time, maximally avoiding adverse health effects on the personnel. This overall
objective consists of the following sub-objectives:
Increase uranium output from a production borehole
Decrease duration of the restoration process
Decrease additional expenses for cleaning the filter or redrilling the borehole
Decrease the adverse health effects on the personnel.

2293

Yerkin G. Abdildin and Ali E. Abbas / Procedia Computer Science 18 (2013) 2288 – 2297

Airflow

Method 1

Chemical

Method 2

Physical

Failure

Failure

Impulsive

Method 3

Redrill

Redrill

Method 1

Method 1
Method 2

Repeat

Failure

Failure
Redrill

Redrill

Redrill

Fig. 3. The partial decision tree for the borehole restoration problem

There are four methods under consideration: (1) Chemical method, a sulphuric acid is used for cleaning the
filter; (2) Physical method, washing it with water; (3) Airflow method, air compressor is used; (4)
Pneumoimpulsive method, pneumatic compressor (up to 60 atm) is used. None of these methods alone
guarantees success. The 5th option is to redrill the borehole in a new place. Redrilling the borehole is the most
effective in terms of uranium output, but it is also the most expensive and time consuming alternative. So, the
DM can either apply some or all of these methods sequentially, or redrill the borehole at any step as shown in
Fig. 3. For example, if the manager chooses one of the methods and it did not work, then he can utilize one of
the three untried methods or still redrill (as shown by a rectangular decision node of the partial decision tree).
The efficiency of damage control depends on many factors. The most important ones are presented in Table
1 (assessed from the decision maker), where the ranges of attributes can vary within their most preferable (best)
and least preferable (worst) values. For example, the attribute Health effects of the process (W ) can
gradually/evenly vary between:
w* 1, best value, no adverse health effects on the personnel, and
w0 5, worst value, moderate intoxication.
Table 1: Attributes for the borehole restoration problem, their measures and ranges.
Attribute

Measure

Range
best

X - Uranium output from a borehole
Y - Restoration time (idle time)
Z - Additional expenses (for repair or redrilling)
W - Health effects of the process (job hazard)

U kg/hour
hour
$
1 5 scale

x*
*

y

z*
*

w

worst

3.2

x0

0.016

6

y0

200

73

z0

23.3K

1

w0

5

In general, the DM can construct the utility function U ( x, y, z, w) and choose the alternative that has the
maximal utility. The scope of this paper is to verify the applicability of canonical forms to the borehole
restoration problem. We present the corresponding experiments in the next section.
5. Experimental assessments of interdependencies of attributes
As we discussed previously, canonical UDMs incorporate partial UI conditions and significantly simplify
the construction of a MUF. In order to verify their applicability in practice, we developed two tests and
conducted two experiments with the experts in the uranium industry. The task was the assessment of the UDM
for the borehole restoration problem. The experiments were administered via paper and pen. The initial
experiment was mainly a one-to-one interview with the experts. The second experiment was conducted
remotely two months later.

2294

Yerkin G. Abdildin and Ali E. Abbas / Procedia Computer Science 18 (2013) 2288 – 2297

5.1. Experiments
Experiment 1. During the summer of 2012, one of the authors was visiting several companies in the uranium
extraction industry; there he had series of meetings with the decision makers. The goal was twofold: (i) gather
information and materials about the borehole restoration problem, and (ii) identify the pool of experts, who are
familiar with the problem and are willing to participate in the experiment. A trip to a drilling field was
organized by one of the companies to illustrate the problem. Participants were the 105 experts in the uranium
extraction industry who desired to take part in the experiment. All experts received the same materials
described below.
After a brief introduction, participants were provided with a two-page questionnaire. The questionnaire
contained a description of the experiment, parameters of the attributes as shown in Table 1, the initial UDM in
the form of an 4 4 identity matrix, and a set of 12 questions. The questions were about the preferences of the
participants on interdependencies of the attributes and were asked in a simple language such as this first
question:
Will your preferences (decisions) for uncertain situations on the level of the uranium output, X , and the
number of hours spent on the process, Y , depend on a particular level (value) of Y given that the other two
attributes, namely, Z and W , are held fixed?
The other eleven questions were similar. Each question was followed by a choice of Yes/No answers. The
assessors were given a tip:
U X | Y , Z ,W , the
value of Y is not strategically significant and can be replaced with its least preferred value, y 0 , i.e.,
U(x | y, z, w) U(x | y0 , z, w). The assessors were also instructed to put a circle into the corresponding cells of
The final
the matrix for their positive answers and move to the next question if the answers were
question asked the experts was to rate the complexity of the test on a scale between 1 (not difficult at all) and 5
(very difficult).
Experiment 2. In the 2nd experiment, 33 experts were randomly selected from the pool of the 105 experts,
who took part in the 1st experiment. A new, formal test was developed for the borehole restoration problem, but
this time only three attributes were considered. This reduced the test size from 14 pages to eight. The attribute
Restoration
not included, but the description of the test explicitly provided the range of the process
duration as from six to 200 hours. The attributes Additional expenses and Health effects of the process were
denoted by Y and Z , respectively. The scaling measure of Z was shifted to the left (0 - 4), and the worst value
of attribute X was set to zero. These adjustments were done merely for cognitive simplification of the test.
The test contained eight pages; the 1st page contained a brief description of the experiment and the borehole
restoration problem, the table with attributes, their measures, and ranges. Pages 2-7 contained six questions.
The 1st question (shown in Appendix A) has three subpreference in Scenario 1 and Scenario 2, respectively. Each scenario has two risky projects, A and B. The
assessor is requested to select from one of the three choices: project A, project B, and I (indifference between A
and B). For example, if the assessor chooses project A, then
represented by a tree with a circular chance node. Part c) asks the assessor whether his choice would change
between Scenario 1 and Scenario 2 if the value of Y was fixed at some other value between its boundary
values. The design of the other five questions was similar, only attributes and their values were varied. Page 8
had a question about the test complexity.
As shown in Table 2
part of the question has a positive response, then there is a utility dependence of one attribute from another,
while the negative response leads to 1S independence.
two scenarios, we may have either BI or UI. Let us present one expert response as an example.

Yerkin G. Abdildin and Ali E. Abbas / Procedia Computer Science 18 (2013) 2288 – 2297

2295

Table 2. Possible responses and interdependencies; P is the Preference made out of {A, I, B}, ¬P denotes change of Preference.
Scenario 1 (Part a)

Scenario 2 (Part b)

Part c) of the question

Interdependence structure

P

¬P

Yes

Utility Dependence

P

¬P

No

One-Switch Independence

P

P

Yes

Boundary Independence

P

P

No

Utility Independence

The expert provided the following answers: 1) ABN 2) ABY 3) BBN 4) BBN 5) BBN 6) BBN, and 2 for the
test complexity. In question 1 (see Appendix A) the expert switched from project A to B and he asserted that
his preference would not switch anymore. By Table 2 we have, ( X 1S Y | Z ).
In other words, the expert switches to project B only if money spent for the restoration process allows
drilling a new borehole, and he might want to have at least x 0.5 kg/hour in uranium output for this money.
Since 1S independence does not imply UI, we can put a node into the XY cell of the UDM. In question 2)
( X UD Z | Y ) and we put a circle into the XZ cell. If we accept (without additional tests) that in the other four
questions the expert provided UI conditions, the UDM will have the canonical form as shown in Fig. 1(a).
5.2. Results
In the 1st experiment, the experts were asked to 1) assess the UDM of the four-attribute borehole restoration
problem, 2) rate the complexity of the test on a 1-5 scale, 3) put name, position, and signature. In this
experiment 105 4 4 binary UDMs were assessed. The results were the following:
101 UDMs (96%) presented partial UI conditions, and four UDMs did not present any UI assertions.
59 out of 105 UDMs (56%) were canonical.
The experts found that the assessments were relatively easy; the average score of 103 experts on the 1-5
scale was 2.55. Two experts did not rate the test.
Typical positions were: Vice General Director, CTO Boring Division, Vice CTO Production, Head of
Supply Department, Head of Finances, lead technologist/consultant, environmentalist, boring master,
borehole restoration master, operator of boring machine, and process engineer. Some experts did not put
their position.
The 1st experiment shows the big picture of the interdependencies of the attributes of the borehole
restoration problem. To our knowledge, this is the first practical study of partial UI conditions assessed from
the large number of experts in the uranium industry. It demonstrates that the attributes of the problem do have
partial UI conditions. The study also verifies the applicability of canonical forms for large industrial projects.
Finally, we learned that the experts were comfortable with the experiment and the test was not difficult for
them.
In the 2nd experiment, 33 experts were randomly selected from our pool of 105 experts who participated in
the 1st experiment. The goal was to verify indirectly the results of the 1st experiment in a formal test. This time,
the experts were not asked to fill the UDMs directly as in the 1 st experiment. The uniqueness of this test is that
it (i) is the first test developed for assessing partial UI conditions including BI and 1S independence, (ii) is
formal, but elicits the partial UI (PUI) conditions indirectly, (iii) does not contain any special decision analysis
terms and not difficult for assessors, and (iv) is easily scalable for any number of attributes. The experts
provided their preferences by taking the formal test and the results were the following:
30 (91%) responses asserted PUI conditions (including 1S and BI conditions) and three experts found that
the attributes were mutually utility independent (identity matrix).
Out of 33 responses, 24 (73%) were canonical UDMs.

2296

Yerkin G. Abdildin and Ali E. Abbas / Procedia Computer Science 18 (2013) 2288 – 2297

The average complexity of the test was 3.09/5. One expert did not rate the complexity of the test.
The experts in the field party (1-15) found the test more difficult (average is 3.93) compared with the
experts in the main office (16-33), where the average complexity of the test was 2.44/5.
The 2nd experiment (i) verified that the majority (91%) of the experts believe in the existence of partial UI of
the attributes, and (ii) demonstrated that the majority (73%) of the responses lead to canonical forms of MUFs.
In addition, the average complexity of the formal test was only slightly higher than that of the layman test (3.09
vs. 2.55).
The significance of the number of experts, who participated in the experiment, their outstanding expertise in
the essence of the problem, and the large percentage of responses leading to canonical MUFs together with the
moderate complexity of the tests, verify that the canonical forms of MUFs are well suited for complex
industrial problems.
6. Conclusions
.
Canonical forms can substantially simplify the construction of a MUF and incorporate
The elicitation of the decision maker's preferences about the interdependencies of the attributes is an important
step in constructing the MUF. If partial utility independence conditions are present, then the MUF can take a
canonical form. We enumerated the number of canonical forms for n attributes and determined its
convergence. Canonical forms of MUFs are relatively easy to assess in practice. We verified the applicability
of canonical forms to a real-world multiattribute problem in the uranium extraction industry, the deep borehole
filter restoration problem. This problem was not previously addressed by the decision analysis community
since the technology is relatively new.
The decision makers in uranium mining are often deluged with mountain of information and usually make
decisions either based on experience and expertise or using some economic models. Decision analysis might be
used to calculate the best decision for situations with multiple conflicting objectives and incommensurable
performance measures in the face of uncertainty.
References
[1] Howard RA. Decision analysis: applied decision theory. Proceedings of the 4th Int-l Conf. on Operational Research 1966; 55 77.
[2] Howard RA. In praise of the old time religion. Utility theories: measurements and applications. Kluwer, Boston, 1992.
[3] Keeney RL, Raiffa H. Decisions with multiple objectives: preferences and value tradeoffs. Wiley, New York, 1976.
[4] Dyer JS, Edmunds T, Butler JC, Jia J. A multiattribute utility analysis of alternatives for the disposition of surplus weapons-grade
plutonium. Operations Research, 1998;46:749 762
[5] Merrick JRW, McLay LA. Is screening cargo containers for smuggled nuclear threats worthwhile? Decision Analysis 2010;7:155 171
[6] Abbas AE. General decompositions of multiattribute utility functions. Journal of Multi-Criteria Decision Analysis 2010;17:37 59.
[7] Abdildin YG, Abbas AE. An algorithm for excluding redundant assessments in a multiattribute utility problem. Procedia Computer
Science 2012;9:802 811.
[8] Matheson JE, Abbas AE. Utility transversality: a value-based approach. Journal of Multi-Criteria Decision Analysis 2005;13:229 238
[9] Farquhar PH. A fractional hypercube decomposition theorem for multiattribute utility functions. Operations Research 1975;23:941
967.
[10] Bell DE. Multiattribute utility functions: decompositions using interpolation. Management Science 1979;25:744 753.
[11] Bell DE. Consistent assessment procedures using conditional utility functions. Operations Research 1979;27:1054 1066.
[12] Abbas AE. The multiattribute utility tree. Decision Analysis 2011;8:165 169.
[13] von Neumann J, Morgenstern O. Theory of games and economic behavior. Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ, 1947.
[14] Abbas AE. Constructing multiattribute utility functions for decision analysis. TutORials in Operations Research 2010;7:62 98.
[15] Abbas AE, Bell DE. One-switch independence for multiattribute utility functions. Operations Research 2011;59:764 771.
[16] World Nuclear Association http://www.world-nuclear.org/info/inf23.html

2297

Yerkin G. Abdildin and Ali E. Abbas / Procedia Computer Science 18 (2013) 2288 – 2297

Appendix A. Question 1 from the 2nd experiment
Question 1. Dependence: uranium output ( X ) of additional expenses (Y )
a) Given two projects A and B with 50-50 chances of receiving different uranium output from a borehole,
which project would you prefer in Scenario 1?
Scenario 1: in both projects y*

73 dollars of additional expenses

Project A
50%

50%

Circle one
out of three:

Project B

x*

3.2 kg/hour

x0

0 kg/hour

50%

50%

x

2.5 kg/hour

x

0.5 kg/hour

Project B

Project A
(A and B are equivalent)

b) Which project would you prefer in Scenario 2?
Scenario 2: in both projects y0

23.3 Thousand dollars of additional expenses

Project A
50%

50%

Circle one
out of three:

Project B

x*

3.2 kg/hour

x0

0 kg/hour

Project A

50%

x

2.5 kg/hour

50%

x

0.5 kg/hour

Project B
(A and B are equivalent)

c)

If the value of attribute Y in Scenario 1 (or in Scenario 2) were held fixed at some other fixed value
between y* and y0 , would your answer change?

Circle your answer:

Yes

No

