Available online at www.sciencedirect.com

Procedia Computer Science 18 (2013) 1574 – 1583

International Conference on Computational Science, ICCS 2013

Grammar-Based Multi-Frontal Solver for One Dimensional
Isogeometric Analysis with Multiple Right-Hand-Sides
Krzysztof Ku´znika , Maciej Paszy´nskia , Victor Calob
b King

a AGH University of Science and Technology, Krakow, Poland
Abdullah University of Science and Technology, Thuwal, Saudi Arabia

Abstract
This paper introduces a grammar-based model for developing a multi-thread multi-frontal parallel direct solver for onedimensional isogeometric ﬁnite element method. The model includes the integration of B-splines for construction of the
element local matrices and the multi-frontal solver algorithm. The integration and the solver algorithm are partitioned into
basic indivisible tasks, namely the grammar productions, that can be executed squentially. The partial order of execution of the
basic tasks is analyzed to provide the scheduling for the execution of the concurrent integration and multi-frontal solver algorithm. This graph grammar analysis allows for optimal concurrent execution of all tasks. The model has been implemented and
tested on NVIDIA CUDA GPU, delivering logarithmic execution time for linear, quadratic, cubic and higher order B-splines.
Thus, the CUDA implementation delivers the optimal performance predicted by our graph grammar analysis. We utilize the
solver for multiple right hand sides related to the solution of non-stationary or inverse problems.
Keywords: graph grammar, direct solver, isogeometric ﬁnite element method, NVIDIA CUDA GPU

1. Introduction
The classical higher order ﬁnite element method [5, 6] delivers higher order polynomials, but the global continuity is only C 0 between particular mesh elements. The isogeometric ﬁnite element method utilizes the B-splines
as basis functions, and thus it delivers C k global continuity [4].
The multi-frontal solver is the state-of-the art algorithm for solving linear systems of equations [8, 12], and it
is a generalization of the frontal solver algorithm [14, 7].
The parallelization of the multi-frontal direct solver may target the distributed memory, shared memory or
hybrid architectures. The distributed memory parallelization requires either partitioning of the computational
domain into sub-domains with overlapping or non-overlapping sub-domains [19, 20], redistribution of the global
matrix [13], or redistribution of the elimination tree into processors [16, 17, 18].
Shared memory parallel multi-frontal solvers are designed to store the entire matrix in the shared memory and
to perform the matrix operations concurrently. Some examples of the shared memory direct solver are [9, 10, 11].
The matrix is partitioned there into blocks and the operations are performed concurrently over each block. The
main disadvantage of this method is that the parallelization is performed based on the analysis of the structure of
Email address: paszynsk@agh.edu.pl (Maciej Paszy´nski)
URL: http://home.agh.edu.pl/~paszynsk (Maciej Paszy´nski)

1877-0509 © 2013 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. Open access under CC BY-NC-ND license.
Selection and peer review under responsibility of the organizers of the 2013 International Conference on Computational Science
doi:10.1016/j.procs.2013.05.325

Krzysztof Ku´znik et al. / Procedia Computer Science 18 (2013) 1574 – 1583

1575

the matrix, while we claim that the better performance can be obtained by performing the parallelization based on
the analysis of the elimination tree, which is the subject of this paper.
We target our solver into GPU, which is a hybrid architecture. We tested our implementation on NVIDIA
Tesla C2070 with 6GB memory and total 448 CUDA cores.
The parallel multi-frontal solver has been implemented for C 0 two dimensional hp-ﬁnite element method [16].
For one dimensional regular mesh, the construction of the assembly tree is straightforward, since it is just a binary
tree with element matrices at leaf nodes.
In this paper we present the generalization of the grammar based solver for one dimensional ﬁnite diﬀerence
simulation [15]. The graph grammar model allows us to investigate if concurrency is hidden within the algorithm.
It is done by analyzing the partial order of execution of the grammar productions, and identiﬁcation of sets of
productions that can be executed concurrently [18].
In this paper we generalize the idea into one dimensional B-spline-based ﬁnite element method, delivering C k
global continuity of the solution. The methodology derived here implies logarithmic execution time of the parallel
multi-frontal solver algorithm. The methodology has been implemented and tested on NVIDIA CUDA GPU,
providing logarithmic execution time for linear, quadratic, cubic and higher order B-splines. The performance of
this algorithmic implementation is in line with our complexity estimates.
The solver is designed for solution of the problems with multiple right hand sides, where all the right hand
sides are not known at the beginning, they are rather computed on ﬂy. The applications of such the solver involve
solution of non-stationary problems with constant material data, where the boundary conditions are incorporated
at the root node of the elimination tree, enabling for re-utilization of LU factorizations from previous time step.
Another application is the solution of an inverse problem, where we have a sequence of several right hand sides.
For a detailed description of the model Laplace problem and B-spline based ﬁnite element method please refer to
[21].
2. Isogeometric multi-frontal solver expressed by graph grammar productions
Graph grammar productions presented in this section represent all the basic tasks that are needed to solve
1D diﬀerential equation using the isogeometric ﬁnite element method and parallel multifrontal solver for a linear
system of equations.










	




Fig. 1. Initial production for generation of elimination tree

2.1. Generation of elimination tree
Set of (G) productions is responsible for a generation of the elimination tree. The computational domain is
partitioned into ﬁnite elements by applying:
• (G f irst ) - a starting production which generates root of the elimination tree and two A nodes, each containing
a direction attribute indicating its position in the domain. Here each of A nodes represents half of the domain.
See ﬁgure 1
• (G)le f t , (G) and (G)right - intermediate productions splitting each domain part into 2 new parts. Direction
attributes propagate during the generation as shown in the ﬁgure 2.
• (Glast ) p - at the leaves level this is the production which produces ﬁnal domain partitioning. It also has
direction attributes. Moreover Glast production diﬀers depending on B-spline degree (p) used for computations. As shown in the ﬁgure 3 the production (Glast ) p generates p + 1 ﬁnal nodes. (Glast )1 is used for linear
B-splines, (Glast )2 for quadratic, etc.

1576

Krzysztof Ku´znik et al. / Procedia Computer Science 18 (2013) 1574 – 1583


	










	














	








Fig. 2. Intermediate productions for generation of elimination tree











	


	







	












Fig. 3. Final production for generation of elimination tree

2.2. Generation of local stiﬀness matrices
After applying productions (G) the computational domain Ω = [0, 1] is partitioned into N ﬁnite elements
k
Ω = ∪k=1,...,N [ξk , ξk+1 ] = ∪k=1,...,N [ k−1
N , N ]. Now it is time to assemble local to element stiﬀness matrices and force
vectors. These matrices will be also frontal matrices for multifrontal solver. Each frontal matrix is generated by
computing the value of b N j,p (x) , Ni,p (x) for B-splines deﬁned over the element ek . Size of the frontal matrix
depends on B-spline basis degree:
• For linear B-splines (p = 1), there are two basis functions Nk,1 and Nk+1,1 with support over an element ek .
This means that element frontal matrix size is 2 × 2 = 4, as it is illustrated formula 1 below.
b Nk,1 (x) , Nk,1 (x)
b Nk+1,1 (x) , Nk,1 (x)

b Nk,1 (x) , Nk+1,1 (x)
b Nk+1,1 (x) , Nk+1,1 (x)

(1)

• For quadratic B-splines, p = 2, there are three functions: Nk,2 , Nk+1,2 and Nk+2,2 with support over an
element ek . The element frontal matrix has 3 × 3 = 9 entries, see formula 2 below.
⎤
⎡
⎢⎢⎢ b Nk,2 (x) , Nk,2 (x)
b Nk,2 (x) , Nk+1,2 (x)
b Nk,2 (x) , Nk+2,2 (x) ⎥⎥⎥
⎢⎢⎢⎢b Nk+1,2 (x) , Nk,2 (x) b Nk+1,2 (x) , Nk+1,2 (x) b Nk+1,2 (x) , Nk+2,2 (x) ⎥⎥⎥⎥
(2)
⎥⎦
⎢⎣
b Nk+2,2 (x) , Nk,2 (x) b Nk+2,2 (x) , Nk+1,2 (x) b Nk+2,2 (x) , Nk+2,2 (x)
• Generally, for B-splines of degree p there is p+1 functions with support over element ek , denoted Nk,p , ..., Nk+p,p
and the element frontal matrix has (p + 1)2 entries.
Productions (Ak ) p are responsible for generation of local frontal matrices (LFM). They generate stiﬀness matrix and force vector for element ek when B-splines of degree p are used (ﬁgure 4).
2.3. Merging of local stiﬀness matrices
Local stiﬀness matrices are also frontal matrices for the multifrontal solver. Productions (M) are responsible
for merging the frontal matrices at deﬁned level of the elimination tree. There are two types of this merge:
• (M f irst ) p - a production for the initial merge depending on B-spline degree p. This is merging at leaf level of
elimination tree - p+1 matrices are merged for B-spline of degree p. Note that at leaf level p+1 consecutive
frontal matrices have only one common degree of freedom. See example for (M f irst )1 on ﬁgure 5.

Krzysztof Ku´znik et al. / Procedia Computer Science 18 (2013) 1574 – 1583

1577

	





	




Fig. 4. Productions for generation of LFM

• (M) p - a production for merging up to the root of elimination tree. This production always merges 2 nodes
representing consecutive parts of the domain. However, depending on B-spline degree there is a diﬀerent
number of rows and a diﬀerent number of common degrees of freedom. For B-spline of degree p there are
matrices of size 2p × 2p with 2p common degrees of freedom. See ﬁgure 6.





	









Fig. 5. Production (M f irst ) for merging of LFM at leaf level (linear B-splines)

2.4. Elimination of fully assembled rows
Productions (E) are responsible for eliminating fully assembled rows from merged frontal matrices (MFM).
After eliminating fully assembled row(s) with Gaussian elimination, obtained Schur complement becomes new
intermediate local frontal matrix (ILFM) ready for merging at the next level of the elimination tree. There are two
diﬀerent types of this elimination that can be distinguished:
• (E f irst ) p - a production for eliminating exactly one fully assembled row obtained after the initial merge
(M f irst ) p . Depending on the degree p of a B-spline basis used in FEM the row length is diﬀerent. It is
exactly 2p + 1. See the example for (E f irst )1 on the ﬁgure 7.
• (E) p - a production for eliminating fully assembled rows at intermediate levels of the elimination tree. For
B-spline of degree p it eliminates exactly p rows. Each row length is exactly 3p. See the example for (E)1
on the ﬁgure 8.

1578

Krzysztof Ku´znik et al. / Procedia Computer Science 18 (2013) 1574 – 1583



	












Fig. 6. Production (M) for merging of ILFM at intermediate level (linear B-splines)

	





Fig. 7. Production (E f irst ) for eliminating fully assembled row from MFM at leaf level (linear B-splines)

2.5. Root problem
After last two frontal matrices are merged there is a system of equations where all degrees of freedom are fully
assembled. This is called the root problem and a production responsible for this is (R) p . This system is again
solved by the Gaussian elimination. Coeﬃcients obtained from the solution of this system are also part of the ﬁnal
solution to the DE. They are respectively u1 , ... , u p , uN/2+1 , ... , uN/2+p , uN+1 , ... ,uN+p . Having them it is possible
to obtain the ﬁnal solution of FEM by recursive backward substitutions. The ﬁgure 9 represents an example (R)1
production for linear B-splines.
2.6. Backward substitution
Productions (B) are responsible for the recursive backward substitution. They work analogically to building
elimination tree by productions (G). At this point each ILFM node contains p fully assembled rows which need
2p coeﬃcients to be solved (to obtain new coeﬃcients for those fully assembled degrees of freedom). At the leaf
level there are nodes that contain exactly one row which also depends on 2p coeﬃcients from the higher level of
the elimination tree. Hence again there are two types of this production:
• (B) p - a production for calculating p coeﬃcients at intermediate levels of the elimination tree. Evaluation is
done with the usage of 2p coeﬃcients calculated at higher levels of the tree. The ﬁgure 10 is an example of
this production for linear B-splines.

Krzysztof Ku´znik et al. / Procedia Computer Science 18 (2013) 1574 – 1583

1579







Fig. 8. Production (E) for eliminating fully assembled row from MFM (linear B-splines)

	





Fig. 9. Production (R) for solving the root problem (linear B-splines)

• (Blast ) p - a production for calculating one coeﬃcient at the leaf level of the elimination tree. The evaluation
is done with the usage of 2p coeﬃcients calculated at higher level of the tree. Figure 11 is an example of
this production for linear B-splines.
2.7. Scheduling tasks for the solver execution
When all productions are deﬁned it is possible to schedule all basics tasks needed for the solver execution. At
ﬁrst, the domain is partitioned and the elimination tree is constructed with productions (G). When the construction
is complete the frontal matrices are constructed at the leaves of the elimination tree with productions (A). Then
with productions (M) and (E) applied alternately the frontal matrices are merged and fully assembled degrees of
freedom are eliminated. In the end, the root problem is solved with production (R). This is followed by recursive
backward substitutions (B) from the root down to the leaves.
The scheduling for quadratic and higher order B-splines diﬀers from the one discussed for linear B-splines. For
quadratic B-splines production (M f irst ) merges three matrices and only one degree of freedom is fully assembled
and ready to be eliminated. In the following steps two matrices are merged as with linear B-splines. However,
after each merge two degrees of freedom are fully assembled and eliminated. Whole process can be generalized
for higher order B-splines.
The crucial property of this algorithm is that productions (A), (M), (E) and (B) at each level of the elimination
tree process independent sets of data – so they can be applied concurrently.
3. Numerical results
In this section we present a comparison of our one dimensional solver with state of the art MUMPS solver
[1, 2, 3] executed on Intel Quad CPU Q9400 with 2.66GHz clock, 8GB of memory. We also present the solver
performance for processing multiple right hand sides. The GPU runs have been executed on NVidia Tesla c2070,
6GB memory, 448 CUDA cores, each one with 1.15GHz clock. The comparison is presented in Figure 12 for
linear, quadratic, cubic and quartic B-splines. All plots are in linear scale. We believe the non-logarithmic scale
emphesizes the huge diﬀerence in performance between the GPU and CPU implementations.

1580

Krzysztof Ku´znik et al. / Procedia Computer Science 18 (2013) 1574 – 1583

	













Fig. 10. Production (B) for backward substitution at intermediate levels of elimination tree (linear B-splines)

	













Fig. 11. Production (Blast ) for backward substitution at leaf level of elimination tree (linear B-splines)

In order to understand these results better, we have performed separate measurements for the time spend by
GPU and CPU on the integrations, and separately for the factorizations. The comparison is presented in Figures
13 and 14. From the comparison it implies that the 1D GPU algorithm has a logarithmic scalability, while the
CPU one delivers linear scalability. The 1D GPU algorithms is up to two orders of magnitude faster than the CPU
one. Execution times for GPU conﬁrm the theoretical model presented here with graph grammars. For relatively
small problem sizes it is possible to achieve logarithmic growth of time needed to solve the diﬀerential equation.
“Relatively small” means that we are able to simulate situation where the number of concurrently executed threads
is equal to the number of frontal matrices merged at the given level of the elimination tree. Please note that the
number of ﬂoating point operations in both versions of the solver (CPU and GPU) are of the same order of
magnitude as both solvers are multifrontal solvers. Such great performance of the GPU implementation is a result
of a special task scheduling and GPU ability to concurrently process huge amount of data.
Solving multiple diﬀerential equations (with a common stiﬀness matrix and diﬀerent forcing vectors) at the
same time is the greatest strength of the implemented solver. Figure 15 presents execution time measured for basis
functions of order p = 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. The number of elements in each case was equal 128(p + 1).
The plot on the ﬁgure 15 is interesting because of a few reasons:
• For lower order basis functions (p = 1, 2, 3) the cost of calculating 256 RHSes instead of 1 is close to none.
For p = 1 its hardly tens of microseconds.
• Execution time does not grow uniformly – it forms steps, which length is 16. Every 16 RHSes the GPU is
required to allocate a new block of threads to process data.
• When the number of RHSes is divisible by 16 the solver runs faster. This means that GPU uses its full
potential and does not need to handle idle threads in a special way.

Krzysztof Ku´znik et al. / Procedia Computer Science 18 (2013) 1574 – 1583

1581

Fig. 12. Comparison of GPU execution time with MUMPS solver CPU execution time for linear, quadratic, cubic and quartic B-splines in one
dimension. Horizontal axis denotes number of unknowns, vertical axis denotes time in seconds.

Fig. 13. Comparison of GPU execution time with MUMPS solver CPU execution time for the integration of linear, quadratic, cubic and quartic
B-splines in one dimension. Horizontal axis denotes number of unknowns, vertical axis denotes time in seconds.

1582

Krzysztof Ku´znik et al. / Procedia Computer Science 18 (2013) 1574 – 1583

Fig. 14. Comparison of GPU execution time with MUMPS solver CPU execution time for factorization with linear, quadratic, cubic and
quartic B-splines in one dimension. Horizontal axis denotes number of unknowns, vertical axis denotes time in seconds.

4. Conclusions
We introduced the methodology for concurrent integration and solution of linear systems produced by Bspline-based ﬁnite elements delivering higher-order global continuity of the solution. The methodology deliver
logarithmic execution time for polynomial orders p = 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 that is C 0 , C 1 , C 2 , C 3 and C 4 respectively. The
developed model was implemented and tested on NVIDIA GPU conﬁrming the logarithmic scalability. We also
presented the linear scalability of the solver when processing multiple right hand sides.
Acknowledgment
The work reported in this paper was partially supported by the Polish MNiSW grant no. NN 519 447739 and
DEC-2011/01/B/ST6/
6 00674.
References
[1] P. R. Amestoy, I. S. Duﬀ and J.-Y. L’Excellent, Multifrontal parallel distributed symmetric and unsymmetric solvers, in Comput. Methods
in Appl. Mech. Eng. 184 (2000) 501-520.
[2] P. R. Amestoy, I. S. Duﬀ, J. Koster and J.-Y. L’Excellent, A fully asynchronous multifrontal solver using distributed dynamic scheduling,
SIAM Journal of Matrix Analysis and Applications, 23, 1 (2001) 15-41.
[3] P. R. Amestoy and A. Guermouche and J.-Y. L’Excellent and S. Pralet, Hybrid scheduling for the parallel solution of linear systems.
Accepted to Parallel Computing (2005).
[4] J. A.Cottrel, T. J. R. Hughes, Y. Bazilevs Isogeometric Analysis. Toward Integration of CAD and FEA, Wiley, 2009.
[5] L. Demkowicz, Computing with hp-Adaptive Finite Element Method. Vol. I.One and Two Dimensional Elliptic and Maxwell Problems.
Chapmann & Hall / CRC Applied Mathematics & Nonlinear Science, 2006.
´
[6] L. Demkowicz, J. Kurtz, D. Pardo, M. Paszynski,
W. Rachowicz, A. Zdunek Computing with hp-Adaptive Finite Element Method. Vol.
II. Frontiers: Three Dimensional Elliptic and Maxwell Problems. Chapmann & Hall / CRC Applied Mathematics & Nonlinear Science,
2007.
[7] I. S. Duﬀ, J. K. Reid, The multifrontal solution of indeﬁnite sparse symmetric linear systems. ACM Transactions on Mathematical Software. 9, 1983; p. 302–325.

Krzysztof Ku´znik et al. / Procedia Computer Science 18 (2013) 1574 – 1583

1583

Fig. 15. Time for growing number of RHSes

[8] I. S. Duﬀ, J. K. Reid The multifrontal solution of unsymmetric sets of linear systems, SIAM Journal on Scientiﬁc and Statistical Computing,
vol. 5, 1984; p.633–641.
[9] S. Fialko, A block sparse shared-memory multifrontal ﬁnite element solver for problems of structural mechanics. Computer Assisted
Mechanics and Engineering Sciences, 16, 2009; p. 117-131.
[10] S. Fialko, The block subtracture multifrontal method for solution of large ﬁnite element equation sets. Technical Transactions, 1-NP, 8,
2009; p. 175–188.
[11] S. Fialko, PARFES: A method for solving ﬁnite element linear equations on multi-core computers. Advances in Engineering Software,
40, 12, 2010; p. 1256–1265.
[12] P. Geng, T. J. Oden, R. A. van de Geijn; A Parallel Multifrontal Algorithm and Its Implementation, Computer Methods in Applied
Mechanics and Engineering, vol. 149, 2006; p.289–301.
[13] L. Giraud, A. Marocco, J.-C. Rioual, Iterative versus direct parallel substructuring methods in semiconductor device modeling. Numerical Linear Algebra with Applications, 12, 1, 2005; p. 33–55.
[14] B. Irons, A frontal solution program for ﬁnite-element analysis. International Journal of Numerical Methods in Engineering, 2, 1970;
p. 5–32.
[15] P. Obrok, P. Pierzchala, A. Szymczak, M. Paszy´nski Graph grammar-based multi-thread multi-frontal parallel solver with trace theorybased scheduler, Proceedia Computer Science, vol. 1 iss. 1, 2010; p.1993–2001.
[16] M. Paszy´nski, D. Pardo, C. Torres-Verdin, L. Demkowicz, V. Calo A Parallel Direct Solver for Self-Adaptive hp Finite Element Method.
Journal of Parall and Distributed Computing vol.70, 2010; p. 270–281.
[17] M. Paszy´nski, D. Pardo, A. Paszy´nska, Parallel multi-frontal solver for p adaptive ﬁnite element modeling of multi-physics computational
problems. Journal of Computational Science 1, 2010; p. 48–54.
[18] M. Paszy´nski, R. Schaefer Graph grammar driven partial diﬀerential eqautions solver. Concurrency and Computations: Practise and
Experience vol.22 iss.9. 2010; p. 1063–1097.
[19] J. A. Scott, Parallel Frontal Solvers for Large Sparse Linear Systems, ACM Trans. on Math. Soft., 29, 4 (2003) 395-417.
[20] B. F. Smith, P. Bjørstad, W. Gropp, Domain Decomposition, Parallel Multi-Level Methods for Elliptic Partial Diﬀerential Equations,
Cambridge University Press, New York, 1st ed. 1996.
[21] K. Ku´znik, M. Paszy´nski, V. Calo, Grammar based multi-frontal solver for isogeometric analysis in 1D Computer Science, 2013, in
press.

