Available online at www.sciencedirect.com

Procedia Computer Science 18 (2013) 1851 – 1860

International Conference on Computational Science, ICCS 2013

Coupling Diagnostic and Prognostic Models to a Dynamic Data
Driven Forest Fire Spread Prediction System
Carlos Brun∗, Tom`as Margalef∗, Ana Cort´es∗
Computer Architecture and Operating Systems Department, Escola d’Enginyeria, Universitat Aut`onoma de Barcelona, Campus UAB,
Bellaterra 08193, Spain

Abstract
Forest ﬁres cause important losses around the world every year. A good prediction of ﬁre propagation is a crucial point to
minimize the devastating eﬀects of these hazards. Several models that represent this phenomenon and provide a prediction of its
spread have been developed. These models need input parameters which are usually diﬃcult to know or even estimate. A twostage prediction methodology was proposed to improve the quality of these parameters. In this methodology, such parameters
are calibrated according to real observations and then, used in the prediction step. However, there are several parameters, which
are not uniform along the map, but vary according to the topography of the terrain. Besides, these parameters are not constant
along time but they are strongly dynamic. In such cases, it is necessary to introduce complementary models that overcome
both restrictions. In the former case, the need of a spatial distribution model of a given variable is needed to be able to provide
a spatial distribution for a given variable along the whole terrain by starting from the measured values of that parameter in
certain points of the terrain. In the case of time variability, a complementary model such as weather forecasting model, could
enable the capability of dealing with dynamic behavior of these parameters along time. In this paper, we describe an enhanced
two-stage prediction scheme, where both type of complementary models a wind ﬁeld model and a weather prediction model are
coupled to the prediction scheme by enabling the system to dynamically adapts to complex terrains and dynamic conditions.
c 2013
2013 The
©
The Authors.
Authors. Published
Publishedby
byElsevier
ElsevierB.V.
B.V. Open access under CC BY-NC-ND license.
Selection
peer-review
under
responsibilityofof
organizersofof
2013
InternationalConference
ConferenceononComputational
Computational
Selection and/or
and peer
review under
responsibility
thethe
organizers
thethe
2013
International
Science.
Science
Keywords: Forest ﬁre;prediction;calibration;models;DDDAS;wind ﬁeld;meteorology;parameters tuning;genetic algorithm;

1. Introduction
Natural hazards, such as hurricanes, tsunamis, ﬂoods, earthquakes or forest ﬁres, are disasters which each year
cause important losses worldwide. Researchers from many diﬀerent ﬁelds have developed models, which try to
represent and predict the behavior of such hazards [1][2][3][4]. Such mathematical and physical models require
an input parameters set describing the environmental conditions where the hazard is happening, to provide a
prediction of the behavior of the phenomenon. Usually, these mathematical and physical models are implemented
in simulators that are computationally intensive applications. In this paper, we focus on forest ﬁre as a natural
∗

Email addresses: carlos.brun@caos.uab.es (Carlos Brun), tomas.margalef@uab.es (Tom`as Margalef), ana.cortes@uab.es
(Ana Cort´es)

1877-0509 © 2013 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. Open access under CC BY-NC-ND license.
Selection and peer review under responsibility of the organizers of the 2013 International Conference on Computational Science
doi:10.1016/j.procs.2013.05.354

1852

Carlos Brun et al. / Procedia Computer Science 18 (2013) 1851 – 1860

hazard, but the proposal described could easily be adapted to any other natural hazard. Some relevant forest ﬁres
spread simulators are [5][6][7]. The quality of the predictions provided by these simulators not only depends on
the model completeness, but is mainly inﬂuenced by the accuracy and reliability of the input parameters, which
typically present a certain degree of uncertainty. Some of them cannot be directly measured but must be estimated
from indirect measures (for example, moisture contents of live and dead fuels). Others, such as wind, cannot
be measured in all the cells of the terrain but can only be measured in certain points. Besides, the frequency
with which the parameters are measured used to be low so these parameters are considered constant along time.
This assumption can be done in some cases but there are some parameters that vary signiﬁcantly during the time
window considered in a single simulation.
This uncertainty in the values of the parameters provokes certain prediction errors that should be minimized
as much as possible. So, it is a great challenge improving the quality of the parameters values using parameter
calibration strategies. To tackle this problem, a Dynamic Data Driven methodology based on two-stages was
proposed. In this methodology, a ﬁrst calibration stage was introduced. In this calibration stage, the actual
evolution of the forest ﬁre is observed and a tuning process is carried out to determine the set of parameters
that best reproduces the recent evolution of the ﬁre. This set of values is then used as input parameters in the
prediction stage. This calibration stage implies the search of the values of the parameters that best reproduce the
ﬁre propagation in a very large search space. This search is driven by the observed ﬁre front evolution making
this approach to fall into the so called Dynamic Data Driven Application Systems (DDDAS) [8]. Response
time is a critical issue to minimize the eﬀect of such emergencies and it is necessary to take advantage of High
Performance Computing to reach a good calibration of the parameters values in the shortest possible time. So,
High Performance Computing (HPC) becomes a key tool to aid the ﬁght against such hazards. It is necessary to
use the available resources in the most optimal way to produce the best possible prediction of the evolution of the
hazard, considering real time constraints.
The original two stage prediction methodology suﬀers from two main handicaps. This scheme considers an
uniform distribution of the parameters along the whole map and it does not consider prognostic models to enable
dynamic parameters changes through time. Both restrictions have a direct impact in the quality of the prediction
results. For example, wind can be the dominant environmental variable aﬀecting wildland ﬁre intensity and spread.
When the terrain topography is not uniform and the slope changes from one cell to another, the meteorological
wind is modiﬁed by the topography. The result is rapid changes in ﬁre intensity at small scales that can have
signiﬁcant inﬂuences on ﬁre growth at larger scales. So, a single value for the wind representing the wind on
each cell of the terrain is a very restrictive simpliﬁcation. It is necessary to evaluate or estimate the wind on
each cell of the terrain. The beneﬁts of using wind ﬁelds in forest ﬁres spread prediction have been discussed in
many other works [5][9] and it has been tested in many scenarios with signiﬁcant results. Therefore, to tackle
this problem, a wind ﬁeld model must be introduced to obtain the eﬀective wind at the required level of detail.
In order to enable the two-stage prediction scheme the capacity of reacting to sudden changes in environmental
conditions, it becomes mandatory to ﬁt into the prediction scheme, environmental data coming from prognostic
models such as weather forecasting models. Prognostic models are computationally expensive, however, we rely
on High Performance Computing (HPC) platforms to speed up the execution of such models.
Therefore, the original two-stage prediction scheme has been enhanced by coupling the forest ﬁre prediction
model to a wind ﬁeld model and to a weather forecasting model. In this paper, we ﬁrst describe how the the wind
ﬁeld model, WindNinja [10][11], has been coupled to the two-stage methodology, and then, we shall introduce
how the system has been enabled to incorporate the ability of injecting dynamic meteorological data coming
from a prognostic model. The improved prediction system increases the accuracy of the delivered predictions in
complex terrains, taking advantage of High Performance Computing resources to be able to launch hundreds of
simulations with a high resolution level.
This paper is organized as follows. Section 2 introduces the Dynamic Data Driven two-stage prediction
methodology and analyzes its main constraints. Section 3 describes three enhanced Dynamic Data Driven prediction schemes where diagnostic and prognostic models are coupled to the fores ﬁre spread model. Section 4
presents some experimental results and ﬁnally, section 5 summarizes the main conclusions of the work.

Carlos Brun et al. / Procedia Computer Science 18 (2013) 1851 – 1860

1853

2. Basic Two-stage prediction methodology (2ST-BASIC)
The classic way of predicting forest ﬁre behavior relies on the results provided by a certain forest ﬁre spread
simulator. This forest ﬁre spread simulator requires certain input parameters such as the initial ﬁre front (RF = real
ﬁre), terrain topography, vegetation types and features, meteorological information among others, at a certain time
ti . These parameters are fed into the simulator to obtain a ﬁre front evolution at a later time ti+1 . Comparing the
predicted result (Simulated Fire=SF) at time ti+1 with the real ﬁre advance (RF) at the same instant, it is usually
observed that the predicted ﬁre front tends to diﬀer to a greater or lesser extent from the real ﬁre line. One reason
for this mismatch is that the classic prediction of the ﬁre propagation is based on a single set of input parameters
which usually presents a high degree of uncertainty.
To overcome this drawback, a simulator independent data-driven prediction methodology was proposed to tune
input parameters [12][13][14]. For this purpose, the methodology introduces a Calibration stage where the set of
input parameters is calibrated before each Prediction stage. That is, the solution proposed come from reversing
the problem: how to ﬁnd a parameter conﬁguration such that, given this conﬁguration as input, the ﬁre simulator
would produce predictions that match the actual ﬁre behavior. This process is deﬁned as a parameter calibration
process. Once, the input parameter set that best describes the current behavior of the ﬁre has been determined,
this set of parameters is used to describe the immediate future. We assume that meteorological conditions remain
constant during the next prediction interval. Then, the predicted ﬁre front becomes the result of applying to the
propagation model a set of adjusted input parameters.
This two-stage ﬁre prediction methodology reduces the negative impact of input parameters uncertainty. In
particular, in the Calibration stage a Genetic Algorithm (GA) is used. The evolutionary operations applied in
the GA are driven according to the observed real ﬁre behavior (see Figure 1). Population is formed by a set of
scenarios, and each scenario - an individual - represents a conﬁguration of input parameters. Each parameter
is considered a gene of an individual for the GA. For every scenario, a simulation is executed to reproduce the
behavior of the ﬁre during the time interval ti - ti+1 . The population of scenarios is evolved by applying to the
GA a certain number of iterations. The individual that provides the best adjustment among the predicted and real
propagation after this number of iterations is introduced in the simulator with the real ﬁre front at time ti+1 , to
provide a prediction at time ti+2 (SF ti+2 ).
In the case of prescribed ﬁres where the conditions of the terrain, vegetation, and weather are easily controlled,
the two stage prediction methodology provides good prediction results. In these cases, the terrain is bounded to
hundreds or a few thousands of square meters, with fairly stable weather conditions, uniform vegetation type and
short spread times (a few hours or even minutes). Figure 2.a shows one of this kind of ﬁres. However, when
this methodology is transferred to large forest ﬁres, there is a substantial change in ﬁre conditions. In these cases
terrain may reach hundreds of hectares, so the topography could be very irregular. Vegetation will probably be
heterogeneous and there could be changing weather conditions both in terms of place and time. Furthermore, the
ﬁre can last several days (see Figure 2.b). Under these conditions, the original assumption of homogeneous spatial
and temporal distribution of the simulator inputs is not feasible. The next section will describe diﬀerent ways
of enhancing the basic two-stage prediction scheme in order to overcome such limitations for the case of wind
components.
3. Enhancing 2ST-BASIC
As it has been previously mentioned, the basic two-stage prediction scheme suﬀers from two main drawbacks.
First of all, it considers a uniform distribution of the input parameters required by the underlying simulator such as
vegetation type, wind speed, wind direction and so on. And, ﬁnally, the basic working hypothesis of this methodology, which consists of assuming that environmental conditions stay relatively stable from the calibration stage
to the prediction stage, implies that the system is not able to properly react to sudden changes in environmental
conditions. Wind speed and wind direction are some of the most dynamic environmental parameters. In this
section, we concentrate on how to enhance the basic two-stage prediction strategy to overcome the two above

1854

Carlos Brun et al. / Procedia Computer Science 18 (2013) 1851 – 1860

Fig. 1. Two-stage prediction methodology

Fig. 2. a.Prescribed ﬁre / b.Wildﬁre

mentioned handicaps for the case of the two wind components. In order to approach both problems, we rely on
diagnostic wind ﬁeld models, which predict the wind ﬁeld at one point in time. Besides, we rely on prognostic
weather forecast models which considers variation in time. For this reason, we propose diﬀerent
ﬀ
variations of the
2ST-BASIC prediction scheme where diﬀerent
ﬀ
alternatives of coupling both models are considered.
3.1. Coupling Wind Field Model to 2ST-BASIC (2ST-BASIC-WF)
When complex terrains are considered, new features arise that must be taken into account from a prediction
accuracy point of view. Local terrain features such as drainages, ridges and other topographical characteristics
generate ﬂow eﬀects
ﬀ
that can only be captured in high resolution models. The original two-stage prediction scheme
was designed to only accept environmental input data at a low resolution. In particular, wind components were
considered at a meso-scale resolution, that is, an unique wind direction and wind speed for the whole terrain was
used. In order to overcome this constraint, a wind ﬁeld model (WindNinja) has been included in the two-stage
prediction scheme enabling the system to deliver spread predictions, which reﬂects the inﬂuence of the terrain
in a high resolution level. WindNinja is able to generate these wind ﬁelds but it has a high computational cost
depending on the terrain size.
This modiﬁcation to the basic two-stage prediction scheme is shown in ﬁgure 3. It can be observed that this
strategy implies that each individual of the GA population, which represents a possible ﬁre scenario, has to execute

Carlos Brun et al. / Procedia Computer Science 18 (2013) 1851 – 1860

1855

Fig. 3. Coupling Wind Field Models to 2ST-BASIC (2ST-BASIC-WF)

an instance of WindNinja and one of the ﬁre spread simulator. This approach represents hundreds of simulations
for every prediction interval. For example, if the population size of the GA is set to 50 individuals and the GA
is evolved 5 generations, the number of total simulated scenarios will be 250. Therefore, the number of times
that WindNinja should be executed will be also 250. Considering that every wind ﬁeld simulation lasts over few
hundreds seconds, if there is no enough computational resources, the provided prediction may be achieved too
late.
3.2. Coupling Meteorological Model to 2ST-BASIC (2ST-BASIC-MM)
In order to overcome the temporal distribution restriction that suﬀers
ﬀ the 2ST-BASIC approach, we propose
a diﬀerent
ﬀ
scheme that takes advantage of meteorological model predictions and dynamic data injection. As it
can be observed, at the calibration stage, we rely on real observations coming from weather stations, whereas
at the prediction stage, predicted meteorological data coming from weather forecasting models is dynamically
injected. This release of the 2ST-BASIC scheme has been referred as a 2ST-BASIC-MM where MM stands from
meteorological model. This enhancing scheme enables the system to react to sudden changes in wind speed
and wind direction because instead of using calibrated values at the predictions stage, the wind components are
obtained from weather forecasting data. A ﬁrst attempt of proving this enhancing scheme is described in [15].
Although the results were encouraged, they were obtained from an experiment based on a synthetic terrain with
characteristics quite far to a real scenario. In order to consolidate the result, in this paper, the scheme is applied to
a real complex terrain. It is worth noticing that, although this scheme saves execution time due to not executing
the wind ﬁeld model as in the case of 2ST-BASIC-WF, the enrichment of the data thanks to the weather forecast
model, it also requires signiﬁcant computing resources.
3.3. All together: 2ST-BASIC-WF-MM
In order to join in a single approach the improvements of the previous prediction strategies, we also propose
a hybrid scheme, which is a trade oﬀ between the accuracy obtained in the prediction results and the time spent
to reach them. In the scheme described in 2ST-BASIC-MM, the system can be ﬁt with weather data provided
from real observations during the calibration stage and, at the prediction stage, the data injected comes from a
weather forecast model. In this hybrid scheme, we interpose the wind ﬁeld model just before injecting the wind
components to the prediction system. Therefore, for each observed wind speed and wind direction and for each
predicted wind components, one wind ﬁeld simulation will be run. In the calibration stage, that means that the

1856

Carlos Brun et al. / Procedia Computer Science 18 (2013) 1851 – 1860

Fig. 4. Coupling Metereological Model and Wind Field Model to 2ST-BASIC (2ST-BASIC-WF-MM)

number of wind ﬁelds evaluations is drastically reduced because each individual of the population will use the
same wind ﬁelds. This eﬀect
ﬀ compensates the slight increase in computational time introduced at the prediction
stage due to the evaluation of the wind ﬁelds in this case. Forexample, if the meteorological model gives one
prediction per hour and the prediction interval is of 12 hours, it will be necessary to generate only 12 wind ﬁeld.
The architecture of this new approach can be seen in ﬁgure 4.
4. Experimental study
The proposed enhanced alternatives for the basic two-stage prediction scheme are oriented to overcome two
weak points: the uniform distribution of the parameters among the terrain and the incapacity of reacting to sudden
changes in environmental conditions. Therefore, in order to validate the improvements introduced in the two-stage
basic methodology to overcome those deﬁciencies, we have set up an experiment, which reproduces the problems
we wanted to solve.
The terrain where the experimental study is performed is called ”Cap de Creus”, which is located in Catalonia
(north-east of Spain). This zone has been selected for its irregularity in terms of slope variations and also for
being an area of interest, due to the number of times it has been punished by forest ﬁres during the last decade.
Although we use the real values of elevation, slope and aspect of this terrain, there is a lack of information about
fuels (vegetation types) and canopy cover. For this reason, we use an homogeneous fuel (number 7 in Albini
classiﬁcation [16]) and a ﬁxed percentage of canopy cover (25%).
In order to evaluate the quality of the enhanced methodology when dealing with sudden changes in certain
meteorological variables, we create a reference ﬁre where certain meteorological conditions. In particular, wind
speed and wind direction, present strong variations from the Calibration stage to the Prediction stage. The whole
ﬁre lasts 18 hours and the components of the wind (wind speed and wind direction) vary every 30 minutes as it
can be observed in ﬁgure 5.
Taking into account that the typical time-step of coarse scale weather forecast models ranges from 3 to 6 hours,
the time window selected for the Calibration stage and the Prediction stage has been 6 hours each. Therefore,
during the 18 hours we are able to repeat the whole prediction scheme twice. That is, the ﬁrst Calibration stage
goes from hour 0 to hour 6 and, the corresponding Prediction stage goes from hour 6 to hour 12. Then, the second
execution of the whole prediction method implies that the Calibration stage goes from hour 6 to hour 12 and, the
Prediction window goes from hour 12 to hour 18.

Carlos Brun et al. / Procedia Computer Science 18 (2013) 1851 – 1860

1857

Fig. 5. Wind speed and direction trend corresponding to reference ﬁre

Since the calibration strategy applied in this case is GA, which consists of a stochastic optimization strategy,
every kind of experiment was repeated ten times with ten diﬀerent populations of 25 individuals. Thus, the results
reported in this section are the mean values of those 10 experiments. The predicted data injected in the case of
using a meteorological model are obtained by simulating the behavior of that model introducing a perturbation
error at the reference ﬁre data and injecting that perturbed data to the ﬁre prediction system. In the experiments
described below, the error in the case of wind speed is about 2.5 mph on average, and for the wind direction, the
error has been set to values greater than 20 degrees. It is noteworthy that it is not a constant error, and in some
phases, the error is greater and in other phases observations and predictions are closer to reference ﬁre conditions.
The propagation results provided by each strategy have been compared using the error function stated in
Equation 1, which evaluates the symmetric diﬀerence between cell maps (simulated map and real map). Each
element of the equation is expressed in number of cells. If the number of cells of the initial ﬁre is considered
negligible, the error is the number of cells that belong to the union of the maps minus the cells of the intersection,
both of them divided by the number of cells of the real ﬁre. This value is not within the interval 0-1 but the error
can be greater than 1.
Error =

(Cells(∪) − Cells(ini)) − (Cells(∩) − Cells(ini))
Cells(Real) − Cells(ini)

(1)

In the following sections we analyze each iteration of the whole prediction scheme separately, in order to
better understand the results obtained when applying each one of the four above mentioned enhanced predictions
schemes, compared to the basic two-stage strategy.
4.1. Calibration from 0 to 6 hours and prediction from 6 to 12 hours
The results obtained for this calibration-prediction stage are shown in ﬁgure 6. As it can be observed, the 2STBASIC and 2ST-BASIC-WF approaches are the schemes that, although providing a good calibration error, the
prediction error is quite high. This eﬀect is not observed when applying either the 2ST-BASIC-MM or the 2STBASIC-WF-MM schemes. The reason of that is that wind suﬀers from sudden changes from the Calibration stage
to the Prediction stage (see ﬁgure 5). The 2ST-BASIC and 2ST-BASIC-WF rely on the wind values provided by
the calibration stage, so they are not able to react to those changes. However, 2ST-BASIC-MM and 2ST-BASICWF-MM use forecasted wind data at the Prediction stage, therefore, these strategies are able to cope with those
wind changes.
To analyze the inﬂuence of coupling a wind ﬁeld model into the prediction scheme, we might analyze the
results provided by 2ST-BASIC and 2ST-BASIC-MM compared to 2ST-BASIC-WF and 2ST-BASIC-MM-WF.
As it can be observed, prediction errors when including a wind ﬁeld model are clearly better than not considering
the inﬂuence of the terrain features into the wind components. The relevance of this eﬀect can be better observed

1858

Carlos Brun et al. / Procedia Computer Science 18 (2013) 1851 – 1860

Fig. 6. Calibration and prediction errors from 0 to 6 hours in calibration and 6 to 12 hours in prediction stage

in ﬁgure 7. This ﬁgure depicts the prediction results for all predictions schemes. In particular, each frame shows
4 ﬁre perimeters. Three of them are the same for all frames, the perimeter at hour 0, the spread ﬁre front at hour 6
and the real ﬁre spread at time hour 12. The fourth perimeter is the predicted perimeter provided by each scheme
at hour 12. Analyzing the images in detail, we can see that when including the wind ﬁeld model, the obtained
ﬁre front better ﬁts the underlying topography because wind speed and wind direction are not considered as a
homogeneous values but they vary according to the terrain heterogeneity.
Finally, when considering the scheme where both prognostic and diagnostic models are coupled to the forest
ﬁre spread model, the prediction spread errors on average denote a great reduction.
4.2. Calibration from 6 to 12 hours and prediction from 12 to 18 hours
In this section, we analyze the results obtained after ﬁnishing the second iteration of the whole prediction
process for the four schemes studied. In general, the results in terms of quality improvements denote a similar
trend to the ones reported in the previous section. In particular, in this calibration-prediction step, meteorological
conditions also suﬀer from notable changes from one stage to another, however, those changes are not as abrupt
as in the previous experiment. In particular, wind speed has been set to have a downward trend. Under these
conditions, the 2ST-BASIC-WF-MM approach is the best both at calibration stage and at prediction stage in terms
of delivered error. Despite this, this softer change in conditions allows 2ST-BASIC and 2ST-BASIC-WF strategies
to reduce their prediction errors signiﬁcantly.
5. Conclusions
Forest ﬁre prediction is a signiﬁcant natural hazard that every year cause important damages in the Mediterranean area. Models and their implementation in simulators can provide estimations of its behavior but they are
not exempt of a certain degree of error. Besides, input parameters are diﬃcult to know or even estimate so there is
a needing of strategies to minimize this uncertainly and provide better predictions.
Basic two-stage methodology has certain restrictions that has been commented in this work. Temporal variation of parameters was discussed in a previous work and we proposed the inclusion of meteorological model and
dynamic injection of this data in the system. Taking beneﬁt of it, a new wind ﬁeld model has been coupled and it
is possible to tackle another big challenge when a real scenario is considered. In these cases, considering certain

Carlos Brun et al. / Procedia Computer Science 18 (2013) 1851 – 1860

Fig. 7. a.2ST-BASIC vs Real / b.2ST-BASIC-WF vs Real / c.2ST-BASIC-MM vs Real / d.2ST-BASIC-WF-MM vs Real

Fig. 8. Calibration and prediction errors from 6 to 12 hours in calibration and 12 to 18 hours in prediction stage

1859

1860

Carlos Brun et al. / Procedia Computer Science 18 (2013) 1851 – 1860

parameters uniform along the surface is a wrong assumption. Wind ﬁeld model permits to improve our predictions
because it is sensitive to the speciﬁc features of the terrain.
Inclusion of a new model involves an extra computational work. In emergency systems, this fact may imply
that our system does not provide a good prediction under a hard time constraint. In our case, we have minimized
the impact of this inclusion thanks to meteorological predictions and observations, and wind ﬁeld model only has
to execute a limited number of simulations before GA begins to work. Besides, individuals size has been reduced
and it allows to reach a good solution in less generations.
This work aims to demonstrate that the parameter uncertainty is one of the most important issues when we
deal with natural hazards. Complementary models may give us useful information to improve our predictions.
Obviously, it depends on the models output quality. However this, our two stage prediction method minimize
models output errors tuning parameters to achieve a better solution. Our main goal by now is coupling a real
meteorological model but it is complex task that we are still tackling.
Acknowledgements
This research has been supported by MICINN-Spain TIN2011-28689-C02-01. The authors would like to
thank to WindNinja team, specially to Jason Forthofer, for providing a linux command line WindNinja version
and being at our disposal.
References
[1] P. J. Vickery, J. Lin, P. F. Skerlj, J. Lawrence A. Twisdale, K. Huang, Hazus-mh hurricane model methodology. i: Hurricane hazard,
terrain, and wind load modeling, Natural Hazards Review 7 (2) (2006) 82–93.
[2] V. V. Titov, F. I. Gonzalez, Implementation and testing of the method of splitting tsunami (most) model, Tech. rep., NOAA Technical
Memorandum ERL PMEL-112, 11 pp UNIDATA (1997).
[3] P. D. Bates, A. D. Roo, A simple raster-based model for ﬂood inundation simulation, Journal of Hydrology 236 (1–2) (2000) 54–77.
[4] R. Rothermel, How to predict the spread and intensity of forest and range ﬁres, US Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Intermountain Forest and Range Experiment Station Ogden, UT, USA, 1983.
[5] A. M. G. Lopes, M. G. Cruz, D. X. Viegas, Firestation an integrated software system for the numerical simulation of ﬁre spread on
complex topography, Environmental Modelling & Software 17 (3) (2002) 269–285. doi:10.1016/S1364-8152(01)00072-X.
URL http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S136481520100072X
[6] FIRE.ORG, Fire.org - public domain software for the wildland ﬁre community.
URL http://www.fire.org
[7] P. L. Andrews, Behave: Fire behavior prediction and modeling systems - burn subsystem part 1, General Technical Report INT-194.
Odgen, UT, US Department of Agriculture (1998) 130.
[8] F. Darema, Dynamic data driven applications systems: A new paradigm for application simulations and measurements, Computational
Science-ICCS 2004 (2004) 662–669.
[9] J. M. Forthofer, Modeling wind in complex terrain for use in ﬁre spread prediction, Ph.D. thesis, Colorado State University (2007).
[10] J. M. Forthofer, K. Shannon, B. W. Butler, Simulating diurnally driven slope winds with windninja, in: 8th Symposium on Fire and
Forest Meteorological Society, 2009.
[11] J. Forthofer, K. Shannon, B. W. Butler, Initialization of high resolution surface wind simulations using nws gridded data, in: Proceedings
of 3rd Fire Behavior and Fuels Conference; 25-29 October, 2010.
[12] G. Bianchini, M. Denham, A. Cort´es, T. Margalef, E. Luque, Wildland ﬁre growth prediction method based on multiple overlapping
solution., J. Comput. Science 1 (4) (2010) 229–237.
[13] M. Denham, K. Wendt, G. Bianchini, A. Cort´es, T. Margalef, Dynamic data-driven genetic algorithm for forest ﬁre spread prediction,
Journal of Computational Science 3 (5) (2012) 398 – 404, advanced Computing Solutions for Health Care and Medicine.
URL http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1877750312000658
[14] A. Cencerrado, R. Rodr´ıguez, A. Cort´es, T. Margalef, Urgency versus accuracy: Dynamic driven application system natural hazard
management, International Journal of Numerical analysis and Modeling (9) (2012) 432–448.
[15] C. Brun, T. Art´es, T. Margalef, A. Cort´es, Coupling wind dynamics into a dddas forest ﬁre propagation prediction system, Procedia
Computer Science 9 (0) (2012) 1110 – 1118, proceedings of the International Conference on Computational Science, ICCS 2012.
doi:10.1016/j.procs.2012.04.120.
URL http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1877050912002414
[16] F. A. Albini, Estimating wildﬁre behavior and eﬀects, USDA Forest Service, Intermountain Forest and Range Experiment Station ,
General Technical Report INT-30 (1976) 92 pp.

