Available online at www.sciencedirect.com

Procedia Computer Science 18 (2013) 2137 – 2146

2013 International Conference on Computational Science

Influence of cell boundary flux distribution on well pressure
R. D. Hazletta* and D. K. Babub
a

The University of Tulsa, 800 S, Tucker Dr., Tulsa, OK 74104-9700
b
Consultant, 16914 Fondness Park, Dr., Spring, TX 77379-6929

Abstract
Semi-dimensional rectilinear domains with Dirichlet and
Neumann boundary conditions, and those
flux distribution to be examined and its influence on well pressure quantified for a series of well trajectories. The pseudosteady state flux distribution between interacting homogeneous domains is shown to be a function of distance from the well
to the boundary. The character of the boundary flux transitions from nearly uniform to bell-shaped to cusped-shaped as a
function of distance, strongly influencing the mode of boundary integral assessment. Permeability contrast is shown to
either sharpen or blunt the transition, depending upon the well cell permeability. In 2D and 3D case studies, the nature of
the boundary flux distribution is demonstrated to be of considerable significance in accurate forecasting of reservoir
observables. Computed boundary flux profiles on discretized interfaces in multi-region problems, enforcing continuity in
flux and pressure, are shown to correspond to neither uniform flux nor uniform pressure. Leveraging analytic representation
of pressure and flux, parametric representation of boundary normal flux as a linear combination of uniform flux and that
required for uniform pressure is suggested to accurately capture the influence of wells on boundary flux with significantly
reduced bandwidth in solving heterogeneous problems using boundary integral methods. The methodology allows accurate
forecasting of well productivity without the need for local grid refinement within numerical reservoir simulation and is
particularly pertinent when well pressure limits reservoir deliverability.
© 2013
2013 The
The Authors.
Authors. Published
Published by
by Elsevier
Elsevier B.V.
B.V. Open access under CC BY-NC-ND license.
©
Selection and
peerpeer-review
review under
responsibility
of the
of the
International
Conference
on Computational
and/or
under
responsibility
of organizers
the organizers
of 2013
the 2013
International
Conference
on Computational
Science
Keywords
e

* Corresponding author. Tel.: +1-918-631-2695; fax: +1-918-631-2059.
E-mail address: Randy-Hazlett@UTulsa.edu.

1877-0509 © 2013 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. Open access under CC BY-NC-ND license.
Selection and peer review under responsibility of the organizers of the 2013 International Conference on Computational Science
doi:10.1016/j.procs.2013.05.384

2138

R.D. Hazlett and D.K. Babu / Procedia Computer Science 18 (2013) 2137 – 2146

1. Background
Using highly accurate, fast computing semiPoisson equation developed elsewhere, the richness of external boundary flux information on well pressure
computations is examined.
Nomenclature
Cf

compressibility

G
L

well length

N

Neumann function solution to the Laplace or Poisson equation

PD

dimensionless pressure

V

volume

a, b, h

cell dimensions

g

outward normal flux

kx, ky, kz directional permeabilties
qw, qo

flow rate and reference flow rate
potential
viscosity

1.1. Well equations
Numerical reservoir simulation requires external relations to capture below grid resolution features, such as
wells, due to the departure from linearity associated with source terms. Early approaches used fine grid
simulations to develop correlations [1,2]. For complex wells, several researches returned to analytic solutions
to delineate the impact of near-field boundaries [3entertained: a correction to infinite system solutions and direct inclusion of boundaries using the method of
images. For complex trajectories, numerical integration of a point source solution along a path yields an inflow
expression, but not without considerable computational challenges [9,10]. More recently, a solution to the Heat
Equation was posed [11] overcoming many of these challenges with analytic integration performed in both
time and space, with fast and accurate spatial integration of singular integrands being the major contribution.
Components can be extracted from the general three-dimensional solution for inherent problems of lower
dim

1.2. Open systems
Solutions to multi-region problems as coupled analytic solutions [12] fall into the class of boundary integral
methods (BIM). Typically boundary integral methods invoke discretization of interfaces and subsequent
numerical integration, with advantages over full discretization of the volume in the number of unknowns

R.D. Hazlett and D.K. Babu / Procedia Computer Science 18 (2013) 2137 – 2146

2139

analytic integration of boundary integrals also becomes possible.
Numerical reservoir simulation on grids or cells simplifies the governing equations on collections of
interacting nodes. Typically, only the values at the nodes are retained, and there is no other information below
the resolution of the cell. The solution requires posing an expression for transport of material across cell
boundaries. While early work addressed only orthogonal grids, these restrictions have been relaxed with
multipoint flux methods, but not without approximation [13]. Continuity of pressure and flux are constraints
placed on all such solutions. Whether dealing with interfaces or sub-interfaces, the nature of a single-valued
characterizing flux, its interpretation, and associated error can be examined.
and Neumann function have also been developed for circles, sectors, and various special case triangular
domains, this work is restricted to orthogonal grids in two and three dimensions, but the effort has ramifications
for more general implementations.
2. Development
We are interested in semi-analytic solutions to the Heat Equation in Cartesian coordinates with a point
source at (xo, yo, zo), uniform pressure initial condition, and Neumann external boundary conditions.
2

kx

P

x

2

2

ky

P

y

2

kz

2

P

z

2

P
t

Ct

q

x

y

xo

yo

z

zo

(1)

The point source solution can then be integrated through space to develop a uniform flux line source solution
valid for representing wells. Solutions for complex wells can be produced via piecewise linear approximation
and assembly using superposition. The Neumann boundary condition can be relaxed for extension to open
he impact of external boundary flux distribution on well pressure is assessed
with the addition of the appropriate boundary integral, the product of normal flux and point source Neumann
function integrated either numerically or analytically across the cell boundary, S.
2.1. Accommodating boundary flux
The pseudo-steady state (PSS) dimensionless well pressure, PD, of Hazlett and Babu [11] for arbitrary
) is extended to
observation point (x, y, z) given a line source starting at (x1, y1, z1) and direction cosines (
open systems as

P D x, y, z; x1 , y1 , z1; , ,

L

qw
qo L

0 l ,m,n

1
qo
with trig

cos

lx
cos
a

C lmn trig
ds
2
2
Dlmn
0

N o x, y , z ;

my
cos
b

nz
cos
h

g

(2)

d

l xo
cos
a

m yo
cos
b

n zo
h ,

2140

R.D. Hazlett and D.K. Babu / Procedia Computer Science 18 (2013) 2137 – 2146

2

Dlmn

xo , yo , zo

and

x1

kxl
2
a

2

kym
2
b

s , y1

2

kz n
2
h

2

s , z1

,

s , 0 s

L

where the point source Neumann function, No, satisfies

k

No

C f qo

r ro

1
V

(3)

inside the solution domain and a no flux boundary condition. The factor, Clmn, takes on values 2, 4, and 8,
depending upon the dimensionality of the infinite series. Point source spatial integration is carried out over the
parameterized trajectory in terms of the pathlength parameter, s. Two dimensional problems can be extracted as
a subset of the full three-dimensional solution.
for mass transfer. We note that
The new term introduced here is the boundary integral over the surface,
integration captures the impact of a normal flux at the boundary on the pressure at the observation point (x, y,
z). The Neumann function is that for a point source regardless of internal source term complexity. The normal
flux can be interpreted as a multiplier on the point source as it samples the entire surface. If we discretize the
surface and consider individual flux elements, as in traditional boundary integral methods using numerical
quadrature, we encounter the problem of integrating a singular function. Singularity smoothing helps, but it
does not remove the cusp-shaped character of the integrand. Splitting the integral at the point of the cusp also
reduces numerical integration error in quadrature methods. However, Gaussian quadrature was seen to be
problematic in two dimensions, as bias in the weighting scheme can lead to a loss of diagonal dominance in
solving coupled analytic solution problems. Consistent with a previous approach, analytic integration of the
boundary integral in whole or part is possible, effectively handling singularities without loss of accuracy. The
nature of the boundary flux dictates the complexity of the integration scheme.
2.2. Uniform flux
For uniform flux at the boundary, the integration of the Neumann function reduces to an exact polynomial
expression. For example, in the three-dimensional case of transport across the surface at x = 0, we have

g

N o x, y, z;

d

2
bh 1
g a
kx 3

x
a

1 x
2 a

2

(4)

The formula can be repeated for other faces with suitable substitution. Thus, the impact of a uniform flux
external boundary condition on any observation point can be easily and accurately determined using Eq 2.
2.3. Uniform pressure
In the case of uniform pressure, the boundary flux adjusts to maintain a constant pressure interface. The
problem could be cast as a Neumann problem with boundary integral, but it is more directly addressed through
2 without the supplemental integration term. A rapidly computing
sines replacing cosines in
the raw solution. Knowledge of the boundary flux distribution is not necessary to assess well pressure under a

R.D. Hazlett and D.K. Babu / Procedia Computer Science 18 (2013) 2137 – 2146

2141

Dirichlet external boundary condition. Should it be of interest, an analytic derivative can be constructed.
proximity to the boundary. Knowing the fundamental solution yields a zero at the boundary, the flux profile is
readily obtained by differencing. Fig. 1a
as the source moves progressively toward the surface. At large distances, the profile is relatively flat but
rounded. At a relative distance of less than 20%, a distinct bell-shape emerges. At very close distances, the flux
profile is cusp-shaped. A source on the surface itself is problematic, as there would be a loss of driving force.
The impact of proximity to the boundary on well productivity is likewise captured in Fig. 1b.
In Fig. 2, the complexity of the boundary flux is further demonstrated for a uniform pressure external
boundary condition imposed on a cube with a centered diagonal line source with 50% penetration in all three
e
zero by the Neumann function.

(a)

(b)

Fig. 1. Sensitivities in the pseudo-steady state Dirichlet boundary condition problem as a function of distance from the interface in a square
cell: (a) Boundary flux profiles to maintain constant pressure; (b) Dimensionless well productivity index.

2.4. Impact case studies
Pressure at the line source midpoint was evaluated for partially-penetrating line sources in two and three
dimensions as a function of distance from the boundary and with different enforced external boundary
conditions. It should be noted that in application of the uniform pressure boundary condition, all sides were
forced to maintain the same pressure, constituting a true steady state. Likewise, in the application of uniform
flux, the well productivity was apportioned equally across all interfaces. In the Neumann case, all production

2142

R.D. Hazlett and D.K. Babu / Procedia Computer Science 18 (2013) 2137 – 2146

0.55

FLUX

0.0

Fig. 2. Depiction of boundary flux to achieve constant pressure for a 50% penetrating slanted well along the diagonal in a cubic cell. Note
each face accounts for 1/6 of production in this symmetric problem.

originates from compressibility considerations, and thus, constitutes a pseudo-steady state. Figure 3a shows
lines sources in 2D that represent uniform flux fractures in 3D. We note that centralized wells show less
sensitivity overall to external boundary conditions. The constant pressure case deviates dramatically for wells
within 25% of the cell width. In extreme cases, it is also possible for the well pressure to be higher than the
average pressure. The well, however, does not convert from a sink to a source, but rather, this illustrates the
failure of drawndown to adequately represent the driving force for production. The pressure gradient integrated
across at the wellbore interface is a better index of the work performed by a well per unit of fluid produced.
Figure 3b shows the results of a similar 3D study for horizontal wells. The productivity indices are an order of
magnitude lower, indicating the difference between wells and fractures. The sensitivity to external boundary
condition is correspondingly reduced for horizontal wells over their 2D fracture counterparts. In both cases, the
steady state uniform flux well productivity index differs little from that computed for the pseudo-steady state
Neumann problem. Limited studies using uniform flux asymmetrically applied to external boundaries, as seen
in Fig. 3a with inflow only at x = a, and mixed boundary conditions show more pronounced sensitivity. The
impact of directional flow is greater than when boundary transport is homogenized. These single cell studies
demonstrate the boundary condition and associated flux distribution to be significant in well productivity
assessment.
2.5. Unknown flux
In the more general case of unknown flux, we can discretize the surface and introduce flux elements in some
spatial arrangement suitable for numerical integration. Introducing flux unknowns shared by neighboring cells
enforces flux continuity. Adding a material balance and expressions equating pressure at surface nodes gives
sufficient equations to solve for the unknown pseudo-steady state flux.
2.5.1. Homogenous systems
This was done for a series of simple two-region problems in 2D sharing a single boundary with 32 nodes
introduced to characterize the flux and all other sides sealed. In Fig. 4, we have the separate cases of an
uncentered point sink (Fig. 4a) and a centered line sink (Fig. 4b) placed in the lower half of a square domain

R.D. Hazlett and D.K. Babu / Procedia Computer Science 18 (2013) 2137 – 2146

(a)

2143

(b)

Fig. 3. Well productivity as a function of position and imposed external boundary conditions: (a) 50% penetrating fractures; (b) 50%
penetrating horizontal wells.

of homogeneous porosity and permeability. The flux profile was examined at the artificial midpoint boundary
by pressure matching and use of a solver, though direct examination as a homogeneous domain was also
possible. In both single well cases, half the material produced is supplied by region 1 and half by region 2
involving transport across the centerline. Along with the flux profile for pseudo-steady state primary
production, we show the rescaled flux profile for the constant pressure boundary case, produced by the method
of images. The two well case is a true steady state with 100% of the fluid produced originating from the
injector. If the steady state and pseudo-steady state flux distributions are normalized by the total flux, the
profiles are identical. Thus, the flux distribution required to produce a Dirichlet boundary condition can be
rescaled to match an undetermined flux profile that corresponds to neither uniform flux nor uniform pressure.
This, however, was true for rectangular domains with identical porosity and permeability.
2.5.2. Heterogeneous systems
The more general situation is not where cells are added for numerical accuracy, but rather to accommodate
spatially varying transport properties. The same two-cell system was used to study transport in the presence of
permeability contrast. From a dimensionless solution perspective, changing permeability is equivalent to
changing physical dimensions. Thus, we are now dealing with a system with a loss of symmetry. Fig. 5 shows
the resolved flux distribution for a series of permeability ratios. Superimposed upon these results is a regression
composed of a linear combination of uniform flux and the normalized flux distribution required for a uniform
pressure boundary condition. This mixing rule is represented by

g x,

g x

1

g

(5)

where g(x) is the renormalized Dirichlet-derived flux, and g is the average value representing a uniform flux
component. Note that when the permeability ratio is unity, the parameter is one, indicating no uniform flux
to be positive to allow for both accentuation and blunting of the
contribution. Also, we do not restrict
Dirichlet-derived flux profile. The mixing rule is fully extendable to three dimensions, provided means are
available to produce Dirichlet flux distributions comparable to that indicated in Fig. 2.

2144

R.D. Hazlett and D.K. Babu / Procedia Computer Science 18 (2013) 2137 – 2146

(a)

(b)

Fig. 4. Boundary flux profiles for the single well pseudo-steady state problem and the renormalized Dirichlet flux for the corresponding
image pair steady state problem with two rectangular regions without permeability contrast and a sealed exterior BC: (a) offset vertical
wells; (b) centralized horizontal fractures. Insets show values of relative pressure, indicating an arbitrary boundary value problem can be
related to a companion constant pressure boundary problem.

Fig. 5. Boundary flux profiles in PSS between two rectangular regions as a function of permeability contrast along with an fitting
parameter describing the linear combination of a uniform flux component and that required to achieve uniform pressure

R.D. Hazlett and D.K. Babu / Procedia Computer Science 18 (2013) 2137 – 2146

2145

2.5.3. Transient systems
Tests were conducted to see if the proposed parametric form of Eq. 5 held also for the transient time period.
We introduce a dimensionless time variable, tD.

tD

k xt
a
Ct

(6)

2

Augmenting Eq. 2 with time dependent terms and revisiting the single line source problem of Fig. 4b, we
obtain the results of Fig. 6 with a generalized form of Eq. 5 using only the average flux as a function of time.

g x,

g tD

1

g x, t D
g tD

1

(7)

Values in long time behavior are those corresponding to pseudo-steady state. We again are able to obtain
excellent agreement with only two free parameters: the average flux and the mixing parameter .

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

(e)

Fig. 6. Time-dependent line source solutions on the square with Neumann external boundary conditions with a banded color lookup table
fixed to extrema in dimensionless pressure in the pseudo-steady state case: (a) tD = 0.001; (b) tD = 0.01; (c) tD = 0.1; (d) tD = 1.0; (e)
Midline normal flux profiles for various dimensionless time values as data points and a line regression with a best fit value for

3. Conclusions and Significance
Firstly, the boundary flux distribution was shown to have an impact on computed well pressure with
increasing significance for decentralized wells and oriented flow. Secondly, analytic-based solutions allow us
to probe the flux profile needed to produce certain boundary conditions. Remarkably, the flux required to yield
a constant pressure condition in steady state flow can, under certain circumstances, be rescaled to yield the flux

2146

R.D. Hazlett and D.K. Babu / Procedia Computer Science 18 (2013) 2137 – 2146

pattern for a related pseudo-steady state problem. The parametric representation appears to be robust also for
time dependent problems. Summarizing, this work suggests that the flux profile at a boundary can be cast as a
linear combination of uniform flux and uniform pressure contributions. This is in some sense related to a
radiation boundary condition represented as

k

d
dx

(8)

is potential, k and are coefficients, and is some inherent constant. Thus, the flux is related to a
where
scaled driving force term. If we reconsider the RHS as two separate terms, one is related to uniform pressure,
while the second is a scaled uniform value.
This development also suggests that nonparametric representation of boundary flux can possibly be
supplanted by parametric representation with a significant reduction in problem bandwidth in solving
heterogeneous domain problems. Only two unknowns need be introduced per well cell interface with arbitrary
choice of two surface locations for pressure matching. Procedures for best choice selection are reserved for
future publication. The methodology need not be restricted to wells cells, as the well cell parameterized flux
may serve as a source term for adjacent regions, enabling propagation to all cells. The result would be a highly
accurate, analytic solution-based reservoir simulator for single phase flow in heterogeneous rectilinear cell
systems.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by in
Innovation Research program, Contracts DMI-0128291 and DMI-0236569. Any opinions, findings, and
conclusions or recommendations expressed in this material are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Science Foundation.
References
[1] Peaceman, D.W., 1978. Interpretation of well-block pressures in numerical reservoir simulation. SPE J 18(3):183-194.
[2] Peaceman, D.W., 1983. Interpretation of well-block pressures in numerical reservoir simulation with nonsquare grid blocks and
anisotropic permeability. SPE J June: 531-543.
[3] Babu, D. K. and Odeh, A. S., 1989. Productivity of a horizontal well. SPE Res Eng November: 417 421.
[4] Babu, D. K., Odeh, A. S., Al-Khalifa, A. J., et al., 1991. The relationship between wellblock and wellbore pressures in numerical
simulation of horizontal wells. SPE Res Eng June: 324 328.
[5] Besson, J., 1990. Performance of slanted and horizontal wells on an anisotropic medium. Paper SPE 20965, Presented at Europec 90,
The Hague, Netherlands, 22-24 October.
[6] Jasti, J., Penmatcha, V. R., and Babu, D. K., 1999. Use of analytical solutions to improve simulator accuracy, SPE J March: 47-56.
[7] Joshi, S. D. 1988a. Production forecasting methods for horizontal wells. Paper SPE 17580, Presented at the 1988 SPE International
Meeting, Tianjin, China, 1-4 November. http://dx.doi.org/.
[8] Joshi, S. D., 1988b. Augmentation of well productivity with slant and horizontal wells. JPT June: 729-739.
[9] Economides, M. J., Brand, C. W., and Frick, T. P., 1996. Well configurations in anisotropic reservoirs. SPE Form Eval, December:
257-262.
[10] Maizeret, P-D., 1996. Well indices for non conventional wells. MS Thesis, Stanford University, Stanford, California (June 1996).
[11] Hazlett, R.D. and Babu, D. K., 2012. Discrete wellbore and fracture modeling for unconventional wells and unconventional
reservoirs. Paper SPE 159379, the SPE Annual Technical Conference and Exhibition, San Antonio, TX, USA, 8-10 October 2012.
[12] Hazlett, R. D. and Babu, D. K., 2005. Optimal Well Placement in Heterogeneous Reservoirs Through Semi-analytic Modeling, SPE J
10(3): 286-296.
[13] Aavatsmark, Ivar, Multipoint flux approximation methods for quadrilateral grids. 9th International Forum on Reservoir Simulation,
Abu Dhabi, 9-13 2007.

