Available online at www.sciencedirect.com

Procedia Computer Science 18 (2013) 1421 – 1428

2013 International Conference on Computational Science

Next steps in simulating high-risk infectious disease
propagation networks
Alfredo Tirado-Ramos, Chris Kelley
Emory University, 201 Dowman Drive, 30322, Atlanta, USA

Abstract
Simulating HIV transmission networks using agent-based systems has consistently shown promise during the last ten
years. In this position paper we briefly discuss the state of the art, as elaborated on our previous work, and propose next
steps that incorporate not only current HIV infection propagation approaches but also promising prevention strategies that
include sociological markers. We stress that throughout translational validation will be key for approaching real impact in
clinical outcomes. Finally, we place our proposed approach in the context of a real-life cohort that provides significant and
relevant data on high-risk populations, HIV+ drug abusing patients that circulate through the U.S. jail system, and propose
that the use of more complex sociological prevention markers may greatly enrich currently used biomarker-based
approaches and provide with more sophisticated and nuanced results.
©
© 2013
2013 The
The Authors.
Authors. Published
Published by
by Elsevier
Elsevier B.V.
B.V. Open access under CC BY-NC-ND license.
Selection
and/or
peer-review
under
responsibility
of the
organizers
of 2013
the 2013
International
Conference
on Computational
Selection and
peer
review under
responsibility
of the
organizers
of the
International
Conference
on Computational
Science
Science
Keywords: HIV; Prevention Strategies; Simulation; Agent-based Models; Drug Abuse

1. Problem statement
Complex simulation of infectious disease networks is a promising field with potential applications in, e.g.
gastrointestinal, respiratory, and sexually transmitted disease [1]. For instance, current research has broadly
illustrated the potential for simulating the transmission of HIV using agent-based systems. However, extensive
work is still needed for current state of the art in translational informatics, from bench to bedside, to apply
simulation results to actually influence clinical outcomes. Furthermore, models and their implementations need
substantial validation and enhancement, with considerable experimentation required in order to illustrate the
potential application of the technology to physician scientists. Interesting applications with potential for high
impact include the simulation and prediction of HIV transmission networks, specially high-risk networks like
the ones that may be present within drug abusing populations, how such networks may affect outcomes, and
their potential impact in public health policy.

1877-0509 © 2013 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. Open access under CC BY-NC-ND license.
Selection and peer review under responsibility of the organizers of the 2013 International Conference on Computational Science
doi:10.1016/j.procs.2013.05.309

1422

Alfredo Tirado-Ramos and Chris Kelley / Procedia Computer Science 18 (2013) 1421 – 1428

Important gateways to care for HIV+ populations include knowledge of HIV status and initiation as well as
adherence to therapy [2]. Moreover, an important factor is that one third of HIV infections are acquired through
drug abuse, especially outside of sub-Saharan Africa [3], with recent data showing strong links between risk of
sexual HIV acquisition and episodic recreational drug/alcohol abuse [4]. Drug abuse is associated with medical
and psychosocial co-morbidities as well as with behavioral disinhibition, and is believed to lead to poorer
outcomes for patients with HIV [5]. Even though the virological and clinical effects of therapeutic regimens
among drug users and non-drug users who adhere to therapy are generally equivalent due to the efficacy of
potent antiviral therapy, current evidence suggests that the primary effect of drug abuse in HIV disease
progression is mediated via factors that limit access and adherence to such regimens [6]. Indeed, innovative
approaches to the management of sexually transmitted infections in settings with generalized epidemics has the
potential to affect current epidemic trajectories: the influence of high-risk individuals who are key to
transmission has shown to exert a major effect on propagation networks, and can result in major changes in
infection rates shown in such networks [7].
This means that finding innovative methods for the prediction, monitoring and early treatment of high-risk
infected individuals could provide a significant tool to reduce the creation of large propagation networks in the
first place. Agent-based simulation can offer an outstanding venue of research on this issue.
2. Agent-based models for simulating HIV propagation
In previous work [8] we explored the state of the art in agent-based simulation of HIV propagation networks
in detail. In this paper, however, we move a step forward by elaborating on what we believe are interesting
venues of future research in the field, discussing innovative approaches that target not only the spreading of
disease but the complex nuances of the effect of innovative prevention strategies and their potential outcomes.
2.1. Why agent-based models for HIV network simulation?
Agent-based models account for the behavior of individuals, which is a major factor in the spread of HIV.
In current research, it has been shown that agent-based models are more effective at modeling the unique nature
of HIV transmission than traditional epidemiology models. For instance, in [9] the authors concluded that it is
impractical to simulate complex interactions using traditional models based on Monte Carlo simulations and
system dynamics techniques. The authors in [10] surveyed existing HIV transmission models and found agentbased modeling to be more effective for modeling risk behavior. In [11] it is stated that when comparing agentbased models with differential equation models, agent-based models are more effective at modeling the
heterogeneity inherent in individuals’ behaviours in networks, and more representative of complex social
network interactions.
Most current model designs consist of some of the following components:
∞
∞
∞
∞
∞
∞

Agents with demographic and behavior attributes
HIV transmission functions
A function of time for simulation
A function for updating dynamic network structures
A function for HIV progression
Population parameters that impact agent behavior and interaction

These parameters have shown good preliminary results, and we propose that they could be enriched by the
use of sophisticated variables from sociological parameters of transmission. Also, in addition to typical model
design, it is also necessary to note the significant role of empirical data in model design and validation.

Alfredo Tirado-Ramos and Chris Kelley / Procedia Computer Science 18 (2013) 1421 – 1428

2.2. State of the art: overview
Some of the more significant contributions in the field (and more cited research) on agent-based models for
simulating HIV provide an important step forward. Such research illustrates the continued enhancement of
agent-based models as a baseline foundation for additional work. Here we review some of the more important
contributions on agent-based models, as in our previous review [8].
In [12], a partially developed basic model is presented which consisted of four mechanism categories that
make up HIV transmission in Eastern and Southern Africa. The mechanisms include migration, interaction,
disease and mortality, marriage and divorce. The data used in model design represents the general population.
The authors in [13] developed a multi-agent system architecture that contains agents to represent
individuals, create and control agents, represent the population environment, and provide statistics based on the
simulation process. Four decision-making functions are used for agent interaction and HIV transmission.
During the simulation process, agents choose other agents at random. The authors’ simulation results were
shown to have 90 % accuracy for illustrating HIV prevalence when compared to the findings of the South
Africa Department of Health.
In [14] the authors report a model that includes more dynamic agent behavior than previous works as well as
the notion of grouping agents into high risk and low risk populations. Agent behavior modification can occur
such as the change in condom use, increase or decrease in sexual contacts, and contact frequency. Agent
networks are comprised of links dedicated to short-term and long-term sexual contacts. Experimental results
showed accurate results when based on factors specific to a MSM (Men who have Sex with Men) population in
Taiwan.
The work shown in [10] adapted previous research to introduce a model that can simulate preferential
attachment behavior and awareness. Preferential attachment behavior for agents is used to form scale-free
sexual networks. Awareness is achieved in the model by a probability calculation based on the common
attributes of agents. Simulation results show the effect that the topology of social and sexual networks may
have on the rate of both HIV transmission and the effectiveness of awareness campaigns.
The model in [15] allows for simulating awareness through various scenarios. Households are also
introduced which are groups of agents that are assumed to have similar exposure to the mass media. Agents
contain additional attributes to support awareness such as education level and a degree variable for religiosity.
A simulation experiment was performed using general population demographic data from a village in Limpopo
Province in South Africa. Awareness scenarios in the simulation were formal education, education and social
network, education and mass media, education and reliable community sources such as religious leaders,
education and household, and a combination of all of the awareness scenarios. The results of the simulation
illustrated an HIV free population for the education and household awareness intervention scenario after 65
years and an HIV free population for all awareness scenarios after 32 years. Additional experiments based on
datasets that include a population impacted by awareness interventions over time will be necessary to validate
this model.
In [8] the authors developed a model that introduces a distribution of sexual partners for each agent based on
gender and a sexual mixing scheme between agents, both of which are based on a study population in SubSaharan region of Africa. In addition to HIV transmission through sexual intercourse, the model also accounts
for the spread of HIV transmission from mother-to-child.
The work shown in [16] introduced a Complex Agent Network that combines a multi-agent system model
approach with complex networks. The combination of these approaches allows for more complex interactions
among agents, real time agent updates based on environmental changes, as well as additional information on
how network topologies affect the transmission of HIV. The authors’ experiment results compared well with
data from the Amsterdam Cohort Study of HIV infection and AIDS between MSM.

1423

1424

Alfredo Tirado-Ramos and Chris Kelley / Procedia Computer Science 18 (2013) 1421 – 1428

In [17] the authors build on existing models by adding additional agent parameters to represent aspects of
sexual partnership such as the ability of an agent to have multiple partners, courtship durations, and desired
quality for a sexual partner. Simulations resulted in sexual behavior patterns that were similar to empirical data.
Finally, the work in [11] presented a calibrated agent-based model (CABM) used to account for the
existence of shooting galleries and quasi-anonymous injections in the spread of HIV within a population of
intravenous drug users. The model provided the ability to calibrate the parameters of subgroups within the
population. Simulation successful illustrated the impact of shooting galleries and quasi-anonymous injections
on HIV transmission and the results were also reported to be representative of prior studies.
3. Next steps: prevention strategies
The previous section hints at the evolution of agent-based models for HIV transmission in recent years.
Research included the incorporation of a few environment factors that account for some population factors that
impact transmission, expanding agent attributes to improve behaviour modelling, incorporating other models
with agent-based models, and modifying model parameters that impact network structures.
In addition to these enhancements, we propose the addition of the effects of prevention strategies to allow
for more sophisticated simulation systems that may combine the potential impact of multiple prevention
strategies and/or a combination of prevention strategies and propagation patterns in high-risk populations. We
find that [10, 15], for instance, provide a powerful foundation for more complex simulation systems that may
include both traditional and also sociological prevention strategies.
Some prevention strategies that we propose may be worth exploring are shown in Table I.

Table I. Prevention strategies

Prevention Strategy
Behaviour change programs

Description
Programs tailored to risk groups that seek to encourage
individuals to adopt safer sexual behaviours. Risk
groups include sex works and intravenous drug users.
Multiple studies have shown behaviour change
programs to be effective

Education and awareness programs

Identify the impact of awareness programs on high-risk
groups

Predictors of condom use with steady
and random partners

Identify strategies to promote condom use that increase
awareness about their effectiveness against not only
unwanted pregnancies but also HIV and other STDs

Psychosocial variables such as
depression

Identify potential impact that psychosocial variables
have in the continued transmission of HIV. Rates of
depression in people with HIV are as high as 60%
compared to general population rates of around 10%;
women with HIV are twice as likely as men to be
depressed

Linking to appropriate care and
prevention services

Programs that provide linking and close monitoring
HIV-infected detainees to medical services during jail

Alfredo Tirado-Ramos and Chris Kelley / Procedia Computer Science 18 (2013) 1421 – 1428

and after release; behaviour that sends a person into the
criminal justice system, including injection drug use and
commercial sex work, are the same activities that can
increase the risk for HIV acquisition and creation of
infection distribution networks
Support of adherence to treatment
regimens

Retention in care is important in promoting medication
persistence, which can both improve the health of the
individual and decrease transmission of HIV to others

Environmental–structural
interventions targeting sex workers

Implementing standard routine programs which monitor
indicators on service provision, service uptake, and
community activities

Diagnosing HIV infections outside
medical settings

Using widely available devices like OraQuick to
increase access to early diagnosis and referral for
treatment and prevention services in high-HIV
prevalence settings, including correctional facilities

Making HIV testing a routine part of
medical care

Health-care providers including HIV testing as part of
routine medical care on the same voluntary basis as
other diagnostic and screening tests. Studies have
shown that people who know their HIV status are more
likely to protect themselves and others from infection

Harm Reduction Programs

Programs that provide clean needles and syringes to
intravenous drug users. These programs have been
shown to be effective in reducing the risk of HIV
transmission among injection drug users

Contraceptive use patterns

Identify the effects of condom use among main and
minority ethnic groups

Incentivised HIV screening for highrisk groups

Community outreach programs that provide services for
individuals with potential for high-risk behaviour in
exchange for HIV screening and care

Pre-Exposure Prophylaxis (PrEP)

Incorporate the use of PrEP with other prevention
methods

The model proposed by [16] appears to be an ideal model to expand for prevention strategies. It utilizes an
agent-based model to provide for both the complex representation of individuals (which is necessary for
prevention strategy simulation) and complex networks, to allow for more complex individual to individual
interaction necessary for network changes based on prevention strategies. Examples of modifications to the
complex agent network to incorporate prevention strategies include adding a new agent state that represents the
removal from the high-risk network due to the decreased risk behavior threshold resulting from a prevention

1425

1426

Alfredo Tirado-Ramos and Chris Kelley / Procedia Computer Science 18 (2013) 1421 – 1428

strategy, update simulation statistics functions to utilize the new agent state to gather statistics for HIV, create a
new population operator that changes updates the network based on whether or not the prevention changed an
agents risk behavior, and so on.
Furthermore, in addition to modifying models, it is necessary to identify empirical data that contains
prevention strategies for validation purposes.
4. Validating new approaches
We position this approach within its potential in the context of early identification and monitoring of highrisk HIV positive drug abusing individuals who go through the United States (U.S.) jail systems, who may have
the potential to initiate high-risk complex infection propagation networks either while in the system or after
release. The US is an interesting case study for these purposes: it has incarceration rates that exceed those of all
other countries; each year, 1 in 7 persons with HIV in this country cycles through a jail. Furthermore, in the
absence of a public health intervention, going to jail increases the odds 8-fold that HIV care will be disrupted
[Figure 1].

Fig. 1. An illustration showing the high US incarceration rate as compared to other countries, data from the U.N.; image courtesy of
Wikipedia Commons (http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:International_incarceration_rates_2002.jpg)

We propose that in such high-risk networks, sensitive dependence on initial conditions (where a small
change at one place in a deterministic nonlinear system can result in large differences to a later state) can
powerfully affect such propagation networks before escalation. We are interested on how such simulation
networks may reflect the footprint of data heterogeneity and other inherent limitations of data curation from
these populations, where data from data rich initiatives is used for research. We focus on the access, modeling,
and analysis of publicly available datasets to identify relevant epidemiological/sociological markers to be
added as vectors for indirect prediction, together with more traditional simulation parameters.

Alfredo Tirado-Ramos and Chris Kelley / Procedia Computer Science 18 (2013) 1421 – 1428

To this end, we identify indirect biomarkers that may enrich current HIV infection parameters to predict
potential high-risk for propagation, non-adherence, and difficulty to stay linked to the care system. Some of
these biomarkers may include, but are not limited to [Table 2]:
Table 2. Example of indirect epidemiological biomarkers considered

Domain
(instrument)
HIV
DEMOGRAPHICS

Variable
Time Since Diagnosis, Baseline CD4 Count, Baseline Viral
Load, Prior Use of Active Antiretroviral Therapy, Initial
Linkage to Care, Linkage to Care Post Discharge
Age, Gender, Race, Self-identified Sexual Orientation (e.g.,
self-identified as bisexual or homosexual), Sexual Risk
Behavior

ADDICTION
(measured by ASI)

History of Injection Drug Use, Addiction Severity Index
(ASI), Drug Use, Alcohol Use

WELL BEING
(measured by SF-12)

Medical Severity, Psychiatric Severity, Family/Social
Problems, Global Well Being Index, General Health, Mental
Health, Social Functioning, Emotional Status

Even though the richness of these data provide a considerable potential for analysis in the cohort being
considered, approximately 7,000 variables available, the detection of early indicators for such high-risk patients
has not been extensively explored.
5. Conclusion
As proposed by [19], agent-based approaches can be leveraged to represent systems that contain large
numbers of active objects and present characteristics of timing, event ordering, and all sorts of individual
behavior. In this paper we point to some of the current best approaches, propose to add complex prevention
strategies to the currently used propagation models, elaborate on what those models could be, and suggest that
validation is probably the most important step if these methodologies are to be useful for clinical outcomes one
day, if we can actually define it. We also describe our future work to initially approach the validation problem
by using a currently available cohort that includes high-risk individuals.
We believe that the potential offered by agent-based models’ high levels of abstraction, with their intrinsic
macroscopic strategic representation power, can provide important advantages when dealing with complex
sociological prevention strategies in population dynamics.
Acknowledgements
This work was facilitated by the Biostatistics and Biomedical Informatics Core of the Center for AIDS
Research at Emory University (P30 AI050409). The authors would like to acknowledge Anne Spaulding MD,
MPH for her feedback on HIV sociological and epidemiologic variable identification.

1427

1428

Alfredo Tirado-Ramos and Chris Kelley / Procedia Computer Science 18 (2013) 1421 – 1428

References
[1] Kier LB, Cheng CK, Testa B. Cellular automaton model of biochemical phenomena, FGCS 1999; 16: 273-289.
[2] Makhlouf Obermeyer C, Osborn M. The Utilization of Testing and Counseling for HIV: A Review of the Social and Behavioral
Evidence, American Journal of Public Health, 2007;October, 97(10): pp. 1762-1774.
[3] Strathdee S, Sherman SG. The Role of Sexual Transmission of HIV Infection among Injection and Non-injection Drug Users, Journal
of Urban Health, 2003;80(3), iii7-iii14, DOI: 10.1093/jurban/jtg078.
[4] St. Lawrence J, Crosby R, Brasfield TL, O'Bannon RE. Reducing STD and HIV Risk Behavior of Substance-dependent Adolescents: A
Randomized Controlled Trial, Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 2002;70(4), August, pp.1010-1021.
[5] Lucas GM, Gebo KA, Chaisson, RE, Moore, RD. Longitudinal Assessment of the Effects of Drug and Alcohol Abuse on HIV-1
Treatment Outcomes in an Urban Clinic, AIDS, 2002;29, 16(5), pp.767-774.
[6] Giordano TP, Gifford AL, White AC Jr, Suarez-Almazor ME, Rabeneck L, Hartman C, Backus LI, Mole LA, Morgan RO. Retention in
Care: A Challenge to Survival with HIV Infection, Clin. Infect. Dis., 2007; 44(11), pp.1493-1499.
[7] Gregson, S., Garnett, GP, Nyamukapa, CA, Hallett, TB, Lewis, JC, Mason, PR, Anderson, RM. HIV decline associated with behavior
change in eastern Zimbabwe, Science, 2006; 311, pp. 664–666
[8] Tirado-Ramos A, Kelley C. Simulation of HIV infection propagation networks: a review of the state of the art in agent-based
approaches, International Journal of Agent Technologies and Systems (IJATS), 2013; in press.
[9] Alam, SJ, Meyer, R, Norling, E. A model for HIV spread in a South African village. 2008;Unpublished manuscript. Centre for Policy
Modelling, Manchester Metropolitan University Business School.
[10] Rhee, A. An Agent-based Approach to HIV/AIDS Modelling: A Case Study of Papua New Guinea. 2006; Master of Science Thesis.
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
[11] Richardson, L, Grund, T. Modeling the impact of supra-structural network nodes: The case of anonymous syringe sharing and HIV
among people who inject drugs, Social Science Research, 2012; 41(3), pp. 624-636
[12] Heuveline, P, Sallach, D, Howe, T. The Structure of an Epidemic: Modelling AIDS Transmission in Southern Africa, Papers from
Symposium on Agent-based Computational Modelling, 2003; Vienna, Austria
[13] Teweldemedhin, E, Marwala, T, Mueller, C. Agent-based modelling: a case study in HIV epidemic, Proceedings-HIS’04: 4th
International Conference on Hybrid Intelligent Systems, 2005; pp. 154–159.
[14] Sumodhee, C, Hsieh, JL, Sun, CT, Huang, CY, Chen, AYM. Impact of Social Behaviors on HIV Epidemic: A Computer Simulation
View, Proc. Intl. Conference on Computational Intelligence for Modelling, Control and Automation, 2005; pp. 550–556. IEEE Press,
Los Alamitos
[15] Tawfik, AY, Farag, RR. Modeling the Spread of Preventable Diseases: Social Culture and Epidemiology, Proc. IFIP International
Federation for Information Processing; Artificial Intelligence and Practice II, 2008; vol. 276, pp. 277–286. Springer, Boston
[16] Mei, S, Sloot, PMA, Quaxa, R, Zhub, Y, Wang, W. Complex agent networks explaining the HIV epidemic among homosexual men in
Amsterdam Mathematics and Computers, Simulation, 2010; 80 pp. 1018–1030
[17] Knittel AK, Riolo, RL, Snow, RC. Development and evaluation of an agent-based model of sexual partnership, Adaptive Behavior,
2011; December 19: pp. 425-450
[18] The Global HIV Prevention Working Group Proven HIV Strategies Fact Sheet (2006):
http://www.kff.org/hivaids/upload/050106_HIVPreventionStrategies.pdf
[19] Borshchev A, Filippov A. From System Dynamics and Discrete Event to Practical Agent Based Modeling: Reasons, Techniques,
Tools. The 22nd International Conference of the System Dynamics Society, July 25 - 29, 2004, Oxford, England

