Available online at www.sciencedirect.com

Procedia Computer Science 18 (2013) 2638 – 2642

International Conference on Computational Science, ICCS 2013

Equation-Free Computations as DDDAS Protocols in the Study of
Engineered Granular Crystals
M. O. Williamsa , F. Lib , P. Kevrekidisc , C. Daraiob , Y. Kevrekidis∗a
a Chemical

and Biological Engineering and PACM, Princeton University, USA
b Aeronautics and Applied Physics, Caltech, USA
c Mathematics and Statistics, University of Massachusetts, USA

Abstract
We explore the use of Equation-Free algorithms as Dynamic Data Driven experimental design protocols for the computational
as well as laboratory study of the dynamics of engineered granular crystals and their models. The ability to prescribe desired initial conditions for computational -and, in this case, also possibly for laboratory- experiments provides an interesting
link between traditional, matrix-free numerical analysis and the acceleration of dynamic studies. The framework is further
enhanced through combination with data-mining algorithms that process detailed, ﬁne-scale data to uncover underlying important, coarse-grained variables (macroscopic system observables).

1. Introduction
In many complex problems ranging from ecology to materials science, and from chemistry to engineering,
the physics are known at a microscopic/individual level, but the accurate closures required to translate them to
a desired macroscopic level are not explicitly available. Furthermore, the enormous gap between the associated
time and spatial scales of the detailed level, where the governing equations are deﬁned, and the coarse level, where
the questions of interest are asked, creates severe computational limitations and is a major stumbling block in the
current computational modeling of complex systems. Equation Free (EF) modeling is a computational framework
that shows promise towards circumventing this computational stumbling block [1]. The EF framework builds
a mathematical library around the best simulator available to a researcher for his or her system; through the
judicious design and performance of brief bursts of (ﬁne scale) computational simulation, and iterative processing
of their results, information is extracted at the coarse-grained, systems level without explicitly obtaining a closed
set of governing equations at the coarse scale. In eﬀect, EF is a framework for the design of computational
experiments.
The EF framework has been previously applied to black-box numerical simulators for which the coarse variables are “user determined.” One of our ambitions is to extend the framework to experimental systems, when
the right macroscopic observables (the coarse variables) are known a priori, as well as when they have to be
algorithmically obtained “on the ﬂy” using data mining methods. In particular, we link the EF method with nonlinear manifold learning techniques (speciﬁcally, diﬀusion maps) for the detection and parameterization of the
intrinsically low-dimensional descriptions of our high-dimensional data, whether computational or experimental.
E-mail address: yannis@princeton.edu.

1877-0509 © 2013 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. Open access under CC BY-NC-ND license.
Selection and peer review under responsibility of the organizers of the 2013 International Conference on Computational Science
doi:10.1016/j.procs.2013.05.456

M.O. Williams et al. / Procedia Computer Science 18 (2013) 2638 – 2642

2639

In order to apply the EF framework, we must be able to fully resolve the “ﬁne-scale” dynamics of the underlying physical system and have the ability to initialize new experiments “at will.” For computational experiments,
satisfying these requirements is relatively simple and can be implemented via repeatedly querying the underlying
simulator for the evolution of the state of the system after suitable initial conditions have been supplied. For a
physical experiment on the other hand these requirements are typically highly nontrivial; this is exacerbated for
spatially distributed systems complex enough to exhibit non-trivial spatiotemporal dynamical behaviors.
In this regard, engineered granular crystals provide a promising test bed for employing the EF framework in
an experimental setting. The experimental setup, which we will describe below, possesses suﬃcient actuation
and sensing authority to allow a wide variety of system states to be initialized, and to record the evolution of
the system from these user speciﬁed initial conditions. Rather than using short bursts of simulation data, the EF
framework will initialize, acquire, and process short time series of resolved experimental data. This dynamic,
design-of-experiments methodology should allow the acceleration of evolution studies, the evaluation of coarsegrained stability and parametric sensitivity, optimization studies, as well as the design of controllers based on
experimental results rather than a pre-speciﬁed mathematical model. It is interesting that the approach can be
applied towards the coarse-graining of both resolved modeling/computational results and of experimental studies
of engineered granular crystals.
2. The Equation Free Framework
The Equation Free (EF) framework assumes that macroscopic equations exist and close for the coarse-grained
behavior of a complex system (a detailed simulation or experiment), but that the closures required to write accurate
macroscopic equations explicitly are not available. In place of the time derivative of the unavailable macroscopic
equations, we use repeated short bursts of an appropriately initialized detailed simulator to estimate the necessary
information. As a result, the EF in practice takes the form of a “wrapper code” where a computational structure
is built around a pre-existing detailed simulator (or experiment) which is called as needed. The essential steps can
be summarized as follows:
1. Identify coarse-grained variables that suﬃciently describe the system dynamics. Typically, these are loworder moments (e.g., density or momentum) of the microscopically evolving distribution. However, as we
will describe later, these may also be determined using manifold learning techniques. In what follows, we
will denote the state of the detailed description by x and the coarse description by X.
2. Choose an appropriate lifting operator, μ, that maps from the coarse description, X, to one or more of the
detailed descriptions, x, that are consistent with with coarse description.
3. Using the detailed simulator, evolve each lifted initial condition x(t0 ) to obtain values at a later time x(t0 +T )
for T > 0.
4. Use an appropriate restriction operator, Φt , that maps from the detailed description to the coarse description
(Φt (x(t0 + T )) = X(t0 + T )). Steps 2-4 constitute the coarse timestepper for the coarse observable associated
with the restriction operator.
5. Apply the desired numerical techniques for the coarse grained variables. For instance, the time derivative of
the system can be approximated using a few successive coarse timesteps, which allows for coarse projective
integration to be performed in time.
6. If needed, estimate a new initial coarse state where computation is required and repeat from step 2.
The EF framework has been used on previous occasions to compute bifurcation diagrams, design controllers
for the stabilization of unstable ﬁxed points, and accelerate the simulation of molecular, agent-based as well as
“black-box,” legacy simulators. Although the EF framework does not generate explicit governing equations, it is
compatible with matrix-free algorithms, such as Shroﬀ and Keller’s Recursive Projection Method (RPM) [2], the
Implicitly Restarted Arnoldi Method (IRAM) [3], and the Newton-GMRES method [4].
One of the main diﬃculties associated with the EF method is the identiﬁcation of coarse variables. These
variables must capture/parametrize the system dynamics (for accuracy) and yet avoid the vast range of timescales
(and concomitant spatial scales) associated with the governing equation of the detailed problem (for speed). The
choice of these variables is often guided by experience with the physical problem and eﬀective methods for
modeling. In cases where this intuition is not available, there is a vital need to link the EF technique with data

2640

M.O. Williams et al. / Procedia Computer Science 18 (2013) 2638 – 2642

mining methods that can automatically identify eﬀective coarse-level variables (observables). One aim of this
work is to use the coarse variables identiﬁed by diﬀusion maps as opposed to a priori available coarse variables.
Diﬀusion maps is a framework, based upon the diﬀusion process, for identifying meaningful, low-dimensional
geometric descriptions of high dimensional data sets, even when the underlying geometry is nonlinear and corrupted by noise [5, 6]. The method is based upon the construction of a Markov matrix corresponding to a random
walk on a graph whose vertices are the data points, with the transition probabilities based on the pairwise similarity (deﬁned, for example, as a function of cartesian distance) between data points. When a spectral gap prevails
in this Markov matrix, its ﬁrst few eigenvectors are used to generate a lower dimensional parameterization of the
data that embodies the intrinsic coarse geometry of the original, high dimensional data. In eﬀect, pairwise similarities across many points are harnessed to obtain an eﬀective global description of the data. Diﬀusion maps bear
conceptual similarities to other nonlinear manifold learning techniques such as locally linear embeddings (LLE)
or isomap [7].
The use of a low-dimensional set of eigenvectors for eﬀective dimensionality reduction is not new. Indeed,
Principal Component Analysis (PCA), often referred to as the Proper Orthogonal Decomposition (POD) or the
Empirical Orthogonal Functions (EOF), computes the principal components of a given data set by obtaining
the ﬁrst few eigenvectors of the covariance matrix associated with that data. PCA has been previously used
extensively in a number of engineering and mathematical applications, including as part of the EF framework.
However, PCA loses eﬃciency when applied to data that lies on low dimensional, nonlinear manifolds including
examples as simple as a helix or spiral. This ineﬃciency stems from the fact that PCA projects the dynamics onto
a hyperplane, and thus additional basis vectors are required to parameterize more complicated (but not higherdimensional) manifolds.
Diﬀusion maps are an eﬀective generalization of PCA to data sets where the data are low-dimensional and lie
on a nonlinear manifold. Unlike PCA, the diﬀusion map coordinates are a nonlinear embedding of the data, and
can produce a more parsimonious parameterization of the data than PCA. Diﬀusion maps have proven to be an
eﬀective tool in many applications such as the organization of data, imaging, and image denoising. One drawback
of the diﬀusion map embedding relative to PCA is that it is more diﬃcult to derive eﬀective governing equations
in the diﬀusion map coordinates. However, as the EF framework does not require explicit equations, this problem
is reduced to that of ﬁnding an eﬃcient lifting operator, a simpler issue to resolve.
3. Experiment: Engineered Granular Crystals
The application we chose for our approach is engineered granular crystals: assemblies of particles in a closely
packed conﬁguration contained inside a matrix. The building blocks of these systems are macroscopic particles
that are either spherical, toroidal, elliptical, or cylindrical in shape, and are arranged in diﬀerent geometries.
The dynamic properties of the resulting crystal are governed by the stress propagation at the contact between
neighboring particles by the Hertzian law of contact interaction. Engineered granular crystals are a promising
testbed for nonlinear dynamics as they exhibit periodic, quasi-periodic, and chaotic behaviors, depending on the
forcing applied to the system. Practically, the study of these crystals is motivated by the desire to create solids
that have dynamically tunable responses to generate resonances, dispersion and localized phenomena, acoustic
band gaps and compact discrete waves. In particular, engineered granular crystals are envisioned for use in a wide
range of applications including:
1. Developing mechanical systems with tunable acoustic/elastic properties;
2. Fabricating devices with controllable acoustic bandgaps within the audible range targeting noise mitigation
and vibration absorbing layers;
3. Designing new acoustic lenses for biomedical applications.
Clearly, several mathematical and application-oriented motivations exist for studying these crystals. For now, we
study a one-dimensional, statically compressed diatomic system, consisting of alternating aluminum and steel
spheres, where the ﬁrst sphere is aluminum as shown in Fig. 1.
The dynamics of this system can be modeled at the detailed level as a system of damped, driven ODEs:
3/2
m j u¨ j = A j−1, j [δ j−1, j − (u j − u j−1 )]3/2
+ − A j, j+1 [δ j, j+1 − (u j+1 − u j )]+ −

m j u˙ j
τ

(1)

M.O. Williams et al. / Procedia Computer Science 18 (2013) 2638 – 2642

3LH]RHOHFWULFDFWXDWRU

6WHHOVSKHUHV

'\QDPLFIRUFHVHQVRU :DOO




$OXPLQXPVSKHUHV

3RO\FDUERQDWH
JXLGHUDLOV

6RIW
6WDWLF
VSULQJ ORDGFHOO

Fig. 1: (left) Schematic of the experimental setup. (right) The experimental setup.
where m j is the mass of the jth bead, A j, j+1 is the Hertz coeﬃcient, and δ j, j+1 is the amount of static overlap (due
to the precompression) between beads j and j + 1 [8]. The actuator is placed at the left edge of the chain and
provides a prescribed displacement with a frequency fd and amplitude α given by u0 (t) = α cos(2π fd t). The right
edge of the chain may be stress-free, or may involve a similar actuator. Brackets [Y]+ denote the positive part of Y,
which signiﬁes that adjacent particles interact only when they are in contact. We model linear on-site dissipation
in line with Ref. [9]. The linear spectrum of the undamped, undriven crystal has an acoustic band and an optical
band, with a ﬁnite gap between, and a semi-inﬁnite gap above the optical band [10].
The EF framework is ﬁrst built solely in silico, around a simulator for the dynamics of (1), but in this case
it can in principle also be constructed around the experimental setup. The idea is to dynamically control the
displacement of the particles so that they can be initialized at desired conﬁgurations. To do so, we embed actuator
particles, so as to apply high amplitude, short time pulse perturbations directly within the system. The shape of the
excited pulses can be independently determined using signal generators and voltage ampliﬁers, connected to the
actuators, and controlled by a computer. Because there is suﬃcient optical sensing to approximate the complete
state of the underlying system for a sequence of snapshots in time, the restriction operator can be applied directly
to data from the experiment as well as to data from simulations. Due to the presence of the actuator particles, a
detailed experimental realization associated with a particular macroscopic state can, in principle, be generated.
We ﬁrst use matrix-free Netwon-Krylov GMRES as an EF protocol to compute periodic solutions (limit cycles)
of the periodically-forced particle assembly model. Following these computations, we plan to use the physics of
the experiment (as opposed to a numerical simulation) in order to quickly converge on periodic system behavior
in the laboratory, and to accelerate determining the evolution of the system state.
4. Discussion
Engineered granular crystals represent a truly promising test bed for the application of the EF framework.
They are known to exhibit complex spatial and temporal responses to forcing, including stable and unstable periodic solutions, quasi-periodic solutions, and deterministic chaos. With knowledge of (1), these branches of
solutions can be computed using boundary value problem solvers and other direct methods for computing large
limit cycles [11]. An exciting challenge for the EF framework is to develop algorithms (coarse projective integrators of the oscillatory evolution “envelopes”, as well as coarse ﬁxed point solvers such as Newton-Picard, or
Newton-Krylove GMRES) to eﬃciently compute these periodic solution branches without direct access to (1), just
by using a black-box simulator as the computational experiment. The same algorithms should then, in principle,
be used when the underlying “simulator” is the properly initialized physical experiment. This combination would
allow us to experimentally probe unstable dynamics, that would not naturally be observable, and reduce the time
required to conduct a suite of dynamical experiments. Using heuristically deﬁned coarse variables this process
would be “equation free”; but if we use the approach in combination with coarse variables obtained using data
mining techniques (here diﬀusion maps), this process will be both “equation free” and “variable free.” Furthermore, the diﬀusion map coordinates are likely to provide a more parsimonious parameterization of the underlying
dynamics, in the form of empirically determined “normal modes” than would the detailed state variables in (1).
This type of reduction in the dimension of the state space should be important for accelerating computational
procedures associated with a single set of parameter values (i.e., the properties of each sphere); more importantly,
such a “variable free” reduction could be useful in obtaining optimal designs for engineered granular crystals, possibly in more than one dimension, which could then be veriﬁed experimentally. EF has been previously used for

2641

2642

M.O. Williams et al. / Procedia Computer Science 18 (2013) 2638 – 2642

optimization in relatively simply computational demonstrations, including indirectly in the design of optimal controllers; the hope here is to implement “coarse optimization” directly on the physical experiment after acquiring
experience with it in both ODE and PDE models of the crystal assemblies [12].
Another advantage of the engineered granular crystal paradigm is the relatively straightforward extension
of the one dimensional case discussed here to two and three spatial dimensions. In addition to more granules,
additional spatial dimensions allow for a wealth of additional “geometric” degrees of freedom (i.e., hexagonal
versus rectangular packing) that also must be accounted for. Furthermore, in this regime traveling waves, periodic
solutions, and other mathematical structures as well as their stability have yet to be established, and present a
signiﬁcant analytical and computational challenge as an application of the EF framework.
Acknowledgements
This work was partially supported by AFOSR grant FA9550-12-1-0332 (Dr. F. Darema); the work of M.O.W.
was also partially supported by NSF grant DMS-1204783.
References
[1] I. G. Kevrekidis, C. W. Gear, J. M. Hyman, P. G. Kevrekidis, O. Runborg, C. Theodoropoulos, Equation-free, coarse-grained multiscale
computation: Enabling microscopic simulators to perform system-level analysis, Communications in Mathematical Sciences 1 (4) (2003)
715–762.
[2] G. M. Shroﬀ, H. B. Keller, Stabilization of unstable procedures: The recursive projection method, SIAM Journal on Numerical Analysis
30 (4) (1993) pp. 1099–1120.
[3] R. B. Lehoucq, D. C. Sorensen, C. Yang, Arpack user’s guide: solution of large-scale eigenvalue problems with implicitly restarted
Arnoldi methods (Software, Environments, Tools), Society for Industrial and Applied Mathematics, 1998.
[4] C. T. Kelley, Solving Nonlinear Equations with Newton’s Method, Society for Industrial and Applied Mathematics, 1987.
[5] R. R. Coifman, S. Lafon, Diﬀusion maps, Applied and Computational Harmonic Analysis 21 (1) (2006) 5–30.
[6] B. Nadler, S. Lafon, R. R. Coifman, I. G. Kevrekidis, Diﬀusion maps, spectral clustering and reaction coordinates of dynamical systems,
Applied and Computational Harmonic Analysis 21 (1) (2006) 113–127.
[7] J. A. Lee, M. Verleysen, Nonlinear Dimensionality Reduction, Springer, 2007.
[8] V. F. Nesterenko, Dynamics of Heterogeneous Materials, Springer-Verlag, 2001.
[9] N. Boechler, G. Theocharis, C. Daraio, Bifurcation-based acoustic switching and rectiﬁcation, Nature Materials 10 (2011) 665–668.
[10] N. Boechler, G. Theocharis, S. Job, P. Kevrekidis, M. Porter, C. Daraio, Discrete breathers in one-dimensional diatomic granular crystals,
Physical Review Letters 104 (2010) 244302.
[11] D. M. Ambrose, J. Wilkening, Computation of time-periodic solutions of the Benjamin-Ono equation, Journal of Nonlinear Science 20
(2010) 277–308.
[12] M. O. Williams, C. W. Rowley, I. G. Kevrekidis, Empirically determined adjoint operators for the coarse control of distributed microscopic systems (in preparation).

