Available online at www.sciencedirect.com

Procedia Computer Science 18 (2013) 70 – 79

International Conference on Computational Science, ICCS 2013

n-step FM-Index for faster pattern matching
Alejandro Chac´on∗, Juan Carlos Moure, Antonio Espinosa, Porﬁdio Hern´andez
Computer Architecture and Operating Systems Department, Escola d’Enginyeria, Universitat Aut`onoma de Barcelona Campus UAB,
Bellaterra 08193, Spain

Abstract
Fast pattern matching is a requirement for many problems, specially for bioinformatics sequence analysis like short read
mapping applications. This work presents a variation of the FM-index method, denoted n-step FM-index, that is applied in
exact match genome search.
We propose an alternative two-dimensional FM-index structure that allows backward-search navigation giving steps of n
symbols at a time. The main advantages of this arrangement are the reduction of the computational work, but most importantly,
the reduction by n of the chain of dependent data accesses, and the increase in the temporal locality of the data access pattern.
This beneﬁt comes at the expense of increasing the total amount of data required for the index.
We present an in-depth performance analysis of a multi-core implementation of the algorithm using large references (up
to 1.5G). We identify memory latency as the major performance limiter for single-thread execution and memory bandwidth
for multi-thread execution. Our proposal provides speedups ranging from 1.4× to 2.4×, when there is no limitation on DRAM
capacity.
We also analyse the trade-oﬀ of compacting the proposed data structure in order to reduce memory capacity requirements,
now at the expense of increasing execution time. An extra 33% of DRAM space allows our proposal to improve performance
by 1.2×, while doubling DRAM size enables an additional 1.5×.
Our proposal of n-step algorithm provides an alternative for pseudo-random memory access algorithms to be redesigned
to scale in current and future computer systems.
Keywords: Pattern Matching; FM-index; Parallel Algorithms; Performance Analysis; Multicore Processors;

1. Introduction
Next-generation DNA sequencing technologies produce over 600 gigabases of DNA sequencing reads from
a single instrument run. Sequence alignment is required for downstream data analysis. Resequencing projects
need to align (most commonly known as mapping) a long list of short sequencing reads to a reference genome,
usually with a low number of diﬀerences from this reference. For the case of de novo sequence assembly, reads
must be aligned to other reads in order to recreate a genome. This large amount of data to process demands fast
and eﬃcient pattern matching algorithms. Recent sequence alignment software tools, like Bowtie[1], SOAP[2],
BWA[3], and GEM[4], use a relatively new suﬃx tree-based algorithm based on the Burrows-Wheeler Transform
(BWT)[5] that is called FM-index[6].
∗ Corresponding

author. Tel.: +34-93-581-1990 ; fax: +34-93-581-2478.
E-mail address: {alejandro.chacon, juancarlos.moure, antonio.espinosa, porﬁdio.hernandez}@uab.es.

1877-0509 © 2013 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. Open access under CC BY-NC-ND license.
Selection and peer review under responsibility of the organizers of the 2013 International Conference on Computational Science
doi:10.1016/j.procs.2013.05.170

