Available online at www.sciencedirect.com

Procedia Computer Science 18 (2013) 2595 – 2598

International Conference on Computational Science, ICCS 2013

An Approximation of Energy Eﬃciency in Web Systems
Jose M. Sola-Morenaa , Katja Gillya , Carlos Juizb
a F´ısica
b Departament

y Arquitectura de Computadores, Miguel Hern´andez University, Elche, Spain
de Ci`encies Matem`atiques i Inform`atica, University of Balearic Islands, Palma de Mallorca, Spain

Abstract
There is an increasing trend pointing to a responsible and sustainable energy consumption as mandatory in order to decrease
the global energy demand more accordingly to the limited non-renewable worldwide energy resources, and consequently,
their costs. As a ﬁrst step, this paper surveys recent studies in literature related to energy eﬃciency in Web server systems
and intends to give a summarised overview and state-of-the-art of the subject for further future contributions in the nextgeneration. As second step, an energy metric has been implemented and tested in a Web system simulation environment based
on the preliminary research of existing methods. The results obtained by the simulations and their discussion are also presented
in this paper.
Keywords: Energy eﬃciency; Web servers; green networking; load balancing; power consumption

1. Introduction
Energy eﬃciency improvement is becoming a critical research item since not only environmental but economic
constraints surround the exponential growth that Internet has been experiencing during last years.
Concerning the environmental problem, recent and oﬃcial studies estimate that Information and Communications Technologies (ICT) industry accounts for approximately 2% of global Carbon Dioxide (CO2) emissions,
overcoming even the carbon footprint of aviation [1]. In detail, focusing on telecommunication networks, it is estimated to produce about 0.6% of the global CO2 emissions. The total CO2 emitted by ICT industry is predicted
to grow in twenty years (from 2002) by a factor of three [2].
Thinking of the economic repercussion of this global power consumption increase, Bolla et al. in [2] also
show the diﬀerence between considering ecologically sustainable scenarios, named Eco Sustainable (ECO), and
the usual ones without energy saving methods implemented, named Business as Usual (BAU). The data, that was
extracted from the reports in Directorate-General for Information Society and Media (DG INFSO), estimates considerable Operating Expenses (OPEX) cumulative savings on energy costs for the European telecommunication
network infrastructures when using ECO instead of BAU scenarios.
Therefore, ﬁxed and mobile network infrastructures have enormous and heavily increasing requirements in
terms of electrical energy. Especially in Internet, where new high quality services need more powerful and higher
number of components in order to provide a good Quality of Service (QoS) for users. This energy increase needs
imply both an environmental and economic impact.
∗ Jose

Mar´ıa Sola Morena. Tel.: +33-640-957-661.
E-mail address: jose-m.sola@graduado.umh.es.

1877-0509 © 2013 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. Open access under CC BY-NC-ND license.
Selection and peer review under responsibility of the organizers of the 2013 International Conference on Computational Science
doi:10.1016/j.procs.2013.05.448

2596

Jose M. Sola-Morena et al. / Procedia Computer Science 18 (2013) 2595 – 2598

The purpose of this paper is to give a summarised overview and state-of-the-art of the subject, as ﬁrst step
for future contributions in next-generation methods and scenarios, based on this preliminary research of existing
methods. In a second part, we perform and simulate diﬀerent scenarios as well as test several parameters inﬂuencing Web energy consumption. The rest of this paper is organised as follows: in the Section 2 the current energy
aware Web proposals are mentioned, reviewed and compared. Based on some of the works considered, we have
designed some simulation scenarios that are described in Section 3, results included.
2. State of the art
The ﬁrst recent and relevant approach in energy savings was introduced by Pinheiro et al. in [3], that turns
on and oﬀ the servers of a cluster depending on the instantaneous needs of the system. The results show that the
energy saving is relatively small for high loads, while for low loads, the energy saving percentage obtained by this
proposal is up to almost the 80%. However, its main drawback is delay introduced when turning on and oﬀ the
servers (around 45 seconds and 100 seconds, respectively).
Another relevant energy saving method is the Dynamic Voltage Scaling (DVS) where the voltage of the server’s
processor is increased or decreased depending on a diﬀerent factor, i.e. on the load sent to this server. This method
was presented in [4] by Horvarth et al that applies two diﬀerent types of load to the tests obtaining a reduction
of around 30% of power consumption. Again, the maximum savings are obtained for low workloads. In [5],
Bertini et al. introduce a model that combines the ON/OFF switching and the DVS method in a load-balancing
web cluster architecture where the frequency for the CPU speed adjustments change depending on the load. They
succeed in maintain a good QoS with up to four times less power consumption than an equivalent scenario with no
power saving methods implemented. Like in the previous model, a load balancer is introduced by Enokido et al.
in [6]. However, in this case, a Peer to Peer (P2P) network is considered, which means that each peer computer in
the system can play both roles (server and client). Enokido et al. presented three diﬀerent types of load balancing
methods: Round Robin, Computation Laxity Based (CLB), which basically works calculating how long it will
take for a server to perform an action and chooses the best one, and Power Consumption Laxity Based (PCLB),
which assigns the diﬀerent incoming tasks to the best server in terms of energy saving criteria. The results showed
that PCLB obtains the lowest power consumption.
Santana et al. [7] also implemented load balancing but considered three types of prediction methods: Performance Governor (PG), which is a Linux system approach that works with all the servers at the maximum
frequency, i.e there is no power management, On-demand Governor (OG), which implements DVS depending on
the load, and ﬁnally, Optimised ON/OFF (OOO), which is a forecasting method implementing ON/OFF servers
switching and DVS. The three mentioned approaches are compared to Holt Linear Method (HLM) load prediction
method (the one that is ﬁnally considered as the best one). Bolla et al. were one of the ﬁrst talking about load prediction methods in [1], implementing and analysing a performance test on software routers, bringing the diﬀerent
components of the software router to diﬀerent states (i.e working frequencies). These frequencies are a discrete
set of values that have to be common to all the components of the software router. Taking into account that the
consumption of an idle core is around half of the consumption of an active one, he uses as the prediction method
a ”time” division consisting in taking diﬀerent time slices on the same day based on statistics from the past. In the
test performed, four diﬀerent frequencies were used, and the results showed that with this approach, an average
of 30% of the power could be saved (as usual, for high incoming loads, the power consumption management
becomes more diﬃcult).
A relevant information that can be extracted from [1] is the fact that the idle status is around half of the
maximum active status in terms of power. This means that a server which is turned on and ready to be used, but
not being used at all (in idle status), will consume this 50% (approx) of its maximum consumption (when the CPU
utilisation is 100%). This assumption, that is also introduced in [8] and [9], is considered for our performance
tests.

2597

Jose M. Sola-Morena et al. / Procedia Computer Science 18 (2013) 2595 – 2598

3. An implementation of an energy metric in OPNET Modeler
3.1. Power consumption variable deﬁnition in OPNET
OPNET Modeler [10] is a powerful software tool for network simulation. In this implementation, we will
test a Web server cluster and measure the power performance for diﬀerent loads and conﬁgurations. The ﬁrst and
most important part of this work consists on the deﬁnition of a parameter that allows us to estimate the power
consumption of the diﬀerent servers.
As introduced in the previous part, we consider the assumption for the power consumption when CPU is idle is
around half of the maximum, and then it increases linearly with the CPU utilisation. Considering this relationship
and having the CPU utilisation monitor already deﬁned as an statistic variable in OPNET Modeler, we focused
on the exact server we are going to use, which is a Sun Blade 1000 whose power supply is 670W and power
consumption when idle is 288W that, considering an ineﬃciency of around 15% of the power supply converter,
we came to 569.5W of maximum power and 288W if idle.
Considering PW as the power consumed by the computer and UCPU the percentage of utilisation of the CPU,
we compute the α factor (based in the results presented in [9] and [8]). The following expression is implemented
in the simulator: PW = 288 + α · UCPU . The α factor is obtained based on the linear dependence of the maximum
value of the power consumption and the power that is consumed when the CPU utilisation is next to 0%: α =
569.5−288
= 2.815. This means that when CPU is not being used (0%) the total consumption is 288W, while for a
100
maximum CPU utilisation (100%), the total consumption, for such a type of server used, will be 288W+281.5W,
i.e. the 569.5W that we deﬁned as the maximum.
3.2. OPNET testbed description
Based on the related work studied and presented before, the criteria for the conﬁguration deﬁnition was a
trade of between simplicity and scalability, in order to be able to include new elements and measures in future
work. The testbed is composed of 100 workstations that act as Web users and send their requests to a switch
that performs the load balancing when more than one Web server is connected to it. The conﬁguration includes a
database server as the traﬃc includes dynamic requests. Since the ﬁnal goal is to measure the power consumption
of the servers depending on the workload, and we will keep this workload ﬁxed, the aim is to reproduce several
scenarios starting from only one server up to four servers connected to the database. As it is introduced in [11],
the database will be converted in the bottleneck of the scenario when the workload increases. However, it is out
of the scope of this paper to consider database replication in this case. In order to be accurate and reliable, we
have executed the simulation for ten diﬀerent seeds in each of the scenarios described in previous section. For
each hour-period simulation, the ﬁrst values have been discarded to avoid strong transient variations. The 95th
percentile is computed for remaining values obtained of each metric and simulation.
3.3. Results

1500
500

1000

60
50

CPU Utilisation (%)

Power Consumption (W)

70

80

2000

per server
whole system

20

20

500

30

40

1500
1000

Power Consumption (W)

60
50
40
30

CPU Utilisation (%)

70

80

2000

per server
whole system

1

2

3
Number of servers

Fig. 1. CPU Utilisation vs.
Number of Servers

4

1

2

3
Number of servers

Fig. 2. Power Consumption
vs. Number of Servers

4

1

2

3
Number of servers

Fig. 3. CPU Utilisation (80%)
vs. Number of Servers

4

1

2

3
Number of servers

Fig. 4. Power Consumption
(CPUs at 80%) vs. Number
of Servers

4

2598

Jose M. Sola-Morena et al. / Procedia Computer Science 18 (2013) 2595 – 2598

The goal is to display a curve comparing the CPU utilisation and the total power consumption of the system
depending on the number of servers introduced. Considering Figures 1 and 2, we can observe a general reduction
of the CPU utilisation and power consumption when increasing the number of servers. However, the global power
consumption of the system increases.
To illustrate with an example how could this work be used for, we will perform an analysis on a speciﬁc
constrained scenario. If we set the CPU utilisation to 80% in every server (to use this criteria for turning ON/OFF,
for example), and we estimate the total power consumption by using the new variable created in OPNET, the
results show us a total consumption of around 2000W. As it is depicted in Figures 3 and 4, it is important to notice
that increasing the power consumption just 25% (from 1500 to 2000 Watts), the Web server system increases its
utilisation more than double (from 40% to 80%). Hence, the decision of having the servers at 80% of their CPU
utilisation is a convenient decision in terms of power saving in the system.
4. Conclusion
Power consumption in Web systems is a new global concern due to the new high quality Internet services as
well as to the increase of users. For that reason, and once proved that keeping the actual tendencies, the situation
will not be sustainable any more in the future, optimisation will be deﬁnitively required. In this paper, we have
reviewed the current state of the art of the subject, and we have deﬁned an scenario in the software simulation tool
OPNET Modeler, introducing a new statistic that did not exist before: the power consumption, based on some
research that showed a direct relation between CPU utilisation and power consumption on the servers. We have
shown that for the same load (number of workstations asking for Web service), the increase of servers (to balance
this load) implies a lower utilisation of each CPU, but a global increase of the power consumption, due mainly
to the fact that the consumption of the system with CPU in idle state is already close to 45% of the maximum
power consumption. The main conclusion then, based on the simulations performed, is that the number of servers
providing service in such a Web service scenarios do not only depend on the quality of service desired, but may
take power consumption into consideration as well, and try to reach a good trade-of between those two factors:
QoS and Power Consumption.
Acknowledgements
This work has been partially funded by the Spanish Ministry of Education and Science under Grant TIN201123889.
References
[1] R. Bolla, R. Bruschi, F. Davoli, Energy-aware resource adaptation for next-generation network equipment, in: Global Telecommunications Conference, 2009. GLOBECOM 2009. IEEE, 2009.
[2] R. Bolla, R. Bruschi, F. Davoli, F. Cucchietti, Energy eﬃciency in the future internet: A survey of existing approaches and trends in
energy-aware ﬁxed network infrastructures, IEEE Communications Surveys and Tutorials 13(2) (2011) 223–244.
[3] E. Pinheiro, R. Bianchini, E. V. Carrera, T. Heath, Compilers and operating systems for low power, Kluwer Academic Publishers Norwell,
MA, USA, 2003, Ch. Dynamic Cluster Reconﬁguration for Power and Performance, pp. 75–93.
[4] T. Horvath, T. Abdelzaher, K. Skadron, X. Liu, Dynamic voltage scaling in multitier web servers with end-to-end delay control, IEEE
Transactions on Computers 56(4) (2007) 444–458.
[5] L. Bertini, J. C. B. Leite, D. Moss, Power optimization for dynamic conﬁguration in heterogeneous web server clusters, Journal of
Systems and Software 83(4) (2010) 585–598.
[6] T. Enokido, A. Aikebaier, M. Takizawa, A model for reducing power consumption in peer-to-peer systems, IEEE Systems Journal 4
(2010) 221–229.
[7] C. Santana, J. C. Leite, D. Moss, Power management by load forecasting in web server clusters, Cluster Computing 14(4) (2011) 471–
481.
[8] X. Fan, W.-D. Weber, L. A. Barroso, Power provisioning for a warehouse-sized computer, in: Proc. of the 34th annual international
symposium on Computer architecture (ISCA ’07), 2007.
[9] G. Chen, W. He, J. Liu, S. Nath, L. Rigas, L. Xiao, F. Zhao, Energy-aware server provisioning and load dispatching for connectionintensive internet services, in: in proc. of the 5th USENIX Symposium on Networked Systems Design and Implementation (NSDI’08),
2008.
[10] OPNET technologies, Inc., http://www.opnet.com/ (2011).
[11] A. Caniﬀ, L. Lu, N. Mi, L. Cherkasova, E. Smirni, Fastrack for taming burstiness and saving power in multi-tiered systems, in: in proc.
of 22nd International Teletraﬃc Congress (ITC22), 2010.

