Available online at www.sciencedirect.com

Procedia Computer Science 18 (2013) 651 – 660

2013 International Conference on Computational Science

CA-GIS model for dynamic simulation of commercial activity
development by the combination of ANN and Bayesian
probability
Shwu-Ting Leea, Chih-Wen Wub*, Tsu-Chiang Leic
a

Department of Architecture, Feng-Chia University, Taichung 40724, Taiwan
Ph. D. Program in Civil and Hydraulic Engineering, Feng-Chia University, Taichung 40724, Taiwan
c
Department of Urban Planning & Spatial Information, Feng-Chia University, Taichung 40724, Taiwan
b

Abstract
Applying Artificial Intelligence (AI) techniques with Geographic Information System (GIS) in urban-related research is a
surging trend recently. Artificial Neural Network (ANN) and Cellular Automata (CA) are two AI techniques discussed in
this paper. ANN is known for its perceptron logic and CA is known for its dynamic evolvement mechanism. This paper
offers the combination of ANN and Bayesian probability- named BAANN process in order to integrate the advantages of
ANN and CA. BAANN can transfer ANN outcome into the transition probability of target pattern, and cooperate with CA
for operating dynamic simulation based on the perceptron logic. A specific experimental material is a kind of urban
commercial phenomenon, which is the development of night market. The experimental CA model is implemented on GISnamed CA-GIS model. CA-GIS model based on BAANN can perform high accuracy simulation and comprehensively
evaluate land commercial value of night market. Additionally, the experiment of dynamic simulation can find out which
places are the originally developing spots, and which zones would be sensitive to the situation of economic fluctuation.
© 2013
2013 The
The Authors.
Authors. Published
©
Published by
by Elsevier
Elsevier B.V.
B.V.
Selection and
and/or
peer-review
under
responsibility
of the
organizers
of 2013
the 2013
International
Conference
on Computational
Selection
peer
review under
responsibility
of the
organizers
of the
International
Conference
on Computational
Science
Keywords: Geographic Information System, Artificial Neural Network, Bayesian Probability, Cellular Automata, Dynamic Simulation

1. Introduction
Establishing simulation model for deeply exploring knowledge is the important method for environmental
research. Since the enhancement of personal computer devices and the promotion of Geographic Information

* Corresponding author. Tel.: +886-098-829-4618.
E-mail address: navyer0412@hotmail.com; p9741686@fcu.edu.tw

1877-0509 © 2013 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. Open access under CC BY-NC-ND license.
Selection and peer review under responsibility of the organizers of the 2013 International Conference on Computational Science
doi:10.1016/j.procs.2013.05.229

652

Shwu-Ting Lee et al. / Procedia Computer Science 18 (2013) 651 – 660

System (GIS), computation simulation has become one of main trends in urban-related research [1]. There are
two purposes of using simulation model for discovering urban-related research; one is for exploring
environmental factor knowledge, and another is for predicting future development [2-3]. The application of
GIS with Artificial Intelligence (AI) algorithm can assist researcher in accomplishing these purposes efficiently.
Artificial Neural Network (ANN) and Cellular Automata (CA) are two kinds of AI technique mainly discussed
in this paper.
ANN is a kind of AI algorithm which can imitate the recognition ability of human brain. Through the
application of ANN, researcher can easily define expert knowledge by perceptron logic. There are many
advantages of ANN, such as endurance of data noise, optimization and approximation, data-driven technique
and great prediction ability [2-5]. Many comprehensive ANN techniques have been applied in various domains,
like land use changes, regional labor market and regional economy [6-8]. The most important property of ANN
is that, the pattern recognition logic of ANN can establish essential knowledge for explaining the causality
about what kinds of factor could make target pattern happen. However, the performance of ANN model
basically is a kind of time static result; it s difficult to use ANN model to display dynamic and stochastic
demonstration.
CA is another AI technique which is originated from the concept of how to imitate the continual growth of
similar cells. The most important feature of CA is the mechanism of displaying units' development. CA has
been largely applied in urban transition research because of the characteristics of dynamic, fractal, bottom-up,
flexible and non-linear complexity [9-12]. In the traditional operation of CA model, it s necessary to set some
relationships and
rules for driving evolvement process, and these rules are often based on
pedagogic approaches. Therefore even having high performance of CA model compared with reality, it's still
hard to figure out the causality of target pattern development.
The main purpose in this paper is that, operating the dynamic model of CA with the pattern recognition logic
of ANN in order to derive advantages to simulate urban phenomenon. The crucial matter is how to transfer
ANN outcome into probability data in order to display the transition probability of target pattern, and using
Bayesian probability can conquer this task. The combination of ANN and Bayesian probability- named
BAANN , can define each sample s transition probability of target pattern according to its ANN perceptron
logic.
The experimental material is a kind of urban commercial phenomenon in Taiwan; that is the development of
night market. The experimental model is a sort of CA model which is established by GIS technique- named
CA-GIS model. CA-GIS model can enhance the efficiency of collecting sample data and demonstrating
simulation result. Our intention is to simulate the commercial activity development of night market in order to
display the advantages of CA-GIS model based on BAANN process.
2. Experimental techniques and methodologies
2.1. The properties of ANN
ANN has come a long way but it s still popular to use in many disciplines today. In general, ANN is a kind
of methodology which can imitate human recognition of certain phenomenon or pattern; that is well known for
perceptron logic. For research, some assumed factors are like recipients which can receive lots of stimulation
from outside, then through a series of neural process to produce pattern classification result [13-14]. As Fig. 1
.
shows, ANN normally consists of three components; those are
ANN can classify target pattern according to the record of reality by adjusting ANN weight values of each
. In fact, the iteration process
factor, and this process is known as training
from input layer to output layer actually is a kind of regression process; thus ANN outcome is the regression
value of each sample [15].

Shwu-Ting Lee et al. / Procedia Computer Science 18 (2013) 651 – 660

Fig. 1. The structure of ANN; ANN consists of input layer, hidden layer and output layer.

2.2. ANN with Bayesian probability- BAANN process
The performance of ANN model is often regarded as time static result. But if ANN outcome can be
transferred into the probability of target pattern, ANN should be able to conduct dynamic performance.
Bayesian probability is suitable for this work. Generally, Bayesian probability is originated from the
transformation of conditional probability [16]. Using Bayesian probability, we can calculate the probability of
target event (or target pattern) with the given observation value of another event. In other words, we can derive
the possibility of a hypothesis that is given by the observed evidence. Fig. 2 is the process of transferring ANN
outcome into Bayesian probability (BAANN process).

Fig. 2. The BAANN process for transferring ANN outcome into the transition probability of target pattern

The prior step of BAANN is ANN procedure; each sample can be calculated as ANN outcome by equation
(1) which is a completed ANN model already finished its training step. Where Yj is the outcome value of j-th
sample generated from ANN output layer; where Xi is i-th factor value; where Wij is the ANN weight value for
calculating the sub-outcome of the path from Xi to output Yj; where is a transfer function; where is a bias
value.

653

654

Shwu-Ting Lee et al. / Procedia Computer Science 18 (2013) 651 – 660

Yj

n

Wij X i

(1)

i 1

The second step of BAANN is applying Bayesian probability to convert each sample from ANN outcome
into the transition probability of target pattern. Equation (2) is the basic form of the definition of Bayesian
probability. where P( TP ) is the prior probability of target event (or target pattern) which is recorded before
considering observation value of Yj; where P(Yj ) is the marginal likelihood of the observation value Yj (ANN
outcome); where P(Yj | TP ) / P(Yj ) is the term of standardized likelihood, which is the impact of evidence that the
observation value of Yj provides for probability TP.

P Tp | Y j

P Y j | Tp
P Yj

P Tp

(2)

Through BAANN process, each sample can derive the transition probability of target pattern ( P( TP | Yj ) )
based on its ANN outcome ( Yj ). This transition probability stands for each sample has how much possibility to
make target pattern happen. The transition probability produced by BAANN can be cooperated with CA
mechanism to perform dynamic simulation.
2.3. CA and GIS: interaction model in spatial database
CA is also a kind of AI technique; it s originally developed by Martin Gardner in 1970 [17]. The main
concept of CA is the mechanism which can imitate lots of similar cells sprawling. Many urban-related
researchers have considered that the manner of urban development might be similar with the sprawl of cells,
and that is a sort of urban modeling theory which has characteristics of bottom-up, dynamic, flexible and nonlinear complexity [9-12]. Tradition CA model must have been driven by following basic rule settings;
formation of cells, state of cells, neighborhood and transition rules. However, these rule settings might be
. Therefore, many relaxations of CA rule settings have
particularly limited by the influence of
been implemented on large amount of urban simulation research to date [11-12]. Our issue is that many CA
rule settings essentially belong to a sort of agent-based technique; and there is still rare of CA rule settings
which can reflect the causality that is derived from the relationship of target pattern and factor assumption. The
cooperation of BAANN process can have the advantage of this purpose.
GIS can be seen as a kind of spatial database technique. The most important advantage of GIS is the
data and numeric data [18]. This advantage can effectively assist researcher in
combination of
recoding samples and demonstrating experimental result. Many researchers have tried to integrate CA unit
formation into GIS platform (CA-GIS) in order to operate evolutionary simulation which can figure out what
kinds of rule or attribute can affect whole geo-configuration [19-21]. We use CA-GIS as an experimental
model to conduct the work of collecting and demonstrating data. Plus, the objective geo-configuration of this
paper can be reproduced by lots of units (cells) for embodying bottom-up, dynamic and flexible properties. In
our CA-GIS model, the CA rule setting about judging cell state is handed over to BAANN process, because
BAANN process can handle more environmental attributes than traditional CA rule settings.
3. Experimental material: the spatial activity of Taiwanese night market
The experimental objective is the Feng-Chia night market, Taichung, Taiwan. The Feng-Chia night market
is a typical Taiwanese night market which is developed along the streets around Feng-Chia University [22-23].

Shwu-Ting Lee et al. / Procedia Computer Science 18 (2013) 651 – 660

This kind of urban commercial phenomenon is really suitable for our experimental purpose, because the
development of night market is a sort of urban phenomenon which has the properties of complexity,
uncertainty, flexible and dynamic. The experimental target is to simulate some locations on the streets of the
Feng-Chia night market have been occupied by informally commercial activity. The definition of informally
commercial activity in this paper is that various commercial activities or vendors occupied on the locations of
be allowed to do any kinds of business by
arcade, sidewalk or road like Fig. 3, because these location
Taiwanese regulations. The simulation area is focused on the streets of the Feng-Chia night market, and the
target pattern is the location on the street occupied by informally commercial activity. In order to exactly define
each location, all the streets have been transformed into lattice formation in our CA-GIS model (Fig. 4), and
each lattice represents one grid-sample.

Fig. 3. Various informally commercial activities (vendors) usually occupy on the streets of Taiwanese night market.

Fig. 4. The target pattern distribution recorded from reality; blue lattices are the grid-samples occupied by informally commercial activity,
and they are the target pattern.

The number of grid-samples is 10940, and that contains 1717 occupied grid-samples and 9223 unoccupied
grid-samples. Each grid-sample is described by several environmental factors which derived from some related
literatures in order to calculate the transition probability of target pattern by BAANN [24-26]. The descriptions
of each factor are listed in Table 1.

655

656

Shwu-Ting Lee et al. / Procedia Computer Science 18 (2013) 651 – 660

Table 1. The descriptions of factor setting
Factor denotation

Description

Grid Location (GL)

The effect of different locations on the streets having different levels of informally
commercial attraction.

Intersection Factor (IntF)

The distance value measured from one recorded grid-sample to the nearest street
intersection.

Street Width (SW)

The width of one street which located by one recorded grid-sample.

Background Building Width (BBW)

The width of one building which adjoined with one recorded grid-sample.

Core zone-1(C1)

The distance value measured from one recorded grid-sample to core zone-1; the core zone1 is the gate of Feng-Chia University.

Core zone-2(C2)

The distance value measured from one recorded grid-sample to core zone-2; the core zone2 is the location of first bustling street intersection.

Core zone-3(C3)

The distance value measured from one recorded grid-sample to core zone-3; the core zone3 is the location of second bustling street intersection.

There are two experimental purposes that need to be demonstrated. One is demonstrating CA-GIS model
with the result of the transition probability in order to evaluate potentially commercial value in each location;
another is implementing dynamic simulation in order to figure out which places are the originally developing
spots of night market, and find out which zones would be sensitive to the situation of economic fluctuation.
4. Experimental operation and result discussions
4.1. Evaluation of land commercial value
Through BAANN process can transfer each grid-sample from ANN outcome into the transition probability
of target pattern according to equation (1) and (2). Fig. 5 is the result of CA-GIS model for demonstrating the
distribution of the transition probability. For simplifying this display, whole distribution has been divided into
four levels. The darker grid-sample refers to this location has higher possibility to attract informally
commercial activity. Table 2 shows the detail of each transition probability level, and the highest transition
probability is 75.68%. This experimental result can evaluate the location value of commercial attraction, and
higher commercial attraction often corresponds with more valuable land price or rent.

Fig. 5. The distribution of the transition probability by CA-GIS model

657

Shwu-Ting Lee et al. / Procedia Computer Science 18 (2013) 651 – 660

Table 2. The detail of transition probability levels
Transition probability level

P<25%

25%<=P<50%

50%<=P<75%

75%<=P

The number of grid-samples

7981

1159

1681

119

Average transition probability

3.21%

36.35%

63.67%

75.42%

4.2. Dynamic simulation demonstration
Depending on the result of the transition probability, we only have to decide how many grids should be
transformed in each stage (the number of transition grids), and then the dynamic simulation can be operated.
There is a repetition which consists of one increasing stage and one decreasing stage, and we implement 500
times of repetitions for performing 1000 stages as the result of dynamic simulation. The transition targets in the
increasing stage are void grids (unoccupied grids), which are the candidates could be changed from void state
into occupied state; in contrast, the transition targets are occupied grids in the decreasing stage.
In each increasing stage, we randomly decide a threshold value from the interval of 0~1, and then the
than
number of transition grids is decided by how many candidate grids have the transition probability
this threshold value. Plus, the maximum number of transition grids in each increasing stage can't be allowed to
over 300. In each decreasing stage, the threshold value is randomly decided from the interval of 0~0.4, and then
the number of transition grids is decided by how many candidate grids have the transition probability
than this threshold value. Plus, the minimum number of transition grids in each decreasing stage can't be
allowed to fewer than 20.
Fig. 6(a) shows the simulation performance of 1000 stages. We should notice that the stable fluctuation
phase approximately occur after 40th stage, but this can be modified by the maximum limited number of
transition grids in the increasing stage. The average number of occupied grids is 1719.3, and that is near the
number of occupied grids recorded from reality; this average number of occupied grids can be modified by the
range of threshold value in the decreasing stage. The performance of simulation accuracy after 40th stage
displays on Fig. 6(b); the average simulation accuracy is 84.7%, which can be seen as a significant result of
dynamic simulation. Fig. 7 displays a part of serial CA-GIS results for demonstrating the simulation process of
informally commercial sprawl within research area.

Fig. 6. (a) Dynamic simulation performance; (b) The performance of simulation accuracy in the stable fluctuation phase (after 40th stage)

658

Shwu-Ting Lee et al. / Procedia Computer Science 18 (2013) 651 – 660

Fig. 7. A series of dynamic simulation of informally commercial activity

We can find out which places are the originally developing spots by observing the result of early stage
simulation. Fig. 8 is the CA-GIS result of 5th stage; the dotted circles display the originally developing spots of
informally commercial activity. In addition, we can analyze the changing rate of occupied grids on each street
section in order to figure out which street sections would be sensitive. Table 3 is the analysis result of the
average changing rate of occupied grids; we can check this table with Fig. 9 to figure out the sensitivity of each
street section. Since informally commercial activity of night market is a kind of phenomenon which is easily
affected by economic situation, therefore this part of experimental result can evaluate which zones would be
sensitive to the situation of economic fluctuation.

Fig. 8. The originally developing spots of informally commercial activity

Shwu-Ting Lee et al. / Procedia Computer Science 18 (2013) 651 – 660

Table 3. The average changing rate of occupied grids on each street section
Street section

Average changing rate of occupied grids

Sensitivity rank

Street 1

0.3475

4

Street 2

0.4169

2

Street 3

0.4521

1

Street 4

0.3876

3

Street 5

0.3421

5

Street 6

0.2518

7

Street 7

0.2832

6

Street 8

0.2361

9

Street 9

0.249

8

Fig. 9. The presentation of the average changing rate on each street section

5. Conclusion
The main purpose discussed in this paper is how to combine the advantages of CA and ANN techniques.
ANN with perceptron logic can figure out which factors could be crucial to recognize target pattern by the
performance of pattern classification; CA with unit evolving mechanism can perform dynamic simulation for
outlining the sprawling development of target pattern. In order to establish CA evolvement model with pattern
recognition logic of ANN, we apply Bayesian probability to transfer ANN outcome into the transition
probability of target pattern. Once having the transition probability, we only have to decide the number of
transition grids in each stage for operating dynamic simulation.
Through CA-GIS model with BAANN process, we can perform high accuracy simulation of night market
development. Depending on the distribution of transition probability, we can comprehensively evaluate land
commercial value in our research area. As the performance of dynamic simulation, we can find out two places
are the originally developing spots of informally commercial activity according to the simulation performance
in early stage. Additionally, we can find out which street sections would be sensitive to the situation of
economic fluctuation by the average changing rate of occupied grids on each street section.

659

660

Shwu-Ting Lee et al. / Procedia Computer Science 18 (2013) 651 – 660

This research doesn't consider the impact of time-changed factor in order to simplify our dynamic simulation
operation. However, time-changed factor still can be added in advanced research. Adding time-changed factor
into CA-GIS model with BAANN process can digging out more factor information for understanding the
complicated development of night market.
References
[1] M. Batty. Models in planning: technological imperatives and changing roles. International Journal of Applied Earth Observation and
Geoinformation 2001;3:252 266.
[2] M. M. Fischer. Computational neural networks: a new paradigm for spatial analysis. Environment and Planning A 1998;30:1873 1891.
[3] S. Openshaw. Neural network, genetic, and fuzzy logic models of spatial interaction. Environment and Planning A 1998;30:1857 1872.
[4] G. P. Zhang. An investigation of neural networks for linear time-series forecasting. Computers & Operations Research 2001;28:1183
1202.
[5] R. Setiono, W. K. Leow, and J. M. Zurada. Extraction of rules from artificial neural networks for nonlinear regression. IEEE
transactions on neural networks 2002;13:564 577.
[6] B. C. Pijanowski, D. G. Brown, B. A. Shellito, and G. A. Manik. Using neural networks and GIS to forecast land use changes: a Land
Transformation Model. Computers, Environment and Urban Systems 2002;26:553 575.
[7] K. D. Karatzas and S. Kaltsatos. Air pollution modelling with the aid of computational intelligence methods in Thessaloniki, Greece.
Simulation Modelling Practice and Theory 2007;15:1310 1319.
[8] R. Patuelli, S. Longhi, A. Reggiani, and P. Nijkamp. Neural networks and genetic algorithms as forecasting tools: a case study on
German regions. Environment and Planning B: Planning and Design 2008;35:701 722.
[9] F. Wu. Calibration of stochastic cellular automata: the application to rural-urban land conversions. International Journal of
Geographical Information Science 2002;16:795 818.
[10] C. M. d. Almeida, M. Batty, A. M. V. Monteiro, G. Câmara, B. S. Soares-Filho, G. C. Cerqueira, and C. L. Pennachin. Stochastic
cellular automata modeling of urban land use dynamics: empirical development and estimation. Computers, Environment and Urban
Systems 2003;27:481 509.
[11] I. Santé, A. M. García, D. Miranda, and R. Crecente. Cellular automata models for the simulation of real-world urban processes: A
review and analysis. Landscape and Urban Planning 2010;96:108 122.
[12] R. B. Thapa and Y. Murayama. Urban growth modeling of Kathmandu metropolitan region, Nepal. Computers, Environment and
Urban Systems 2011;35:25 34.
[13] C. M. Bishop. Neural networks for pattern recognition. 1 rd ed. New York: Oxford University; 1995.
[14] R. O. Duda, P. E. Hart, and D. G. Stork. Pattern Classification. 2 rd ed. New York: Wiley; 2001.
[15] C. Marzban. Basic Statistics and Basic AI: Neural Networks. In S. E. Haupt, A. Pasini, and C. Marzban, editors. Artificial Intelligence
Methods in the Environmental Sciences, Berlin Heidelberg: Springer; 2009, p. 15 47
[16] P.-N. Tan, M. Steinbach, and V. Kumar. Introduction to Data Mining. 1 rd ed. Boston: Addison-Wesley; 2005.
[17] M. Gardner. MATHEMATICAL GAMES- The fantastic combinations of John Conway's new solitaire game "life". Scientific
American 1970;223:120 123.
[18] P. Bolstad. Gis Fundamentals: A First Text on Geographic Information Systems. ed. Minn.: Eider Press 2008.
[19] M. Batty, Y. Xie, and Z. Sun. Modeling urban dynamics through GIS-based cellular automata. Computers, Environment and Urban
Systems 1999;23:205 233.
[20] D. Stevens, S. Dragicevic, and K. Rothley. iCity: A GIS CA modelling tool for urban planning and decision making. Environmental
Modelling & Software 2007;22:761 773.
-based cellular automata model to
[21] S. Yass
characterize forest fire behaviour. Ecological Modelling 2008;210:71 84.
[22] A.-T. Hsieh and J. Chang. Shopping and Tourist Night Markets in Taiwan. Tourism Management 2006;27:138 145.
[23] J. Chang and A. T. Hsieh. Leisure motives of eating out in night markets. Journal of Business Research 2006;59:1276 1278.
[24] D. J. Timothy and G. Wall. Selling to tourists: Indonesian street vendors. Annals of Tourism Research 1997;24:322 340.
[25] R. Bromley. Street vending and public policy: a global review. International Journal of Sociology and Social Policy 2000;20:1 28.
[26] Y. A. Yatmo. Perception of street vendors as 'out of place' urban elements at day time and night time. Journal of Environmental
Psychology 2009;29:467 476.

