Available online at www.sciencedirect.com

Procedia Computer Science 18 (2013) 1382 – 1391

2013 International Conference on Computational Science

MetFlexo: an Automated Simulation of Realistic H1-NMR
Spectra
Zeinab Atieha , Karsten Suhreb , Halima Bensmaila
a Qatar

Computing Research Institute, Qatar Foundation, P.O Box 5825, Doha, Qatar
b Weill Cornell Medical College in Qatar

Abstract
The development of the ’omics’ technologies such as transcriptomics, proteomics and metabolomics has made it possible
to realize some of the goals of systems biology, where biological systems are interrogated at diﬀerent levels of biochemical
activity (such as gene expression, protein activity and/or metabolite concentration). Metabolomics deals with the metabolome
that represents the complete set of small-molecule metabolites. Even though metabolomics can be thought of as a relatively
young method, it is nevertheless a rapidly growing one that has the potential to reveal the molecular mechanism of certain
diseases. H1 nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectroscopy is commonly used in the metabolic proﬁling of bioﬂuids as it
has the potential to detect all proton-containing metabolites. Metabolites in bioﬂuids are in dynamic equilibrium with those in
cells and tissues, so their metabolic proﬁle reﬂects changes in the state of an organism due to disease or environmental eﬀects.
Results: MetFlexo is as an easy-to-use C package that allows the simulation of datasets of 1 H-NMR spectra in order to
test data analysis techniques, hypotheses and experimental designs. The idea is based on transforming statistical parameters
of metabolites (shifts, couplings, concentrations and magnetic ﬁeld) to an NMR spectrum using chemical-physics theory.
Our method helps in the deconvolution of NMR spectra and in a better determination of metabolite concentrations, as these
concentrations are key in detecting diseases and abnormalities. Unlike others, this program generates NMR spectrum of
bioﬂuids with no limit on magnetic ﬁeld or pH. Thus, our approach is able to produce complex NMR proﬁles with ﬂexible
conditions. It is also simple to implement in C, requires small storage, is easy to compute and uses an independent platform. It
will be available in R and MATLAB soon. The algorithm is freely available upon request to the corresponding author.
©c 2013
Authors. Published
Published by
byElsevier
ElsevierB.V.
B.V. Open access under CC BY-NC-ND license.
2012 The Authors.
Selection and/or
and peer
review under
the 2013 International Conference on Computational
peer-review
underresponsibility
responsibilityofofthe
theorganizers
[OrganiserofName].
Science
Keywords: H1-NMR; chemical shifts; spin-spin couplings; metabolites; eigenvectors.

1. Introduction
Magnetic resonance spectroscopy enables non-invasive in vivo identiﬁcation and quantiﬁcation of metabolites
[1]. These include hormones and other signalling molecules, metabolic intermediates, and secondary metabolites.
Thus metabolomics, or metabolic proﬁling, can instantly give an in-depth proﬁle of the physiology of a sample
under scrutiny. Reliable identiﬁcation and quantiﬁcation of metabolites is very important for disease detection,
as there is a wide variety of diseases where key changes in metabolites have been deduced e.g. cancer, diabetes,
∗ Corresponding author. Tel.: +0-974-4454-0195 ; fax: +0-974-4454-0160.
E-mail address: hbensmail@qf.org.qa.

1877-0509 © 2013 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. Open access under CC BY-NC-ND license.
Selection and peer review under responsibility of the organizers of the 2013 International Conference on Computational Science
doi:10.1016/j.procs.2013.05.305

Zeinab Atieh et al. / Procedia Computer Science 18 (2013) 1382 – 1391

1383

hypertension and others [2, 3]. The analysis of signals of bioﬂuids obtained from patients may be performed via
methods which incorporate prior knowledge about the metabolites that contribute to the NMR spectrum. The
individual signals of metabolites may be obtained either from measurements [4] or from ﬁrst principles by using
quantum chemistry methods [5]. They can then be recorded in a metabolite basis set to assist in the analysis of
NMR spectra of bioﬂuids.
The NMR spectrum of a single metabolite is characterized by: i) a number of distinct signals, ii) hyperﬁne
structure of individual signals, and iii) a signal intensity. These characteristics are respectively derived from three
main factors: i) the chemical shifts (δ) which are related to the local magnetic ﬁeld experienced by 1 H nuclei
and are measured in parts per million ppm [6, 7] and, ii) the indirect spin-spin couplings (J) between 1 H nuclei,
which causes the ﬁne splitting of resonance peaks, and iii) the number of 1 H nuclei to which the integrated peak
area is proportional. Once NMR parameters (δ and J) are determined, the NMR spectrum of a metabolite can be
simulated and then the NMR spectrum of a complex mixture can be closely approximated by a linear combination of the individual spectra of the metabolites [8]. The Human Metabolome Database (HMDB) is currently the
most complete and comprehensive curated collection of human metabolites and human metabolism data. It contains records for thousands of metabolites with information gathered from books, journal articles and electronic
databases. In addition to literature-derived data, the HMDB also contains an extensive collection of experimental metabolite concentration data compiled from statistical studies of hundreds of mass spectra (MS) and NMR
metabolomics, performed on urine, blood and cerebrospinal ﬂuid samples.
Chenomx–a commercially available software package [12]–oﬀers a platform for generating, classifying, and interpreting metabolic information obtained from biological ﬂuids using NMR spectroscopy. Chenomx helps in
the identiﬁcation of metabolites with advanced algorithms for analyzing biological samples. Both HMDB and
Chenomx, provide metabolite proﬁles under speciﬁc criteria such as constant pH and constant magnetic ﬁeld B.
Herein we develop an improved algorithm for simulating an NMR spectrum for a mixture of metabolites, representing a bioﬂuid such as urine or blood. We called it MetFlexo. The idea is based on transforming statistical
parameters of metabolites (shifts, couplings, concentrations...) to an NMR spectrum. Unlike some of the few
methods for simulating NMR spectra such as [9], [10] and [11], MetFlexo is not limited by the number of metabolites of the mixture, magnetic ﬁeld frequency at which the NMR spectrum should be displayed, or pH of the
bioﬂuid. It is able to simulate an NMR database comparable to any experimental spectrum at any magnetic ﬁeld
frequency and any pH. The initial input of the program is the known NMR parameters of the metabolites, which
are expanded over diﬀerent magnetic frequencies and pH. This type of study opens the door for more precise
NMR identiﬁcation of metabolites. In this work, we have used NMR parameters given in the HMDB.
We show that our algorithm works as the spectra we derive are similar to the real ones available at the HMDB.
For comparative purposes, we used unprocessed samples from participants in the population-based study KORA
(Cooperative Health Research in the Region of Augsburg) [13] and processed samples provided by Chenomx.
MetFlexo is written in C, with a graphical interface allowing the user to alter and change processing parameters.
The software is freely available along with an example of 26 metabolites commonly found in normal human urine
and also with samples from KORA projects.
2. Materials and Methods
Metabolomics, the measurement of metabolite concentrations in various biological system, is a multidisciplinary approach and has recently been one of the most comprehensive research area of all ’omics’. Metabolomics
aims to (a) detect as many metabolites as possible, and (b) identify and annotate metabolites. There are a wide
variety of diseases where key changes in metabolites have been deduced, however, as algorithms and methods are
developed, they need to be reﬁned and validated to ensure results will be biologically meaningful. Nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) metabolomics is a powerful spectroscopy technique used both for analysis on materials
and biological tissues (liquid and solid-state NMR). This technique exploits the interaction between the nuclear
magnetic moments and external magnetic ﬁelds. With this technique it is possible to get extremely accurate structure studies and also underline some dynamical properties of the samples. As stated by Benesi [22], ”There’s an
intimate tie between theory and experiment” (the ability to get useful information from NMR spectroscopy goes

1384

Zeinab Atieh et al. / Procedia Computer Science 18 (2013) 1382 – 1391

hand-in-hand with computer simulations that link the experiments with theory). So it is important to compare
experimental results with computer simulations, especially when dealing with structure studies. In this case it
is fundamental to compare spectrum of unknown materials with numerical simulations of existing metabolites.
Common contemporary practice within the nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) metabolomics work is to evaluate
and validate those novel algorithms on empirical or simulated data. In order to assess a good performance of
competing techniques more exacting tools are required. In fact, to simulate an NMR spectrum of a metabolite, it
is more convenient to analyze the relative energy levels of the molecule. If we have N protons (1 H nuclei) and
each proton has two magnetic states, then r = 2N possible combinations of the spin quantum numbers are found.
The relative Hamiltonian, H, describing this molecule [14] can be given by:
N

H=

N

N

Hn +
n=1

N

i< j j=1

N

N

Hi j =

δIn +
i< j j=1

n=1

Ji j Ii I j
B

(1)

where In is the spin operator of nucleus n, and B is the external magnetic ﬁeld frequency. Equation (1) shows that
the energy depends on NMR parameters (δ and J) as well as magnetic ﬁeld B. The eﬀect of pH of bioﬂuids on
NMR spectra cannot be ignored because it causes peaks to be shifted. Using the Henderson-Hasselbalch equation
[15], the chemical shifts δ of a given metabolite can be expressed as a function of pH as follows:
δ=

ae pH−pKa + b
e pH−pKa + 1

(2)

where a is the acidic limit of δ, b is the basic limit, and pKa is a constant of the metabolite. The parameters
a, b, and pKa can be determined either experimentally or by simulation using quantum chemistry calculations.
Coeﬃcient δ in (2) can be implemented in (1) to make the total energy (pH, B)–dependent. The problem lies
in states ψi and ψ j , which are equivalent. We cannot diﬀerentiate which nucleus has spin-up and which one has
spin-down. This problem is solved by introducing the mixed total wavefunction. Without going into details, and
using the variational method where the maximum and minimum values for E are calculated, the energies of N
protons molecule or r = 2N states can be all gathered in a single determinant.

|Ω − E| =

ψ1 |H|ψ1 − E
ψ1 |H|ψ2
..
ψ1 |H|ψr

ψ1 |H|ψ2
ψ2 |H|ψ2 − E
...
...

...
...
...

ψ1 |H|ψr
(3)
ψr |H|ψr

E

where each element of the energy matrix Ω, is the inner product of the wavefunctions ψi and ψ j corresponding
to state i and j (the spin wavefunction ψi is assigned to the nucleus with Iz = 1/2 and the wavefunction ψ j to
the nucleus with Iz = −1/2 for example. Diagonalizing Ω leads to the energy values and eigenvectors. Once
the energies are determined, we can calculate the energies of emission i.e. the diﬀerence in E between states
where the transition is allowed. Proceeding in that way, the NMR spectrum for the molecule under study can be
obtained. The observed peaks in an NMR spectrum are determined by the selection rule. This selection rule states
that only one spin can be ﬂipped in any given transition. For an allowed transition, the energy between states i
and j, ti j = ΔEi j = |Ei − E j |, in which Ei and E j are the eigenvalues corresponding to states i and j respectively.
If Ci and C j are the eigenvector elements corresponding to the eigenvalues Ei and E j , then the intensity Ii j of the
transition between states i and j is given by equation (4) [16, 17]

Ii j =

C Et i

CE j

⎛
⎜⎜
= ⎜⎜⎜⎝

r

r

⎞2
⎟⎟
CilC jm flm ⎟⎟⎟⎠

(4)

l=1 m=1

where matrix = ( flm )l;m=1,...,r is the transition matrix where each element flm is equal to 1 for an allowed transition
between states l and m and is equal to 0 for an unallowed transition.

Zeinab Atieh et al. / Procedia Computer Science 18 (2013) 1382 – 1391

1385

The peaks corresponding to an intensity Ii j are commonly modeled by Gaussian or Lorentzian functions. Here we
use a Lorentzian function that is deﬁned by the intensity (Ii j ), the center (ti j ), and the width at half height of the
Lorentzian (Γ/2):
Ii j (x) = Ii j

Γ/2π
(x − ti j )2 + (Γ/2)2

(5)

When all intensities Ii j (x) of allowed transitions are calculated for a metabolite k, the spectrum of this metabolite
is given as a sum over these intensities, namely
2N

2N

i

j

Ik (x) =

Ii j (x)

2.1. Diagonalization
When all individual spectra of metabolites are simulated, they are summed together to produce the overall
spectrum of the mixture, taking into account their concentrations ck and proton numbers Nk . In fact, the observed
intensity of a peak (corresponding to a metabolite k) in a real spectrum is proportional to the concentration ck
of the metabolite, and the number of its protons Nk . For a mixture of K metabolites, the total spectrum of the
mixture can be simulated or approximated via equation (6) (to which one can add the noise ∼ N(0, σ2 )), which
is then smoothed to simulate the conventional preprocessing technique of exponential apodization prior to Fourier
transform.
k=K

I(x) =

Ik (x)ck Nk

(6)

k=1

Each individual metabolite spectrum is sampled at a series of n uniformly spaced data points. The overall spectrum
is made up of pairs of data points, (x, I = (xi , Ii ), i = 1, ..., n, ) where Ii = I(xi ); n is set by the user, and xi deﬁnes a
point on the ppm grid.
Few methods for generating simulated NMR datasets have appeared in the literature to date [9-11]. Most models
(i) have a limited number of metabolites, (ii) make no attempt to reproduce the positions of the signals (under the
inﬂuence of an external magnetic ﬁeld) or (iii) reproduce the positions under the inﬂuence of a pH or magnetic
ﬁeld B changes. Those limitations are justiﬁed by computational time and memory requirements, which increase
rapidly with the number of protons Nk . For example, for a metabolite of 15 protons, the matrix Ω will reach
large dimensions (32768 × 32768) and hence solving (3) and (4) will be very expensive on both levels: time and
memory, and therefore traditional methods that are well established and reliable will perform poorly for practical
simulations as the system size is scaled up.
To do this, we ﬁrst partition the energy matrix Ω into blocks or sub-matrices. Here, we do not introduce submatrices but diagonalize the energy matrix related to the Hamiltonian by changing the basis. The full energy
matrix can be transformed into blocks, only when states of the same total spin are grouped together to form the
same block, so states having the same total spin, the sum of spins of individual protons, are grouped together. We
derive it from noticing that if the two wave functions ψl and ψm have diﬀerent magnetic states, then the matrix
element ψSl |H|ψSm = 0.
Under this assumption, the matrix Ω will have a diagonal block form Ω = diag(Ω1 , . . . , ΩN−1 ) and one is
left with the computation of the eigenvalues and eigenvectors of the matrix within the diagonal using Krylov
approach [24] where each sub-matrix Ωi is the energy matrix corresponding to a magnetic state of the N protons.
The dimension of the sub-matrix Ωi is N!(N − i)!i! for i running from 1 to N − 1; note that these sub-matrices
have diﬀerent dimensions. For example, for N = 15 protons, the largest sub-matrix will have a dimension of
(6435 × 6435) which means it is 80% smaller than the initial full matrix. Now, instead of calculating eigenvalues
and eigenvectors for the whole matrix Ω, they can be calculated for each sub-matrix using the well-known KrylovArnoldi algorithm.

1386

Zeinab Atieh et al. / Procedia Computer Science 18 (2013) 1382 – 1391

2.2. Implementation
In this section, we give a summary of the proposed algorithm. A ﬂow chart and the structure of the algorithm
is given in Figure 1. The code is written in C and we run it on a Unix platform. Note that the algorithm can be
implemented in any environment and plotted graphs can be obtained using any graphical interface.
Algorithm. 1. Input data: NMR parameters of metabolites (δ, J), their acidic basic limits (a, b), pKa which
is a constant for each metabolite, pH of the bioﬂuid or mixture, magnetic ﬁeld frequency B, concentration of
metabolites c if available otherwise are simulated. 2. Calculate δ values of a given metabolite as a function of pH
(Eqn. 2). 3. Divide the energy matrix into sub-matrices to make computation faster and less expensive (Eq. 7) 4.
Calculate the possible energy transitions ΔE as diﬀerences between eigenvalues. 5. Simulate the individual NMR
spectrum of the metabolite taking Lorentzien form of peaks (Eq. 5). 6. Repeat the same steps (2-5) to simulate
the individual NMR spectra of all input metabolites and add linearly all spectra taking the concentration of each
metabolite into account (Eq. 6). 7. Output data: a series of pairs of (x, I) taken at uniformly spaced data points,
and it can be plotted using any graphical interface.

Fig. 1. Flow chart of MetFlexo algorithm and its structure

MetFlexo performs various functions: specifying databases and metabolites to check, incorporating chemical
shifts δ, spin-spin J, magnetic ﬁeld frequency B and concentrations c, simulating their acidic basic limits (a, b),
pKa, of the bioﬂuid or mixture, and creating the ﬁnal mixture spectrum. Details of the algorithm are described
below:
Setting the parameters
Parameters are easily uploaded as a function or by the user.
Input ﬁles
User provides NMR spectra parameters: J, B, PH, a, b, pKa. Parameters a, b, pKa are speciﬁed by user, or can be
simulated from normal distributions a ∼ N(μa , σ2a ), b ∼ N(μb , σ2b ) and pKa ∼ N(μ pKa , σ2pKa ) with user-speciﬁed
mean μa , μb , μ pKa and standard deviation σa , σb , and σ pKa .
Calculate δ
Parameter δ is given by Equation (2), we can also provide the eﬀect of pH on δ and J as:
Δδ =

ae pH−pKa (δa − δ) − δ + δb
ae pH−pKa (δ J − J) − J + Jb
; ΔJ =
pH−pKa
e
+1
e pH−pKa + 1

where δa and Ja are parameters in the acid limit and δb and Jb are parameters in the basic limit.
Simulate a metabolite k

(7)

Zeinab Atieh et al. / Procedia Computer Science 18 (2013) 1382 – 1391

1387

When all intensities Ii j (x) of allowed transitions are calculated for a metabolite k, an individual NMR spectrum of
a metabolite k is simulated taking Lorentzien form of peaks
2N

2N

Ik (x) =

Ii j
i=1 j=1

Γ/2π
(x − ΔEi j )2 + (Γ/2)2

Simulate K metabolites
For a mixture of K metabolites, we simulate the individual NMR spectra of all input metabolites, then we linearly
add all spectra, taking the concentration ck and number of protons Nk , of each metabolite into account as in
equation (6). Normally distributed additive noise ∼ N(0, σ2 ) can be added here to include other artifacts. In case
the concentrations are unknown, ck , for each metabolite, k = 1, .., K, are simulated for the number of replicates
speciﬁed by the user. Individual metabolite concentrations are generated from a truncated normal distribution, ck ∼
N(μ, σ2 )I(ck > 0), using the inverse CDF (cumulative distribution function) method since negative concentrations
are impossible [23]. Here μ is the concentration average and σ is the concentration standard deviation, both are
provided by the user.
Results and Discussion
MetFlexo is tested by simulating the NMR spectrum of a mixture of 30 metabolites, chosen at random, that
are all normally found in signiﬁcant concentrations in human urine. The NMR parameters of the metabolites and
their concentrations are gathered from the HMDB. We note that our list of metabolites and their concentrations do
not form a deﬁnitive description of human urine. The main goal of the work is to show the power of our model.
Figure 2 is a subset of an 1 H NMR spectrum randomly selected from urine samples of 869 male participants
of the SHIP study (Cohort Study of Health in Pomerania, where participants were genotyped using aﬀymetrix
Genome-Wide Human SNP Array 6.0 microarray) from the independent KORA study (”Kooperative Gesundheitsforschung in der Region Augsburg) [13].

Fig. 2. A sample of 1 H NMR spectra at 600 MHz, displaying the characteristic ﬁngerprints of diﬀerent bioﬂuids (reproduced with
permission from Ref. 13)

Figure (3a) is one selected spectrum corresponding to a normal urine of pH 7, and is obtained at 600 MHz.
Figure 3b is the output spectrum simulated for the 30 metabolites at B = 600 MHz and pH=7, and it is compared
to the real human urine spectrum. The comparison between real and simulated spectra shows a good agreement
on both levels: number of peaks and their relative intensities.

1388

Zeinab Atieh et al. / Procedia Computer Science 18 (2013) 1382 – 1391

Fig. 3. (a) A portion of real normal urine sample, (b) a simulated urine sample

Despite this accordance, some diﬀerences result from the incomplete knowledge of the molecules giving rise
to NMR signals.
Because the pH of bioﬂuids varies from one person to another [20], it is very important to be able to simulate
the NMR spectrum at varying pH. Here, we simulate, at diﬀerent pH values, the spectrum of citrate, which is a
metabolite found in normal urine (Figure 4). Acid and base limits of citrate are obtained from Chenomx, which
estimates them experimentally. Figure 4 shows that the peaks of citrate are shifted towards lower frequencies with
increasing pH values. Thus, the shift in peak positions due to pH cannot be neglected; on the contrary it must be
always taken into account to ensure a good identiﬁcation of metabolites. Figure 5 shows a simulated NMR spectra
for patient urine with paraquat poisoning. Figure 5a is a simulated NMR spectra for normal urine and Figure 5b
is NMR spectra for a diseased state, namely paraquat poisoning. Paraquat poisoning was chosen from HMDB
because it shows variations in metabolic concentrations in comparison with normal urine. In paraquat poisoning,
the concentrations of citrate and creatinine decrease in comparison with normal urine. Figure 5b clearly shows
the expected decrease in citric acid and creatinine concentrations.
One advantage of MetFlexo is that it also allows the simulation of NMR spectra of bioﬂuids at varying magnetic ﬁeld frequencies, B. Obviously, we can in principle adjust the diﬀerence between energy states by suitably
varying B (see Equation 1). Figure 6 shows the variation of citrate spectrum with external magnetic ﬁeld frequency. The splitting in main peaks decreases with increasing magnetic ﬁeld; and hence the positions of the peaks
vary. A database such as this is very important in detecting citrate in experimental spectra taken at diﬀerent values
of B. In Figure 7, we simulated the NMR spectrum of a mixture of three metabolites: 1-methylhistidine, hippurate, and glycolate, at two diﬀerent magnetic ﬁeld frequencies 200 and 600 MHz. Here we are only interested
in 1-methylhistidine, a biomarker of meat consumption which predicts risk of several chronic disease [21]. The
spectrum simulated at 600 MHz reveals only one clear peak for 1-methylhistidine. For a small concentration of
1-methylhistidine, this peak will be less intense and it might be hidden in the presence of noise. Simulating the
spectrum at 200 MHz shows three peaks of 1-methylhistidine, which increases the possibility of detecting the
peaks for this metabolite and hence a better quantiﬁcation. Thus, this method helps in the deconvolution of NMR
spectra and may aid in suggesting a better determination of metabolite concentrations, as these concentrations are
key in detecting disease and abnormalities.

Zeinab Atieh et al. / Procedia Computer Science 18 (2013) 1382 – 1391

1389

Fig. 4. Simulated NMR spectra of citrate at diﬀerent pH values

Fig. 5. Simulated NMR spectra for patient urine with paraquat poisoning. Figure (5a) is for normal urine and Figure (5b) is for a
diseased state, namely paraquat poisoning

1390

Zeinab Atieh et al. / Procedia Computer Science 18 (2013) 1382 – 1391

Fig. 6. Simulated NMR spectra of citrate at diﬀerent magnetic ﬁeld values

Fig. 7. Comparison between NMR spectra simulated at 200 and 600 MHz

Zeinab Atieh et al. / Procedia Computer Science 18 (2013) 1382 – 1391

1391

Conclusion
In recent years, nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy has proved to be a powerful tool in the identiﬁcation and quantiﬁcation of metabolites in bioﬂuids. The identiﬁcation and quantiﬁcation of metabolites requires
the presence of a database to which experimental NMR spectra can be compared. This work aims to simulate
an NMR database comparable to any experimental spectrum at any magnetic ﬁeld frequency and any pH. The
initial input of the program is the known NMR parameters of metabolites, which are expanded over diﬀerent
magnetic frequencies B and diﬀerent pH. This type of study opens the door for more precise NMR identiﬁcation
of metabolites. No other method is currently able to simulate NMR metabolic proﬁles with such complexity and
ﬂexibility. This paper describes the algorithm behind MetFlexo and demonstrates how it can be used to simulate
NMR metabolic proﬁles with which to develop and test new data analysis techniques. Not only can it be used to
simulate proﬁles for humans, but also for diﬀerent species and bioﬂuids. On the other hand, any simulator of this
kind is limited by the sources of data available; however, metabolite databases are in continuous progress.
Acknowledgements
The research has been supported by Qatar Foundation Research Excellence Award to HB. The authors thank
Dr. M. Harb, Institut de recherches sur la catalyse et l’environnement de Lyon, Universit`e claude Bernard Lyon 1
and Chris Leonard from Qscience, Qatar Foundation, for improving the quality of the manuscript.
References
[1] J. F. A. Jansen, W. H. Backes, K. Nicolay, and M. Eline Kooi, 1H MR spectroscopy of the brain: absolute quantiﬁcation of metabolites,Radiology, vol. 240, pp. 240-332, 2005.
[2] S. Moolenaar S, et al, Handbook of 1H-NMR Spectroscopy in Inborn Errors ofMetabolism SPS Publications, Heilbronn 2002.
[3] E. Holmes, R. L. Loo, J. Stamler,M. Bictash,I. K. S. Yap, Q. Chan, T. Ebbels, M. De Iorio, I. J. Brown, K. A. Veselkov, M. L. Daviglus,
H. Kesteloot, H. Ueshima, L. Zhao, J. K. Nicholson, and P. Elliott, Human metabolic phenotype diversity and its association with diet
and blood pressure, Nature, vol 45, p 396, 2008.
[4] V. Govindaraju, K. Young, and A. A. Maudsley, Proton NMR chemical shifts and coupling constants for brain metabolites, NMR
Biomed., vol. 13, pp. 129-153, 2000.
[5] Z. Atieh, A. R. Allouche, and M. Aubert-Frcon, DFT calculations of isomer eﬀects upon NMR spin-Hamiltonian parameters, J. Mol.
Struc. THEOCHEM, vol. 945, pp. 104-109, 2010.
[6] W. G. Proctor and F. C. Yu, Phys. Rev., vol 77, p. 717, 1950 ; W. C. Dickinson, Phys. Rev., vol 77, p. 736, 1950; G. Lindstrom Phys.
Rev., vol 78,p. 817, 1950; H. A. Thomas, Phys. Rev., vol 80, p. 901, 1950.
[7] J. Keeler, ”Understanding NMR spectroscopy, chapter 2,”University of California, Irvine, retrieved 2007
[8] J. Lindon, J. Nicholson, E. Holmes, and J. Everet, Metabonomics: Metabolic processes studied by NMR spectroscopy of bioﬂuids.
Concepts In Magnetic Resonance, vol 12, pp. 289-320, 2000.
[9] P. E. Anderson, M. L. Raymer, B. J. Kelly, N. V. Reo, N. J. DelRaso, and T. E. Doom, Characterisation of 1H NMR spectroscopic data
and the generation of synthetic validation sets, Bioinformatics, vol 25, pp. 2992-3000, 2009.
[10] H. J. Muncey, R. Jones, M. de lorio, and T. M. D. Ebbels, MetAssimulo: simulation of realistic NMR Metabolic proﬁles, Bioinformatics,
vol 11, pp 496-507, 2010.
[11] D. S. Wishart, et al., HMDB: the human metabolome database, Nucleic Acids Research, vol 36, pp. 521-526, 2007.
[12] Chenomx - Metabolite Discovery and Measurement. www.chenomx.com
[13] E. H. Wichmann, G. Gieger, and T. Illig, KORA-geb resource for population genetics, controls and a broad spectrum of disease phenotypes, Gesundheitswesen, vol 67, pp. 26-30.
[14] C.A.Coulson, Valence, Oxford University Press, London, 1952.
[15] P. Hore, Nuclear magnetic resonance, Oxford University Press Inc 2004.
[16] J. Franck, ”Elementary processes of photochemical reactions,” Transactions of the Faraday Society, vol. 21, pp. 536542, 1926.
[17] E. Condon, ”A theory of intensity distribution in band systems (Meeting abstract),” Physical Review, vol. 27, p. 640, 1926.
[18] O. Cloarec, M. Dumas, J.Trygg, A. Craig, R. Barton, J. Nicholson, and E. Holmes, Evaluation of the orthogonal project on the latent
structure model limitations caused by chemical shift variability and improved visualization of biomarker changes in 1H NMR spectroscopic metabonomic studies, Analytical Chemistry, vol 77, pp.517-526, 2005.
[19] M. Hazewinkel, ”Determinant”, Encyclopedia of Mathematics, Springer, ISBN 978-1-55608-010-4, 2001
[20] T. Remer, and F. Manz, Potential renal acid load of foods and its inﬂuence on urine pH, Journal of American Dietetic Association, vol
95, pp. 791-797, 1995.
[21] T. Myint, G. E. Fraser, K. D. Lindsted, S. F. Knutsen, R. W. Hubbard, and H. W. Bennett, Urinary 1-methylhistidine is a marker of meat
consumption in Black and in White California Seventh-day Adventists, Am J Epidemiol., vol. 152, p. 752, 2000.
[22] A.J. Benesi, Series Expansion of Propagators, Journal of Magnetic Resonance, Series A, 103, 230-33, 1993.
[23] C. P. Robert, Simulation of truncated normal variables, Statistics and Computing 5 (2), pp. 121125, 1995.
[24] Z. Bai, J. Demmel, J. Dongarra, A. Ruhe, and H. van der Vorst, eds., Templates for the Solution of Algebraic Eigenvalue Problems: A
Practical Guide, SIAM, Philadelphia, 2000.

