Available online at www.sciencedirect.com

Procedia Computer Science 18 (2013) 976 – 985

International Conference on Computational Science, ICCS 2013

A Small-World Network Immune from Random
Failures and Resilient to Targeted Attacks
Hidefumi Sawaia
a Advanced ICT Research Institute,
National Institute of Information and Communications Technology,
Kobe 651-2492, Japan

Abstract
A network architecture with bimodal degree distribution robust for both random failures and targeted attacks has been proposed.
This paper studies the robustness of ”n-Star” network which is proposed by the author as a new Small-World network by
comparing with the bimodal degree distribution network and a scale-free network. As a result, the n-Star network is found
to be not only more robust than the bimodal degree distribution network and the scale-free network, but also has the good
characteristics maintaining the property of Small-World even under the above failures and attacks. Furthermore, even if the
n-Star network were more severely damaged and the network doesn’t work well at all with some nodes alive, the damaged
network could be recovered using the alive nodes by connecting the links among the nodes in a self-organizing manner of
communication. We show a resilient algorithm to automatically recover from the damaged network, which can hold the
property of Small-World for the n-Star network.
Keywords: Small-World; Robust network; Resilient network; Network failure; Complex network

1. Introduction
Maintaining communication infrastructures and substantial information operations is a matter of great urgency
in a severe situation such as earthquakes and disasters particularly in Japan. Our memories for the Great East Japan
Earthquake on Mar.11, 2011 are still vivid because almost all communication facilities were broken down in the
disastrous area. On the other hand, as information leakage is frequently caused by computer viruses and several
kinds of cyber attacks, secure communications against the cyber attacks are critically important issues in our daily
life.
In this study, we will evaluate the robustness of a new Small-World network architecture (n-Star network),
which was proposed by the author, and show the network is more robust against both random failures and targeted
attacks in such situations of the Internet than conventional network architectures proposed so far. Furthermore,
we will propose a resilient algorithm from a damaged network under random failures and targeted attacks by
connecting links among alive (survived) nodes in a self-organizing manner of communication.

1877-0509 © 2013 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. Open access under CC BY-NC-ND license.
Selection and peer review under responsibility of the organizers of the 2013 International Conference on Computational Science
doi:10.1016/j.procs.2013.05.263

Hidefumi Sawai / Procedia Computer Science 18 (2013) 976 – 985

Fig. 1. Scale-free Network (left), its adjacency matrix (upper right) and degree distribution (bottom right) (BA model, N=100)

2. Networks Robust for Both Random Failures and Targeted Attacks
It is well known that degree distribution on the Internet has ”scale-free” characteristics (e.g., [1]). The scalefree network shown in Fig. 1 consists of a few hub nodes with a large degree and many nodes with a small degree,
whose degree distribution obeys P(k) ∝ k−γ (2 < γ < 3) and is known to be robust for random failures of nodes,
but fragile for targeted attacks on the hubs. [2]
2.1. Features of Bimodal Degree Distribution Network

Fig. 2. Bimodal Distribution Network (left), its adjacency matrix (upper right) and degree distribution (bottom right) (N=100)

∗ Corresponding author. Tel.: +81-78-969-2115 ; fax: +81-78-969-3928 .
E-mail address: sawai@nict.go.jp.

977

978

Hidefumi Sawai / Procedia Computer Science 18 (2013) 976 – 985

To solve the problem of fragility in scale-free networks, the bimodal degree distribution network consisting of
a few nodes with a large degree k2 (k2
1, probability: r2 ) and many nodes with a small degree k1 (0 < k1 k2 ,
probability: r1 ) has been proposed [4], as shown in Fig. 2. The bimodal degree distribution P(k) is characterized
as follows:
⎧
⎪
k = k1 ≤ k ,
r 1 = 1 − r2 ;
⎪
⎪
⎪
√
⎨
A2 3/4
P(k) = ⎪
=
(
)
;
k
= k2 =
k N,
r
2
⎪
k
N
⎪
⎪
⎩ 0;
otherwise,
where
A≡{

2 k 2 ( k − 1)2 1/3
} .
2 k −1

If the number of modality m increases from 2 to infinite, this multi-modal network approaches a scale-free network
[5]. The network was claimed to be robust for both random failures and targeted attacks through a theoretical
analysis and simulation experiments.
2.2. Features of n-Star Network

Fig. 3. n-Star Network (left), its adjacency matrix (upper right) and degree distribution (bottom right) (n=3, N=100)

The author has proposed a new Small-World network called n-Star network [7] inspiring from ACO (AntColony Optimization) [6], by comparing the characteristics of several complex networks from the viewpoint of
Small-World [3]. This network has n star nodes and many peripheral nodes, as shown in Fig. 3. The n star
nodes are completely connected with each other (forming a ”clique”) and with all peripheral nodes, the degree
distribution of which is also bimodal distribution. However, the diﬀerence between the n-Star network and the
bimodal distribution network is the manner of connections and the size of two kinds of degrees (i.e., k1 and k2 ).
Accordingly, a remarkable feature of the n-Star network is that the average path length L is always less than 2,
independent of the number of stars (n) and the total number of nodes N (hence, the number of peripheral nodes
N0 ≡ N-n) which shows an absolutely minimum value of L among known complex networks including a WattsStrogatz (WS) model, Barab´asi-Albert (BA) model, random graph etc. on the condition of the same value of
k.
In this study, the robustness of the n-Star network will be evaluated comparing with the scale-free network
and the bimodal network using several network parameters. We first analyzed the n-Star network architecture

979

Hidefumi Sawai / Procedia Computer Science 18 (2013) 976 – 985

theoretically and experimentally. By defining a new network index R ≡ L + p = L + k /(N−1) (p: link probability),
we showed that the degree of the Small-World can be evaluated based on the R values for several complex networks
[7].
For the n-Star networks (m: the number of peripheral links), the average degree k , average path length L and
clustering coeﬃcient C are calculated as follows;
n(2N − n − 1) + 2m
;
N
2N(N − n − 1) + n(n + 1) − 2m
L=
;
N(N − 1)
k =

C=

n = 1, 2, 3, ..., N;

m = 1, 2, 3, ...,N−n C2 ,

(1)

n = 1, 2, 3, ..., N;

m = 1, 2, 3, ...,N−n C2 ,

(2)

n{n−1 C2 +(n−1)(N−n)}
N−1 C 2

N

+ (N − n)
C = 0;

;

n = 2, 3, ..., N;

m = 0,

n = 1;

m = 0.

(3)

For n=1 and m=0, the n-Star network becomes the so-called single star network, and the network becomes a
complete graph for n = N − 1 and N. The average degree k monotonically increases from 0 to N − 1. On the
other hand, L monotonically decreases from 2 to 1 as n increases. The clustering coeﬃcient C decreases once,
reaching a minimum value around k = 33 when N=100, and then increases as n increases. If n is removed using
Eqs.(1) and (2) to obtain the relationship between L and k , we obtain Eq.(4) as follows:
L=2−

k
= 2 − p,
N−1

p=

k
,
N−1

(4)

where p is a link probability. The L value decreases from 2 to 1 as the link probability p increases. As Eq.(4) is
derived for k values, each value corresponding to n = 1, 2, 3,.., N; m = 0, 1, 2, 3, ..., N−nC2 , this equation is valid
for any values of k with arbitrary numbers of peripheral links m connected with each other.
3. Network Failures
There are mainly two kinds of network failures: one is a spontaneously random failure, the other is an intentional targeted attack which is intrusion into a network and destruction of the network from outside (i.e., cyber
terror). As both cases cause node and/or link failure in the network, the robustness of the network can be evaluated
in the following cases: (1)link failure, (2)node failure, and (3)link and/or node failure. For a fair comparison, an
initial number of total nodes N and average degree k are set as the same values for the three kinds of networks:
the n-Star network, bimodal distribution network and scale-free network (BA model) when no network failure
happens.
3.1. Link Failures
We will evaluate the robustness of three kinds of networks by increasing the probability Pl in link failure from
0 to 0.95, independent of spontaneously random failure and intentional targeted attacks.
3.2. Node Failures
Similar to the case of the link failures, we will evaluate the robustness of three kinds of networks by increasing
the probability Pn in node failure from 0 to 0.95, independent of spontaneously random failure and intentional
targeted attacks.
3.3. Link and/or Node Failures
In reality, as only one of either link failure or node failure rarely happens, both kinds of failures often happen
at the same time. In this case, the probability of failure P f is defined as a combination of link and node failures:
P f = αPl + (1 − α) Pn = Plink + Pnode , (0 ≤ α ≤ 1), where Plink ≡ αPl , Pnode ≡ (1 − α) Pn , and we will evaluate the
robustness of three kinds of networks as well.

980

Hidefumi Sawai / Procedia Computer Science 18 (2013) 976 – 985

4. Simulation Experiments for Network Failures
As mentioned above, simulation experiments for the network failures are performed in the three cases: (1) link
failures, (2) node failures, and (3) link and/or node failures.

Fig. 4. An n-Star Network without failure (left, n=3, N=100), and its change of architecture under link and/or node failure (right) [9]

Fig. 4 shows a typical example of link and/or node failure for an n-Star network. The left figure is the n-Star
network before the failure, and the right figure is the n-Star network in the case of the probabilities Plink = Pnode =
0.25, (i.e., α = 0.5, Pl = Pn =0.5 and P f =0.5). The left figure has 3 star nodes at the center with an average degree
k = 5.88, and the right figure has two star nodes by losing 26 nodes including one star node, which decreased
the average degree k from 5.88 to 2.34. Even in such a situation, two alive star nodes still keep many links with
the alive peripheral nodes, and hold the average path length L = 2.13 (this average path length is 9.8% increase
compared to the initial (without failure) average path length L = 1.94).

Fig. 5. A Bimodal Distribution Network without failure (left, N=100), and its change of architecture under link and/or node failure (right) [9]

Fig. 5 shows a typical example of link and/or node failure for a bimodal distribution network in the case of
the same probabilities Plink = Pnode = 0.25 (P f = 0.5) as those of the n-Star network. The left figure is an initial
network with the same average degree k = 5.88, and the right figure is the network in the failure. The average
degree decreased from k = 5.88 to 3.24, the decrease of which is less than the case of the n-Star network. This
is because the damage on star nodes in the n-Star network is larger than that of the bimodal distribution network,

Hidefumi Sawai / Procedia Computer Science 18 (2013) 976 – 985

even though the number of damaged (isolated) nodes is 26 (Fig. 5 right) which is the same as that of the n-Star
network (Fig. 4 right). It is interesting that the average path length L =2.78 didn’t change in these two cases (i.e.,
Fig. 5 left and right), which may mean that the bimodal distribution network holds ”self-similarity” in a sense
between the two networks.

Fig. 6. A Scale-free Network without failure (left, N=100), and its change of architecture under link and/or node failure (right) [9]

Fig. 6 shows a typical example of failure for a scale-free network (BA model) in the same probabilities. The
left figure is an initial network before the failure, and the right figure is a network in failure. The number of
damaged (isolated) nodes is 30, which is the largest among three networks, and the decrease of average degree k
from 5.88 to 2.12 is also the largest among them, where many hub nodes were damaged and only four hub nodes
were connected with some alive peripheral nodes. As a result, the average path length L largely increased from
3.02 to 3.84 (i.e., 27% increase).

Fig. 7. The number of star nodes #S tar vs. probability P f in link and/or node failure (n=3, N=100)

Simulation experiments on several network parameters were performed by ten trials with diﬀerent random
seeds for each network in each probability P f . The average values and their standard deviations as error bars are

981

982

Hidefumi Sawai / Procedia Computer Science 18 (2013) 976 – 985

shown in Figs.7, 8, 9 and 12. Fig. 7 shows the number of stars as a function of P f because the number of stars
greatly aﬀects the robustness of the three networks. The bimodal distribution network has 10 initial ”pseudostar” nodes because of N (=100) multiplied by r2 (=0.104). The scale-free network (BA model) is generated
based on an initial complete sub-graph with three nodes (n=3). These number of ”star” nodes decreased as the
probability P f in link and/or node failure increases. However, the number of star nodes #S tar for the n-star
network only decreased from three to two on average, on the other hand, the #S tar for the bimodal distribution
network dramatically decreased from ten to five, and the #S tar for the scale-free network were between three and
two. This means that the n-Star network is quite stable among the three networks for the link and/or node failure
even in a severe situation of P f =0.95.

Fig. 8. Average degree L vs. probability P f in link and/or node failure (n=3, N=100) [9]

Fig. 8 shows the relationship between the average path length L and the probability P f in link and/or node
failure. Reflecting the situation in Fig. 7, the changes in L values for the scale-free and bimodal distribution
networks are larger than that of the n-Star network, on the other hand, the L value for the n-Star network is really
stable with the values around 2. Fig. 9 shows the relationship between the clustering coeﬃcients C and the

Fig. 9. Clustering coeﬃcient C vs. probability P f in link and/or node failure (n=3, N=100)

Hidefumi Sawai / Procedia Computer Science 18 (2013) 976 – 985

probability P f in link and/or node failure. On the contrary to the case of L in Fig. 8, the C values for the n-Star
network changed dramatically, on the other hand, the change in the C values for the scale-free network is the
smallest among the three networks. The manner of change in the C values for the bimodal distribution network is
in-between those for the n-Star and scale-free networks.
5. Resilient n-Star network Against Targeted Attacks

Fig. 10. Recovering algorithm of n-Star network from network failures [10].

If an intentional targeted attack happened (i.e., the so-called cyber attack) on the star nodes in an n-Star
network, the n-Star network may break up completely. Even in such a severe situation, some alive star and
peripheral nodes could be expected to function as communication nodes, which can communicate with each other
by connecting the links among the alive nodes. This situation will make it possible for the alive nodes to restore a
new n-Star network recovering from the damaged network.
Fig. 10 shows the recovering algorithm of n-Star network from the network failures. When an n-Star network
(upper left) happened to suﬀer from some accidents (i.e., random failures and/or targeted attacks), the network
will be damaged (upper-right and bottom-right) on the nodes and/or links. Even in this situation, some alive nodes
(also some links) may exist, as shown in the bottom-right of Fig. 10, which could communicate with each other
using their communication function. If some star nodes are alive, the nodes would be eﬃciently recover the links
with the peripheral alive nodes. Next, if some peripheral nodes are alive, the nodes could become some of the new
star nodes and communicate with the other peripheral nodes to form a new n-Star network. Even if all of the n
star nodes failed by the intentional targeted attack, some survived peripheral nodes could become the n star nodes
to form a new n-Star network by rewiring the links among the survived nodes. As a result, the bottom-left of Fig.
10 shows the recovered n-Star network.
Fig. 11 shows one typical case of experimental results for an n-Star network and its adjacency matrices before
failure (upper), under failure (middle) and after recovery from the failure (bottom). In this case, N=100, α=0.5,
Plink =0.4, Pnode =0.4, hence P f =Plink +Pnode =0.8. The average path length L changed from 1.94 before the failure
to 2.13 under the failure. Using the recovering algorithm described above, the L value decreased to 1.89 after the
recovery. This means the network could reconstruct a new n-Star network with a new peripheral node as one of
the new n star nodes, as shown in the adjacency matrix (bottom-right) of Fig. 11.

983

984

Hidefumi Sawai / Procedia Computer Science 18 (2013) 976 – 985

Fig. 11. n-Star networks and their adjacency matrices before failure (upper), under failure (middle) and after recovery from the failure (bottom)
[10].

6. Discussions
For an n-Star network, we summarized the results in the cases of link and/or node failure, where several
network parameters such as the average path length L, the average degree k , the number of alive star nodes
#S tar, the clustering coeﬃcients C and the maximum eigenvalues Ev are shown in Fig. 12 as a function of P f . In
the n-Star network, we can recognize that there is a positive correlation of the number of alive star nodes #S tar
with the clustering coeﬃcients C and the maximum eigenvalues Ev. The fluctuation in such parameter values is
bigger in the node failure than in the link failure. This is because a part of the link failure doesn’t unnecessarily
directly aﬀect the network failure, but a small part of the node failure directly aﬀects the network failure due to the
link failures connected to the nodes. However, even if only one star node in an n-Star network could survive for
the link and/or node failure, the n-Star network could hold the ”Small-Worldness” with the average path length L
2. To verify this fact theoretically, we calculated the survival probability P s as a function of node failure because
the node failure directly aﬀects the insuﬃciency of n-Star network. P s is a probability that at least one star node
can survive against a targeted attack. If the probability of node failure is Pn , and the average number of nodes in
node failure is nn , the probability that all n star nodes failed is represented by the binomial distribution such as:
N− nn
(1 − r) nn , where nn = NPn , r = n/N. Thus, the survival probability P s is P s = 1 - N C nn r N− nn
N C nn r
nn
(1 − r) . According to this calculation, the survival probability P s keeps nearly 1 in a broad range of Pn =0 ∼
0.95 in node failure when N ≥ 100. This is the very reason why the n-Star network can be extremely robust for the
network failure such as the link and/or node failures, independently of either random failure or targeted attacks.
We also proposed a resilient algorithm for the n-Star network to recover from a severely damaged situation
by an intentional targeted attack and/or a natural disaster such as a great earthquake. This algorithm made it

Hidefumi Sawai / Procedia Computer Science 18 (2013) 976 – 985

Fig. 12. Several network parameters in n-Star network vs. probability P f in link and/or node failure (n=3, N=100) [9]

possible for the damaged network to reconstruct a new n-Star network in a self-organizing manner, even when
all star nodes failed and some peripheral nodes still survived. This resilient algorithm is of critical importance
to maintain an emergent communication using the n-Star network among the survived nodes when a disastrous
situation unhappily happened.
7. Conclusions
In this paper, we evaluated the robustness of an n-Star network through simulation experiments by comparing
with a bimodal distribution network and a scale-free network (BA model) in terms of several network parameters such as the number of survived ”star” nodes, the average path length L, the clustering coeﬃcients C, the
maximum eigenvalues Ev, etc. As a result, the n-Star network is not only more robust for both random failures
and targeted attacks than the bimodal distribution network and the scale-free network, but also can maintain the
”Small-Worldness” in an extremely severe situation of the network failure. Also, a resilient algorithm for the
n-Star network was proposed to eﬀectively recover from a severely damaged network in a self-organizing manner. These results are useful not only for the application to constructing robust and resilient computer networks,
but also for the application to robust and resilient logistics such as airline networks [8], which are frequently affected by the weather change and disasters such as heavy snow, typhoons, hurricanes, the eruption of volcanoes,
earthquakes, etc.
References
[1]
[2]
[3]
[4]
[5]
[6]
[7]

A-L.Barab´asi and R.Albert, Emergence of Scaling in Random Networks, pp.509-512, Science, 1999.
R.Albert, H. Jeong, A-L. Barabasi, Error and Attack Tolerance of Complex Networks, Nature, vol.406, pp.379-381, 2000.
J.D.Watts, Small Worlds, The Dynamics of Networks between Order and Randomness, Princeton University Press, 1999.
T.Tanizawa et.al., Optimization of network robust to waves of targeted and random attacks, Phy. Rev. E 71, 047101-p.1 -p.8, 2005.
T.Tanizawa et.al., Optimization of the robustness of waves of multimodal networks, Phy. Rev. E 74, 06125-p.1 -p.8, 2006.
E.Bonabeau, M.Dorigo, G.Theraulaz, Swarm Intelligence, From Natural to Artificial Systems, Oxford University Press, 1999.
H.Sawai, Exploring A New Small-World Network for Real-World Applications, Proc. of the 4th Int. Conf. on Networked Digital Technology (NDT 2012), Dubai, UAE, Apr. 2012.
[8] H.Sawai, Reorganizing A New Generation Airline Network Based on An Ant-Colony Optimization-Inspired Small-World Network, 2012
IEEE World Congress on Computational Intelligence (WCCI 2012), Brisbane, Australia, June 2012.
[9] H.Sawai, A Small-World Network Robust for Both Random Failures and Targeted Attacks, Proc. of the 26th Annual Conference of the
Japanese Society for Artificial Intelligence, 2012, June, 2012, in Japanese.
[10] H.Sawai, Proposal for Resilient Small-World Networks, The 9th Network Ecology Symposium, Information Processing Society of Japan,
poster presentation, Okinawa, Japan, Dec. 2012, in Japanese.

985

