Procedia

Available online at www.sciencedirect.com

Computer
Science

Procedia Computer Science 00 (2009) 000–000

Procedia Computer Science 1 (2012) 397–406

www.elsevier.com/locate/procedia

www.elsevier.com/locate/procedia

International Conference on Computational Science, ICCS 2010

Data Sonification of Volcano Seismograms and Sound/Timbre
Reconstruction of Ancient Musical Instruments with Grid
Infrastructures
Salvatore Avanzoa, Roberto Barberab,c, Francesco De Mattiad, Giuseppe La Roccab,
Mariapaola Sorrentinoe, Domenico Vicinanzae,*
a

Dept. of Mathematics and Computer Science of the University of Salerno and SoundLab, Via Ponte don Melillo, Fisciano (SA) I-84084, Italy
b
Italian National Institute of Nuclear Physics, Via S. Sofia 64, Catania I-950123, Italy
c
Department of Physics and Astronomy of the University of Catania, Viale A. Doria 6, Catania I-95125, Italy
d
Conservatory of Music of Parma, Via del Conservatorio 27/A, Parma I-43100, Italy
e
DANTE, City House 126-130 Hills Road, Cambridge CB2 1PQ, UK

Abstract
Recently, the scenario of international collaboration in scientific research has swiftly evolved with the gradual but impressive
deployment of high bandwidth networks and Grid infrastructures towards what is currently called e-Science. So far, several
scientific domains, such as Life Sciences, High Energy Physics, Computational Chemistry, Earth Science, etc. are benefiting of
e-Infrastructures to tackle new global challenges, particularly those that have high societal and economic impact, with a truly
multidisciplinary approach. Much less has been done, however, in the field of Humanities. In this paper we present some use
cases of how the EU funded e-Infrastructures have been used to support both the Cultural Heritage community in reconstructing
the sound of ancient musical instruments and the scientists belonging to the Earth Science domain to better understand the
behavior of volcanoes close to eruptions translating the patterns of volcanic seismograms into a set of hearable sound waves.
c 2012 Published by Elsevier Ltd. Open access under CC BY-NC-ND license.
⃝
Keywords: Grids: Data audification; Recover the sound from our historical memory; Music from volcanoes; the ASTRA project.

1.

Modelling the past with the ASTRA Project

The ASTRA (Ancient instruments Sound/Timbre Reconstruction Application) project (www.astraproject.org) is
coordinated by the Conservatory of Music of Parma (www.conservatorio.pr.it) in close synergy with the
Conservatory of Music of Salerno (www.consalerno.com), the Division of Catania of the Italian National Institute of
Nuclear Physics (www.ct.infn.it) and other international partners. The project, running since 2006, aims at providing
the Arts and Cultural Heritage community with an application to reconstruct the sound/timbre of ancient musical
instruments. By applying the physical modelling synthesis, a complex digital audio rendering technique which

* Corresponding author. Tel.: +44 (0)1223 371 300; fax: +44 (0)1223 371 371
E-mail address: Domenico.Vicinanza@dante.net

c 2012 Published by Elsevier Ltd. Open access under CC BY-NC-ND license.
1877-0509 ⃝
doi:10.1016/j.procs.2010.04.043

398

S. Avanzo et al. / Procedia Computer Science 1 (2012) 397–406
Author name / Procedia Computer Science 00 (2010) 000–000

allows modelling the time-domain physics of an instrument, the experts who are carrying out the project can recreate
models of some musical instruments that were lost for ages (since hundreds and hundreds of years) and reproduce
their sounds by simulating their behaviours as mechanical systems. The application is very computer intensive and
this is the main reason why it runs over research and academic networks such as GÉANT (www.geant.net) and
EUMEDCONNECT2 (www.eumedconnect2.net) operated by DANTE (www.dante.net). The work performed by
the parties involved in this project to address this goal is sketched in fig.1.

Fig. 1. Modelling and computation of ancient instruments in Grid

The starting point is represented by all archaeological findings about the instrument such as fragments from
excavations, written descriptions, pictures on ancient urns, etc. By applying the Physical Modelling Synthesis
(PhM), ASTRA recreates computer replicas of some musical instruments and reproduces their sounds by simulating
their behaviour as mechanical systems. The PhM Synthesis uses a set of equations and algorithms that describe the
physical materials used in the ancient instruments to generate the physical sources of sound. For instance, to model
the sound of a drum, a formula for how striking the drumhead injects energy into a two dimensional membrane
would be created. Then, the properties of the membrane (mass density, stiffness, etc.), its coupling with the
resonance of the cylindrical body of the drum, and the conditions at its boundaries (e.g., a rigid termination to the
drum's body) would describe its movement over time and how it would sound. Similar modelling can be carried out
in instruments such as violins, though replicating the slip-stick behaviour of the bow against the string, the width of
the bow, the resonance and damping behaviour of the strings, the transfer of string vibrations through the bridge,
and finally, the resonance of the soundboard in response to those vibrations. The computing model of the instrument
reconstructed by ASTRA is parameterized by several quantitative factors. Some of them are constants that describe
the physical materials and dimensions of the instrument while some others are time-dependent functions that
describe the player's interaction with it such as plucking a string or covering tone holes. The “tuning” of some of
these parameters is performed taking into account the sound spectra of a Monochord, an ancient musical instrument
played by Pythagoras. The word "monochord" comes from the Greek and literally means "one string." In the
Monochord, a single string is stretched over a sound box. The string is fixed at both ends while a moveable bridge
alters the pitch. ASTRA researchers built a real Monochord in their laboratory and they verified that the model was
correctly reproducing the sound of the physical instrument. In the last step, the refined computing model is
simulated as a mechanical system in order to output the sound of the instrument. The simulation of the model is a
key point in order to generate the sound of the instrument. It requires a large amount of computation because, in
order to properly model the instrument, a lot of mathematical equations (differential equations of coupled
oscillators) have to be solved. The computation also depends on the quality of the audio file one wants to obtain. In
this scenario, Grid infrastructures , with their huge distributed computational and storage resources spread over large
geographic regions worldwide, can effectively contribute to speeding up the simulation of the computing model and
generate the sound of the instrument. With this approach, today ASTRA can generate digital sound libraries, using
computing power wherever it is located, and share these results with the Cultural Heritage community. The most
important advantage of this approach is to easily build sound libraries that students, researchers and museums can
easily access and use. The digital sound libraries obtained with the use of the Grid, for instance, can be loaded into a
keyboard and used by musicians to perform live concerts. Another main advantage of the ASTRA project is to bring

S. Avanzo et al. / Procedia Computer Science 1 (2012) 397–406

399

Author name / Procedia Computer Science 00 (2010) 000–000

experiences and knowledge together. Using e-Infrastructures, ASTRA allows archaeologists to have many
interesting relics and findings, software developers, and historians to work together and create something unique.
2. The Implementation

2.1. Computational aspects of the Physical Modeling Synthesis used by ASTRA
Although physical modelling is not a new concept in acoustics and synthesis, having been implemented already
in 1971 using the wave equations created by Hiller and Ruiz [1,2,3], its practical use has become feasible only
recently, i.e. since large bandwidth research networks and sophisticated Grid middleware have started to
interconnect thousands of computers in what are called e-Infrastructures. Physical modelling is a very computingintensive technique, as the complex models of the musical instruments are solved by the numerical integration of
coupled differential equations. For example, to have 100 samples (corresponding to an instrument with 50 strings
plucked in 2 different ways) 400 CPU hours would be needed on a standard computer. Using Grid technology those
computations could be run at the same time (as independent Grid jobs), automatically, on 100 different computers,
having the results in just 4 CPU hours. This is particularly valuable, for example, when it is needed to create a large
sound library. It would speed up by a factor of 100’s the overall computing time. In order to exploit the
computational power needed by the project and speed up the sound reconstructions, the ASTRA project moved from
a local computer cluster towards distributed computing resources. First tests have been successfully conducted
within the GILDA [4] (https://gilda.ct.infn.it) facility, the EGEE default training infrastructure, which brings
together about 20 sites (not all on-line at the same time) in three different Continents, and later on the
EUMEDGRID project (www.eumedgrid.org) Grid infrastructure which links computing resources across the
Mediterranean region at up to 2.5 Gb/s through the GÉANT (www,geant2.net) and EUMEDCONNECT2
(www.eumedconnect2.net).research networks. The extremely high reliability of the GÉANT and
EUMEDCONNECT2 networks, their performances in terms of number of institutions connected and overall
throughput, made the ASTRA project possible. Thanks to EGEE and other projects, today ASTRA can rely on more
than 500 CPUs and on the support of more than 20 different Grid sites in Europe, the Mediterranean, and other
regions of the world.
2.2. Technical implementation of the Physical Modeling Synthesis
The modelling of our string instruments has been carried out using the Digital Waveguide Models (DWM). The
Digital Waveguide Models, coined by Julius O. Smith III and introduced for the first time in 1985, are
computational physical models made up of delay lines, digital filters, and often nonlinear elements which can be
used to model the physical media through which acoustic waves propagate. Some features of these models are:
• Sampled acoustic travelling waves;
• Follow geometry and physical properties of a desired acoustic system;
• Efficient for nearly lossless distributed wave media (strings, tubes, rods, membranes, plates, vocal tract, etc.).
From a technical point of view, using the discrete form of d’Alembert’s solution, the 1-D wave equation can be
described by the following equation:

y (m, n) = y + (m − n) + y − (m + n)
+

−

where y is the right-going wave and y is the left-going wave. It can be seen from this representation that
sampling the function y at a given point m and time n merely involves summing two delayed copies of its
travelling waves. These travelling waves will reflect at boundaries such as the suspension points of vibrating strings
or the open or closed ends of tubes. Hence, the waves travel along closed loops. Digital waveguide models therefore
comprise digital delay lines to represent the geometry of the waveguide which are closed by recursion, digital filters
to represent the frequency-dependent losses and mild dispersion in the medium, and often non-linear elements.
Losses incurred throughout the medium are generally consolidated so that they can be calculated once at the

400

S. Avanzo et al. / Procedia Computer Science 1 (2012) 397–406
Author name / Procedia Computer Science 00 (2010) 000–000

terminations of a delay line, rather than many times in between. Waveguides such as acoustic tubes are threedimensional but, because their lengths are often much greater than their cross-sectional area, it is reasonable and
computationally efficient to model them as one dimensional waveguides. Membranes, as used in drums, may be
modelled using two-dimensional waveguide meshes, and reverberation in three dimensional spaces may be
modelled using three-dimensional meshes. Vibraphone bars, bells, singing bowls and other sounding solids (also
called idiophones) can be modelled by a related method called “banded waveguides” where multiple band-limited
digital waveguide elements are used to model the strongly dispersive behaviour of waves in solids.
2.3. String Modeling
In this sub-section we will describe how the DWM has been used for modelling the ideal plucked string. Let

y (t , x) denote the transverse displacement of an ideal vibrating string at time t , with x denoting the position
along the length of the string. If we terminate a length L ideal string at x = 0 and x = L , we then have the
following boundary conditions:

y (t , 0) ≡ 0

y (t , L) ≡ 0

where “ ≡ ” means “identically equal to” for all t ’s. The corresponding constraints on the sampled travelling waves
are then

y + ( n) = − y − ( n)
y − (n + N / 2) = − y + (n − N / 2)
where N is the time in samples to propagate from one end of the string to the other and back, or the total “string
loop” delay. The loop delay is also equal to twice the number of spatial samples along the string. A digital
simulation diagram for the rigidly terminated ideal string is shown in fig 2. A “virtual pick-up” is shown at the
arbitrary position x = ξ

Fig. 2. The rigidly terminated ideal string with position output

x =ξ

An ideal plucked string is defined as having an initial displacement and zero initial velocity. In the model, the delay
lines should be initialized with displacement data corresponding to some arbitrary initial string shape.
The implementation we have chosen for our simulation was derived from the Karplus-Strong observation that a
delay line initialized with random numbers makes for a pleasant and bright plucked string tone. We modelled the
time-dependent frequency losses using a moving average low pass filter, which implements in an efficient way the
high frequency losses quite typical in real string instruments. Finally, the effect of the soundboard has been
simulated analyzing the sound of tapping on a real soundboard with the same shape, measuring its impulse response
and doing a convolution with the sounds coming out from the simulation.
From what concerns the computational implementation of the synthesis algorithm, the Synthesis ToolKit (STK,
https://ccrma.stanford.edu/software/stk/index.html) has been used. The ToolKit, developed by Perry Cook and Gary

S. Avanzo et al. / Procedia Computer Science 1 (2012) 397–406

401

Author name / Procedia Computer Science 00 (2010) 000–000

Scavone, is based on a set of open source audio signal processing and algorithmic synthesis classes written in C++ .
STK was designed to facilitate rapid development of music synthesis and audio processing software with an
emphasis on cross-platform functionality, real-time control, ease of use, and educational example code. The ToolKit
is extremely portable, and it is completely user-extensible (all source included, no unusual libraries, and no hidden
drivers) then it was an ideal candidate to design the simulation algorithms to be run on the Grid. The Synthesis
ToolKit, which is free for educational purposes, can generate simultaneous SND (AU), WAV, AIFF, and MAT-file
output sound file formats (as well as real-time sound output). The ToolKit and the wxWidgets C++ libraries (v.
2.8.0) have been used to create a GUI for ASTRA. Using this GUI the user can specify the sample frequency of the
instrument, redirect the computation to an output file and, last but not least, specify a music score to be played.
2.4. Running ASTRA on the Grid
In this section we are going to describe the set-up of the Grid environment, first on GILDA and then on the
EUMEDGRID infrastructure, created in order to allow non expert users to speed up the large scale production of
sounds of ancient instruments. This task has been pursued by the Italian National Institute of Nuclear Physics
(INFN) in close synergy with the Music Conservatories of Salerno and Parma. As first step, the two distributed Grid
infrastructures have been successfully configured by installing, in the dedicated software areas, the package
requested by ASTRA to perform the reconstruction process. The installation and the configuration of this software
has been done using widely adopted tools such as automake and autoconf. A new software tag to reference the
ASTRA software has also been published in the Information System in order to be used by the whole community of
users. Another important task pursed by all the partners involved in the project has been the development of a webbased interface to help musicians and historians to execute the ASTRA algorithms without any knowledge of the
middleware. In fact, there is a sort of “scientific gap” represented by the difficult protocols and the rather complex
Command Line Interface that a normal user has to learn and practice to access Grids. In order to by-pass this
problem, a web-based interface has been designed on top of the GENIUS Grid Portal [5,6,7,8]. This web portal,
powered by EnginFrame (www.nice-software.com/web/nice/products/enginframe), provides end-users with a very
intuitive interface which allows to access the distributed services and resources of a typical Grid infrastructure in a
transparent and ubiquitous way.
2.5. The GENIUS architecture and the EnginFrame Java framework
EnginFrame is a web-based technology, developed by the Italian company Nice Srl (www.nice-software.com),
that enables the access and the exploitation of Grid-enabled applications on e-Infrastructures. It allows users,
gathered in a Virtual Organization (VO), to exploit the whole power of the Grid hiding all its complexity and
providing an abstraction layer on top to the middleware. EnginFrame is also well known in the Grid world for being
the technology which GENIUS (Grid Enable web eNvironment for site Independent User job Submission), one of
the most known and used Grid portals of the European flagship project EGEE (www.eu-egee.org), is based on. Due
to the modularity and flexibility of EnginFrame, the GENIUS portal can be easily customized to interact with
several Grid services and/or VOs allowing scientists to access, execute and monitor their own applications by only
using a simple web browser. The features exposed by EnginFrame through the GENIUS portal contributed to
disseminate the achievements during demo sessions organized by ASTRA. For further information, see the website
https://glite-demo.ct.infn.it.
3. The ASTRA Results
Since September 2008, and for the first time in centuries, the harp-like strings of the Epigonion, an instrument
from Ancient Greece (see fig. 3), have been “virtually” plucked thanks to ASTRA. To achieve this, we used the
advanced GÉANT and EUMEDCONNECT2 research networks to link high capacity computers together, sharing
information to enable the computer-intensive modelling of musical sounds. In Figure 3 is shown the 3D structure of
the Epigonion reconstructed by ASTRA in close synergy with some engineers from Parma. For this purpose, the
following two additional packages: Blender (www.blender.com) and LuxRender (www.luxrender.com) have been
installed on the Grid resources and used for the three-dimensional rendering of the instruments. The knowledge of

402

S. Avanzo et al. / Procedia Computer Science 1 (2012) 397–406
Author name / Procedia Computer Science 00 (2010) 000–000

the Epigonion was based on archaeological findings, historical pictures and literature. It was a wooden string
instrument that musicians have likened the sound to something similar to a modern harp or a harpsichord. We have
compiled the sounds of four Epigonion instruments to recreate a medieval musical piece, making this the first time
that these instruments have been heard performing together. An important event to celebrate this result and
communicate it to the general public was a concert held in Naples, Italy on the 14th of December 2008. It was the
first time ever that an instrument of the past, reconstructed via compute-intensive modelling, performed alongside
real instruments such as violins and flutes as well as voices. The Psalm “Laetatus sum” by Czech composer Jan
Dismas Zelenka was performed by the Sonora Network Ensemble (www.scatolosonora.org) enriched with the
digitally reconstructed sounds of the ASTRA Epigonion. Promoted as a concert produced in the ‘listening
laboratory’, the performance aimed at paving the way for innovative musical research which enables a wide range of
scientists such as archaeologists, network engineers and computer experts to collaborate with artists to revive lost
sounds in real concerts (an excerpt of the concert is available at www.astraproject.org/files/concertdemo.mov).
Other sound reconstruction examples can be downloaded from www.astraproject.org/download.html. Another
notable step forward to improve the musical cultural heritage and brings history back to life has been reached on the
1st of December 2009 during the GÉANT launch event which took place in Stockholm, Sweden. During the
meeting, researchers involved in the ASTRA project presented to all the community, as a world premiere, the sound
of the Barbiton, an ancient Greek instrument similar to a double bass (see fig. 3). Accompanied by percussions, the
instruments were played by the Lost Sounds Orchestra following melodies from a musical score written by
Domenico Vicinanza (another co-author of this chapter). The melodies of the Barbiton, heard for the first time in
2,000 years, were sent 9,300 km away from the venue in Stockholm across the GÉANT and TEIN3 (www.tein3.net)
research networks to provide music for dancers from the Arts Exchange of Asia, allowing them to simultaneously
perform in Kuala Lumpur (Malaysia) at the ASEM (Asia-Europe Meeting) workshop’s Gala Dinner. The video of
the
performance
can
be
downloaded
from
www.geant.net/Media_Centre/Media_Library/Media%20Library/ASTRA_musicians_09.mp4. The sound of
percussions and the warm notes of the Barbiton worked perfectly with the background melody from the GÉANT
and TEIN3 networks. Being the Barbiton a heavy, multi-stringed instrument, it produces a sound similar to a double
bass and it was described in many poems and paintings of the time. It is known to have been played by the poets
Alcaeus and Sappho. As well as for the Epigonion, also for the Barbiton a 3D rendering of the instrument has been
created thanks the computational resources of the Grid.

Fig. 3. 3D rendering of the Epigonion (a) and the Barbiton (b) with Blender and LuxRender (courtesy of F. Baghino and F. Ugozzoli, VisArc
Studio, Parma, Italy)

4. Introduction to Data Audification and Melodisation

S. Avanzo et al. / Procedia Computer Science 1 (2012) 397–406

403

Author name / Procedia Computer Science 00 (2010) 000–000

Current knowledge of volcanoes does not yet allow scientists to predict eruptions but since the sonification of
volcano seismograms of Mount Etna (grid.ct.infn.it/etnasound/page4/page8/etna.aif) has been carried out on the
GILDA training infrastructure, a notable step forward has been taken in this direction by the scientific community.
A seismogram is a particular representation of the regular oscillations of a volcano. The sonification of these
seismograms has recently become possible thanks to the new advanced features introduced by the data audification
analysis (www.jyu.fi/hum/laitokset/musiikki/en/research/coe/materials/miditoolbox/Manual). Data audification is
the representation of data by means of sound signals (typically, waveforms or melodies). It can be considered as the
acoustic counterpart of data graphic visualization, i.e. a mathematical mapping of information from data sets to
sounds. In the last few years this new way to represent data sets and patterns has acquired more and more interest in
different disciplines such as science and engineering and education and training. Although most data analysis
techniques are exclusively visual in nature, data presentation and exploration systems could benefit from the
addition of sonification capabilities. The possibility to add sonification aspects and describe patterns or trends
through sounds is particularly useful when dealing with complex high-dimensional data, or in data monitoring tasks
where it is practically impossible to use the visual inspection. Indeed, sonification may give information about the
inner structure of the represented data using the power of an abstract description. All kinds of regularities in the
original data set will be reflected to the aural signal generated by the audification algorithm. The main advantage of
this technique is that it make easier for users to recognize a change in sound with respect to a modification in
something which has to be looked at. It is quite impossible, for instance, to distinguish a blinking light flashing 100
times per second from another one flashing at 200, 1000, or 10000 times per second, while it is quite easy to
recognize periodic signals from 20 Hz to 20000 Hz. In this paper, this approach it has been used to approximate the
volcano to a huge musical instrument which can produce a sound non detectable by the human ear as the frequency
is too low. The larger the mountain the lower the frequencies emitted. Seismograms are the graphical representations
of these infrasonic sounds. To hear these sounds, it is necessary to perform a special manipulation called “pitch
shift”. In other words, the infrasonic frequencies are mapped to the ones that can be heard by the human ear. The
hope is that by studying large amount of these sounds (which can be easily collected, categorized, stored, and
retrieved thanks to the grid databases) it will be possible to learn more about the phase before eruptions. It will also
potentially be possible to fully characterize eruptions from a sonic point of view to make more accurate predictions
of their occurrences.
The melodisation of a data set, i.e. the creation of a melody starting from a series of data, is an interesting way to
convert into aural signals almost any kind of information. One of the main reasons for converting a data set into a
melody is the possibility to perform quantitative analyses on them by means of standard open source tools, like the
seek for self similarities, self organization behaviour, recurrent patterns, quasi periodicities, “signature tunes”
(which would help blind researchers to deal with data analysis as well). For the sake of simplicity we can imagine a
set of m elements (a list or a discrete set of values) to be sonified. The sonification will provide a melody, a list of
notes chosen among a set of n, to be drawn onto a music score. Without loosing generality, we can consider a
standard, numerical, coding convention for the (well tempered) notes to be represented. In particular, we shall refer
to the MIDI code, according to which the central ”C” note corresponds to the integer 60, ”C#” is 61, ”D” is 62, and
so on (any semitone shift will add or subtract 1 from the previous value). The lowest acceptable MIDI value is 0 and
the higher is 127 so there are 128 possible notes that can be used to represent our data. Compared to other
sonification methods, the MIDI sonification has the great advantage to code information into one of the most widely
used musical formats. Almost all the applications for music analysis/sequencing are able to operate and play MIDI
files in extremely customizable ways. Moreover, many programming languages, such as Java for example, have the
possibility to load and use special libraries to efficiently manage them (see for example jMusic:
http://jmusic.ci.qut.edu.au/).
4.1. Sound production on the Grid
Even though the usefulness of sound representations was clearly accepted by the scientific community, its
practical use has so far received limited attention because of the intensive computation usually required to produce
the sounds. The Grid has made the application of this method possible. Digital audio usually deals with very high
sampling rates. The standard value for CD quality audio signals is 44100 Hz, so to produce one second of audio data
is necessary to compute 44100 values. One minute will take 60 x 44100 = 2646000 calculated samples. Geophysical

404

S. Avanzo et al. / Procedia Computer Science 1 (2012) 397–406
Author name / Procedia Computer Science 00 (2010) 000–000

data sonification with the use of Grid infrastructures has been carried out since 2003. Initially, the sonification
process has been applied to data collected by a digital seismograph placed on the Etna volcano in Italy and recently
to data collected on the Tungurahua (www.volcanodiscovery.com/en/tungurahua.html) volcano in Ecuador. A total
of 60252 samples were analyzed. The goal was to learn more about eruption dynamics from patterns (and pattern
evolution) in the sonograms. In the case of the sonification of Tungurahua, scientists from Italy and Ecuador
involved in EGEE and EELA (www.eu-eela.eu) projects, collected the geophysical information on seismic
movements which were then transformed into audible sound waves using the process of data sonification. In a
second step, the sound waves were also “scored” as melodies. The resulting volcanic music can then be analyzed to
look for patterns of behaviour and self similarities in eruption dynamics that can be used to predict the future
activity of a volcano.
4.2. MIDI Sonification of Mt.Etna Volcano Seismograms
Mount Etna is the Europe tallest and largest active volcano (its volume is more than 350 km3) and is one of the
most active volcanoes on Earth. It is located along the eastern (Ionian) coast of Sicily and occupies a surface area of
around 1200 km2 with a perimeter exceeding 135 km. Its summit height varies frequently (from about 3315 to 3350
m) depending on the eruptive activity or minor collapses at the highest craters. The MIDI sonification of the Mt.
Etna seismograms could be described in a simple way as follows.
Let us start from an empty score, as the one shown in fig. 4. We can then imagine to superimpose the seismograms
to the score. How many musical notes or octaves are involved is one of the parameter of the sonification; one can
take into account the 88 keys of the piano or the 128 MIDI notes, or some other subset like all the white keys and
draw the notes according to the shape of the seismogram. The time scale is another parameter of the sonification. As
we were discussing above, one can tight or enlarge the rhythmical structure to disentangle some peculiar
phenomena. The score is hence ready to be played. The Java package developed for this kind of sonification works
just in this way, starting from a discrete data set (the digitalized seismogram) to produce the MIDI score. The metro
is customizable as well as the musical scale (i.e., the subset of 128 MIDI notes to be used) and the playing
instrument. Following this procedure, we get a melody whose profile perfectly follows the shape and the behaviour
of the seismograms, reproducing the oscillation amplitude variations and giving a quick and effective insight to their
overall structural properties. Some examples of this sonification can be listened from the Mt. Etna volcano
sonification web site (http://grid.ct.infn.it/etnasound/) where it is also possible to download the PDF scores of such
sonifications.

Fig. 4. (a) we start from an empty score; (b) we superimpose the seismogram; (c) we put notes according to the shape of the seismogram; (d)
finally we get the melody

4.3. Sound production on the Grid
The first experiments involving sound production with INFN-Grid facilities started during the last months of
2003. In September 2003, CSound (www.csounds.com/whatis/index.html), a free and cross-platform acoustic
compiler, developed by Barry Vercoe (MIT), was installed at INFN Catania and the software to interface it with the
Grid middleware was written. The compiler, written in C, was tested within the new environment and since its
beginning the test phase produced interesting results such as efficient use of the computing resources and
customizable quality of the audio files. After a 4-5 months test phase, CSound was deployed on other Grid sites in

S. Avanzo et al. / Procedia Computer Science 1 (2012) 397–406

405

Author name / Procedia Computer Science 00 (2010) 000–000

Europe and, since the beginning of 2004, CSound is one of the new resources available on a relevant fraction of the
continental infrastructure. Data sonification, sound synthesis and algorithmic composition have been investigated
using couple of CSound files and Python (or sometimes Perl) scripts. Python scripts have been used to prepare the
right data files during the tests. The sonification package has been written in Java and made it run on the INFN Grid.
Sonified data were geophysical signals (Mt. Etna volcano activity) collected by a digital seismograph. The
computing power needed to run such sonifications and the storage required to keep the results are really large. To
create one minute of music coming from volcanoes, the algorithm has to process more than 2.6 millions of data,
taking more than 120 MB of disk space and between 10 and 12 CPU hours on a state-of-the-art PC. This is why
Grid is a natural platform for this kind of studies. Here follow the steps performed on Grid to let Mt. Etna volcano
plays. First of all seismgraphical data have been recorded by a digital seismograph at a sampling frequency of about
100Hz. The total amount of processed data were 44 files, each of them taking almost 1MB and containing 27
minutes of recording of the Mt. Etna volcano activity. Here follows an example taken from on of these files:
ASCII files processed:
Starting time: 15/06/2001 00:03:39.920, Frequency: 100.1603 Hz, Samples: 168960
44 43 42 44 44 45 46 43 45 41 48 43 45 45 [..]

After a first scaling procedure (to properly arrange the samples in the [-1,1] interval) an array of samples is
constructed. The waveform coded in the audio file will have exactly the same regularities, also recognizable thanks
to the presence of some higher lines in the spectrum file. The order of magnitude of the frequency of quasi-regular
phenomena is in the range 0-50 Hz, with a spectral envelope centred around 25-30 Hz. Starting from the scaled and
re-sampled collection of values, two interpolation methods have been implemented: linear interpolation and sampleand-hold (SH) interpolation. Even if linear interpolation returns particularly "smoother" sound strings, nevertheless,
for some analysis application, it could be useful to prefer the SH audio file where no external values are added to the
original (scaled) data set. For each waveform coded, a Grid job, described by a special file containing (at least) the
files to be transferred to the computing node (the Java source code Sonification.java), the data file to be sonified
(etna.dat), and a list of files to be transferred back from the computing node to the PC when the computation has
finished (audio file, ASCII files representing waveform and spectrum), has been submitted. The audio file collected
back contains the sonification of the volcano activity. Moreover, the possibility, granted by the Grid, to have a
unique (distributed) shared database for all the seismological data, accessible from the researchers from all over the
world, will surely pave the way for a more effective and quick interaction among scientists (even coming from
different domains). An interesting and worth mentioning “side effect” of the work done with seismic data
audification was the world premiere which aimed to create a dance show based on volcanic sounds to raise public
awareness about global warning, The event created a unique creative union between Science and the Cultural
Heritage communities. For the first time ever, on the 14th of March 2009 a modern dance company performed to
music generated from seismic data, recorded from four volcanoes across three continents. This unique event was
facilitated by DANTE, the provider of high speed research and education networks, the two distributed computing
projects EGEE and EELA, as well as the CityDance Ensemble (www.citydance.net), a prestigious company based in
Washington, D.C.. The dance, titled “The Mountain”, and choreographed by Jason Garcia Ignacio, was part of
CityDance Ensemble’s Carbon, a work-in-progress about climate change. The video about this performance is
available for download at www.dante.net/upload/mpg/TheMountain.mpg. “The Mountain”’s choreography is based
on the structure of melodies created out of seismic waves recorded from Mount Etna in Italy, Mount Tungurahua in
Ecuador, and the Mountains Pinatubo and Mayon in the Philippines. Data were transformed into audible sound
waves using the sonification technique described above by Domenico Vicinanza (the corresponding author of this
paper) who also composed the music used in the dance performance.
5. Conclusions
The benefits of the works presented in this paper are manifolds. ASTRA makes it possible to recreate the sound
of instruments that would have previously been either too expensive or too difficult to manufacture manually. It also
allows any model and its associated data to be accessed by other parties. This means that the research data can be
shared around the world, making it a truly international project of immense value both to archaeologists and

406

S. Avanzo et al. / Procedia Computer Science 1 (2012) 397–406
Author name / Procedia Computer Science 00 (2010) 000–000

historians. The world premiere concert held in Naples (and, the Catania Concert “Musica@Fisica” held on the 26th
of June 2009), clearly showcased the immense potential for creativity when two worlds come together: art/music on
one side and science/technology on the other. With their huge computing power, essential for the sound modelling,
Grid infrastructures like EGEE and EUMEDGRID, based on high-speed networks such as GÉANT and
EUMEDCONNECT2, can act as catalysts of creativity. The success of the ASTRA project demonstrates, once
again, how high speed networking technology can underpin research collaboration across a wide range of subjects
and allow the academic world to work together across multiple locations. As its full name indicates, ASTRA hopes
to bring a number of ancient instruments back to life, eventually creating a complete orchestra made up of
yesteryear’s gear. One of the most relevant, long-term results is the birth of the Lost Sounds Orchestra
(www.lostsoundorchestra.org), the ASTRA project orchestra: a unique ensemble made of reconstructed ancient
instruments coming from the ASTRA research activities. It is the first orchestra in the world composed only by
reconstructed instruments. The purpose is to involve musicians, artists, collaborating with real players,
instrumentalists and singers, to enjoy together a heritage lost in the past. It plays sounds being lost in time due to
instruments too complex both to build and play. The GILDA and EUMEDGRID infrastructures will continue to be
heavily used to produce the huge amount of high-quality sound samples needed by the orchestra. For any further
information or enquiry, readers can contact either info@astraproject.org or info@lostsoundorchestra.org.
Data sonification and melodisation are two applications aiming at converting data and information coming from
scientific environments into audible signals (melodies, waveforms, etc). One of the most important outcomes is the
possibility of spotting similarities and patterns in more efficient way. Fast Fourier Transforms and Wavelet analysis
can be applied to sonified data in an easy and effective way, trying to correlate spectral evolutions and geophysics
(changes in volcanoes’ behaviour). The successful tests done in Italy with Mt Etna and in Ecuador with Mt
Tungurahua clearly demonstrate the interest of the scientific community in this new approach of sound analysis.
Another relevant result is the possibility offered to blind researchers to perform data analysis and data mining
listening to the data instead of looking at them on a screen. The data sonification experiments have been carried out
in collaboration with the INFN Division of Catania and the TRAC (Technologies and Research for Contemporary
Arts) project. For more information about the TRAC project, readers can contact gaetano.foti@ct.infn.it.

Acknowledgements
We gratefully acknowledge all the people who supported this work contributing with ideas, requirements and
feedback. Authors thank in particular the support provided by the EELA, EUMEDGRID and EGEE-III projects. The
GILDA Team is also acknowledged for the help provided in interfacing the application described in this abstract
with the gLite (www.glite.org) grid middleware.

References
1. L. Hiller, P. Ruiz, Synthesizing Musical Sounds by Solving the Wave Equation for Vibrating Objects: Part 1 - Part 2 JAES (1971).
2. J. O. Smith, Physical modeling using digital waveguides. Computer Music Journal, 16(4), (1992) 74–91.
3. J. O. Smith, .Physical modeling synthesis update. Computer Music Journal, 20(2), (1996) 44-56
4. R. Barbera, L. N.. Ciuffo, et al. GILDA: Grid INFN Virtual Laboratory for Dissemination Activities. In: International Conference on
Computer Supported Education, Lisboa. Conference Proceedings. Setúbal: INSTICC Press, (2) (2009) 273-278
5. G. Andronico, et al. GENIUS: a web portal for the grid. Nuclear Instruments and Methods in Physics Research, A 502, (2003) 433-436.
6. G. Andronico, et al. GENIUS: a simple and easy way to access computational and data grid. Future Generation of Computing System, 19,
(2003) 805-813.
7. G. Andronico, et al. The GENIUS web portal: an easy way to access the grid. Methods of Information in Medice, 44, (2005) 210-220.
8. R. Barbera, et al. The GENIUS Grid Portal: Its Architecture, Improvements of Features ,and New Implementations about Authentication
and Authorization. Paper presented at the 16th IEEE International Workshops on. doi: 10.1109/WETICE.2007.4407171 (2007)

