,

Procedia Computer Science 1 (2012) 761–770
Procedia Computer Science 00 (2010) 1–10

Procedia Computer
Science
www.elsevier.com/locate/procedia

International Conference on Computational Science, ICCS 2010

Multiscale multiagent architecture validation by virtual instruments
in molecular dynamics experiments
Manuel Combes∗1 , Benjamin Buin∗ , Marc Parentho¨en∗ and Jacques Tisseau∗
LISyC, ENIB, UEB
CERV, 25 rue Claude Chapp´e, F-29280 Plouzan´e, France

Abstract
A multiagent architecture is proposed in order to build a physics laboratory in virtual reality. Thermodynamics
experiments are used for its validation. Classical numerical resolution of thermodynamics problems comes up against
the number and variability of boundary conditions. Based on molecular dynamics, a multiagent approach is proposed,
resting upon agent spatial and temporal autonomy. This approach grants each particle a capacity to identify its environment using both its own clock and perceptive area. Individual molecular properties are injected into thermal and
mechanical models, and macroscopic gas behaviors can be detected and quantiﬁed by 3D virtual instruments, created
in order to involve the user into the simulation. In order to assess its ability to simulate thermodynamic experiments,
our method is applied to classical situations, such as the Joule-Gay Lussac experiment or the maxwellian relaxation
in a hard-sphere gas. The simulated gas behavior is in good agreement with theoretical results for gases without
interaction. Taking into account the volume of the molecules, our method also allows to quantify the mean free path
and the average collision time for Neon and Xenon hard-sphere gases at equilibrium. Dynamic speed relaxation from
uniform to maxwellian distribution is simulated successfully, and molecular covolume are also measured with such
virtual gases.
c 2012 Published by Elsevier Ltd. Open access under CC BY-NC-ND license.
⃝

Keywords: multiagent architecture, virtual laboratory, thermodynamics

1. Introduction
Thermodynamics is the branch of Physics that is concerned with the relationship between heat and other forms of
energy, by coupling various mechanical interactions, such as collision, diﬀusion and convection. Its application to refrigerators or engines is common, but thermodynamics also examine global change and particles accelerator, implying
highly multiscale phenomena. Such problems are generally modelled by partial diﬀerential equations, numerically
resolved, for instance with ﬁnite volume or ﬁnite element methods [1, 2, 3].
However these methods are not eﬃcient as regards boundary conditions variability, in particular in complex situations
1 Corresponding
∗

author

Email address: {combes,parenthoen,tisseau}@enib.fr (Manuel Combes∗ , Benjamin Buin∗ , Marc Parentho¨en∗ and Jacques Tisseau∗ )

c 2012 Published by Elsevier Ltd. Open access under CC BY-NC-ND license.
1877-0509 ⃝
doi:10.1016/j.procs.2010.04.082

762

M.Combes
Combes et
et al. / Procedia
00 1(2010)
1–10
M.
ProcediaComputer
ComputerScience
Science
(2012)
761–770

2

involving many physical interactions, with various scales of space and time [4, 5, 6]. In this case it is impossible to
solve exactly even simple problems like gas behavior with pressure variations, because at macroscopic scale, any gas
approximately contains 1023 entities.
A method has been developed for ﬁfty years to by-pass this problem, injecting individual microscopic properties in
physical models, in order to simulate macroscopic experiments. This branch of physics is called molecular dynamics
[7, 8, 9], and allows to deal with complex boundary conditions. Now, the approach we propose uses various specialized
entities : they are not only provided with individual properties, but also with interactions (perception, communication)
between them. Particles are simulated by agents that build their own perceptive area, and other agents manage asynchronously the interactions between particles. That is why this approach is called multiagent simulation [10], resting
upon individual-based models [11]. At diﬀerent scales, other agents are used to create virtual instruments, in order
to measure macroscopic physical values. In terms of method validation, the advantage of molecular dynamics is that
we do know many experimental and theoretical results, which allows us to assess the relevance of such a multiagent
architecture.
In this article, a simple thermodynamic system is examined in virtual reality: a gas, whose complexity can be chosen,
is submitted to various experiments with well known theoretical results. We ﬁrst consider ideal gas equilibrium and
expansion, and then study dynamic experiments for hard-sphere gases. This validation may allow us to apply our
multiagent approach to more diﬃcult problems, for instance dynamic energy transfer process, which is based on both
mechanics and thermodynamics.
2. Multiagent architecture
In order to study complex boundary conditions, we have built a multiagent system architecture. Diﬃcult boundary
conditions management is caused by their number and variability, in addition to the various scales of time and space.
Such objects are called ”complex systems”. In order to study them eﬃciently, we have built a multiagent system
architecture.
2.1. Physical individual-based models
A complex system is a priori open, heterogeneous and formed by entities that can be complex too. In this case,
the system presents diﬀerent levels of structure and interaction, resting upon diﬀerent scales of time and space [12].
Simulating physics in a virtual environment, created specially for this application, implies to pay attention to causality
problems : physical models will only show what they were built to show [13]. In virtual reality, the model user can
a priori interact with the simulation. This kind of work has a lot of common points with experimental sciences, but
presents an access to numerical methods. We call it ”in virtuo experiments” [14]. Hence emerging results are the
product of both simulated system and user behavior.
In individual-based models, the state is a structured set of objects described not only by variables’ values, but also by
ﬂuctuating relations between entities [15]. Such a system is called multiagent system, able to carry out complex collective tasks in dynamic environments, without external control or central coordination, like insect colonies or immune
systems. The autonomous character of an agent is not in its behavior, since it is restricted by determinist laws, but in
its ability to observe its own dynamics and those of its neighbours. The central idea consists in providing the agents
with a capacity to recognize its neighbourhood, and to interact with it in three steps : perception/decision/action.
In this study, the multiagent approach enables to follow individual trajectories, simpliﬁes boundary conditions management, and authorizes the coupling of interactions, as studied in many ﬁelds : hydrological modelling [16], selforganization of multi-protein structures [17, 18], chemical kinetics of blood coagulation [19], or halieutic resources
dynamics [20]. The present work is aimed at assessing a multiagent architecture, able to simulate physics experiments
in virtual reality, and allowing the user to interact with the virtual laboratory. Moreover, this environment was developed in order to be usable without advanced knowledge in coding ; such an architecture may be used by physicists,
biologists, or ecologists.
2.2. Our multiagent architecture
Molecular dynamics simulations described here are based on an enactive architecture [21] that takes place in the
AR´eVi environment, developed in the European Center for Virtual Reality. In such an evolutive architecture, agents
are characterized by a temporal and spatial autonomy.

M. Combes
/ Procedia
Computer
Science100
(2010)761–770
1–10
M. Combes
et al.et/ al.
Procedia
Computer
Science
(2012)

3
763

Time. Temporal autonomy remains in the ability of each agent to decide on its own activities. It carries its own
clock to determine its activity, contrary to classical resolution methods, based upon synchronous iterations. Our
agents are scheduled by asynchronous chaotic iterations [22].
Space. Spatial autonomy remains in the way that each agent perceives its neighbourhood: it builds its own perceptive
zone, setting speciﬁc beacons for each measurement. A beacon is a position (x, t, dx) – location, date, spatial
resolution – associated to a question. Every agent able to reply to this question will participate to give an answer,
if the beacon is eﬀectively located in its inﬂuence area. Spatial scheduling is ensured by the localization of the
beacons in the inﬂuence neighbourhood of the other agents.
Some multiagent simulations also use asynchronous iterations, with a variable optimized time step [13], but this
method may involve important calculation time if too many interactions are calculated, because each time step is
chosen through an error evaluation of the particle acceleration. In this context, cluster dynamics may be scheduled by
a ﬁxed time step [18]. Moreover, this approach is an adequate method to solve homogene speed and low Reynolds
number problems [23], but since we study here particles’ collisions, a quick interaction management is required, and
neighbours’ beacons detection remains more adapted.
3. Gas thermodynamics
Gas thermodynamics is a good application of a multiagent system paradigm. Indeed simple gas models, whose
behavior is intuitive in classical experiments, can raise important problems of boundary conditions management. We
propose here to study two gas models : an ideal gas, and a Van der Waals gas. The theoretical results about these
gases are known ; and because they are quite similar to low pressure real gases, their experimental behaviors are also
well described [24, 25, 26].
3.1. The simulated gas models
Both ideal and hard-sphere gas models are implemented in our in virtuo experiments.
Ideal gas molecules have no geometrical extent and they do not see each other (there is no electrostatic potential
between them). Consequently, they only collide with the walls, and these collisions are responsible of the existence
of a pressure inside. The results of the ideal gas model are derived from four strong hypotheses : 1) molecular
chaos at equilibrium : the vector components of position and momentum of the particles were randomly assigned in
three dimensions, 2) uniform particle spatial distribution, in the absence of an external ﬁeld (neither electrostatic nor
gravitational) 3) isotropic distribution of virtual molecule velocity 4) independence of velocity components.
The probability density of the ideal gas speed was deduced by [27] from these four hypotheses, and explicitly
depends on particle mass m and generation temperature T = 300 K [25] :
Pv (v) = (

3
m
−mv2
) 2 4πv2 exp
2πkB T
2kB T

(1)

with kB = 1, 38.10−23 J.K −1 the Boltzmann constant. Root mean square speed u is calculated with Maxwell’s velocity
distribution. Under these conditions, for N particles conﬁned in a volume V, pressure P and temperature T of an ideal
gas explicitly depend on u :
mu2
T=
(2)
3kB
and

Nmu2
(3)
3V
Last but not least, the internal energy U is a macroscopic quantity which has a very signiﬁcant role in gas behavior.
It is the total energy due to the motion of the ideal gas molecules. It is directly related to temperature T , and in the
case of punctual particles without interaction, equipartition theorem [28] gives the relation :
P=

U=

3
NkB T
2

(4)

764

M.Combes
Combes et
et al. / Procedia
00 1(2010)
1–10
M.
ProcediaComputer
ComputerScience
Science
(2012)
761–770

4

Finally, at equilibrium, thermodynamic variables N, P, T, V that describe an ideal gas are related by the ideal gas
state equation :
(5)
PV = NkB T
The hard-sphere gas model introduces particles’ volume in order to take into account molecular collisions. In this
case, impacts are elastic : the interaction is considered as inﬁnitely short, and conserves the total momentum and
kinetic energy, like perfect pool balls. It is a ﬁrst step to Van der Waals gas model, that would also consider short
range electrostatic interactions [28, 29].
3.2. Virtual measuring instruments
The objective is to measure the thermodynamics quantities P and T that deﬁne a real gas state in laboratory
experiments. A virtual physics laboratory was built with computing tools of the AReVi environment, developed in
the European Center for Virtual Reality, in order to simulate in virtuo experiments [22]. These tools permitted to
create particle generators, pressure and temperature sensors, collision counters, virtual enclosures and cameras that
provide an immersive video of the experiment. This virtual environment can also be provided with portals between
various boxes, or obstacles like porous tubes. Gas behavior measurement permits the evaluation of instrumentation
performances, in comparison with theoretical results. Equation (4) gives an in virtuo gas temperature deﬁnition, that
is calculated by measuring in real time the kinetic energy of the system : a volume thermometer was built with a cube
that works like a counter, adding kinetic energies of all the particles present in its volume at time t.
T thermo =

Uthermo
3
.N
thermo .k B
2

=

Nthermo 1
2
i=1
2 mi v i
3
2 .Nthermo .k B

(6)

We choose to calculate the average temperature, with X measurements. For that reason, we do not measure exactly
the root mean square speed, and it would be the case only with a statistical number (almost 1023 ) of particles in the
volume. This point will be discussed later on.
Pressure sensors (manometers) also realize statistical measurement. An inﬁnitely thin disk counts during a time tmano
the number of particles that bounce on its surface S. Then each manometer adds the momentum variation Δp = mΔv
of all these particles, and taking into account the particles’ angle of incidence, pressure is deﬁned by :
Pmano =

2
tmano .S

Nmano

mi .vi .cos(vi ; n)

(7)

i=1

for one direction. Since two manometers oriented in two directions would present two distinct pressure values, a
three-dimensional solution is proposed : using three orthogonal surfaces, each particle projetcs its total contribution
on an orthonormal basis (X, Y, Z), and the average value in calculated. It should be noticed that pressure is measured
by a surface sensor, adding quantities proportional to speed, whereas temperature is evaluated by a volume, adding
quantities proportional to speed squared. Nevertheless, pressure and temperature are supposed to be proportionnal.
Actually, this apparent paradox is justiﬁed because temperature is deﬁned as a statistical instantaneous mean, whereas
pressure is a temporal mean. Indeed, dividing by elementary time dt permits sensors to take into account the particle
collision frequency, so that the fastest particles have a large inﬂuence on temperature, because they bounce on the
manometer more often. That is why in virtuo pressure is coherent with the corresponding temperature, and both respect the ideal gas law.

4. In virtuo experiments
4.1. Ideal gas law
Macroscopic pressure and temperature are measured in a virtual 10 nm side enclosure, containing 8000 Xenon
particles of molar mass M = 131, 29.10−3 g.mol−1 . The particle generator ensures a maxwellian velocity distribution,
with a generation temperature T = 300 K. The principle of inertia rules each particle’s dynamics between two successive bounces. Collisions are supposed to be elastic, i.e. the total kinetic energy remains constant, and consequently

M. Combes
/ Procedia
Computer
Science100
(2010)761–770
1–10
M. Combes
et al.et/ al.
Procedia
Computer
Science
(2012)

5
765

the molecule speed too. The agent-molecule veriﬁes at each step (time t) that it still remains inside the box. If it does,
it keeps on its way ; if it does not, it is reinjected at next step (time t + dt) as if it was a symmetric bounce. The virtual
instruments used for this experiment are similar to the sensors presented on ﬁgure 1.
The simulated gas is in thermodynamic equilibrium within the enclosure, and sensor response time is chosen as
Δt sensor = 1.10−10 s. The thermodynamic quantities measured are :
P.V = 3, 301.10−17 ± 0, 02.10−17 J
N.kB .T = 3, 300.10−17 J
Temperature is determinist because the enclosure and the thermometer have the same volume, whereas pressure
measurement is a temporal integration, with its associated uncertainty. It should be noticed that there is no need of
1023 particules to obtain a good agreement of the ideal gas law.
4.2. Joule-Gay Lussac experiment
The Joule-Gay Lussac experiment is a classical thermodynamic problem that consists in abruptly expanding a
gas, initially described by To, Po, Vo, into a greater volume. A portal is instantaneously opened, without energy
contribution, and the process is adiabatic (no heat transfer through the walls). Figure 1a represents the gas expansion
during the virtual experiment. This expansion is theoretically isoenergetic, i.e. gas internal energy remains constant.

(a)

(b)

Virtual experiment of the Joule - Gay Lussac expansion. (a) The volume was enlarged abruptly : the gas expands in the space
in an isoenergetic way. Surface manometers are brown, and volume thermometers are red. (b) Joule-Gay Lussac expansion is
isoenergetic. For an ideal gas, the experiment is monothermal. Thermal peak is a kinetic eﬀect. The short thermal drop in the ﬁrst
box illustrates gas energy conservation.
Figure 1: Joule - Gay Lussac virtual expansion

In the particular case of the perfect gas, the ﬁnal temperature is equal to the initial temperature (monothermal
expansion). In order to evaluate the temporal autonomy of AReVi agents, the temperature evolution is measured in
real time (ﬁgure 1b). Two results should be noticed here. Firstly, the Joule-Gay Lussac in virtuo experiment is indeed
monothermal for a virtual gas without interaction. Then, during a transitory period, a thermal peak is observed. This
phenomenon is also observed experimentally in laboratory and can be explained by a kinetic argument. During an
expansion into an evacuated enclosure, the fastest (and thus most energetic) particles are the ﬁrst to pass through the
manometer surface, consequently the measured temperature is higher during a short transitory period. Moreover, this
temperature is calculated in the laboratory referential, which gives an additional contribution to the peak, because in
this case, expanded gas presents a group motion. The short thermal drop detected by the ﬁrst thermometer illustrates
the conservation of the total kinetic energy, since the fastest molecules were liberated ﬁrst. This result highlights the
eﬃciency of agents’ temporal autonomy, since dynamic behavior can be simulated with such a multiagent architecture.

766

M.Combes
Combes et
et al. / Procedia
00 1(2010)
1–10
M.
ProcediaComputer
ComputerScience
Science
(2012)
761–770

6

4.3. Hard-sphere gases
In order to get closer to the behavior of real gases, when pressure is not low enough to consider that molecules
are blind, new microscopic characteristics can be introduced. Here, Van der Waals’ hard-sphere interaction consists
in simulating one to one, every elastic collision between a molecule of radius R and its neighbours.
Each agent has one main activity : to move and check if neighbours are present in its perception zone : a sphere of
radius 2.v.dt + R surrounding each agent. For each detected neighbour, intermolecular distance is calculated for every
step. A condition of collision is that intermolecular distance is decreasing. If this distance does not decrease, there is
no collision. If it decreases, a minimum impact time is determined, and when this time is reached, the molecules do
collide (elastic impact). Then, new molecular positions and velocities are calculated.
We now consider nonpunctual particles, and three experiments are carried out with Xenon and Neon hard-sphere
gases.
4.3.1. Maxwellian relaxation
A dynamic experiment is implemented in order to assess the architecture ability to simulate physics out of equilibrium. A Xenon hard-sphere gas is placed in an enclosure in unstable state : the initial velocity distribution is uniform
at vo = 238, 74 m.s−1 , which corresponds to T = 300 K. After 4, 2.10−8 s of simulation, a new velocity distribution is
reached, which is illustrated in ﬁgure 2. This result is in good agreement with the theoretical maxwellian relaxation

Speed distribution of a Xenon hard-sphere gas after
4, 2.10−8 s of simulation. The initial speed state was
uniform at vo = 238, 74 m.s−1 . The statistical distribution reached after relaxation is in good agreement
with the theoretical curve of maxwellian distribution for T = 300 K.

Figure 2: maxwellian relaxation of a Xenon hard-sphere gas

[25, 30], which is due to elastic collisions : both total momentum and kinetic energy are conserved during a collision,
and each impact contributes to energy redistribution, until the gas system reach thermodynamic equilibrium.
4.3.2. Mean free paths
An enclosure of volume V contains N = 1000 hard-sphere particles of radius R, with a maxwellian velocity
distribution calculated with a generation temperature T = 300 K. An identical box of side L = 10 nm contains a
perfect gas at the same temperature. The mean free path l is deﬁned as the average distance covered by a particle
between two successive impacts. An ideal gas can be described by a mean free path lwtheo for collisions on walls, and
theo
for collisions between molecules. Theoretical expressions of these statistical quantities can
a hard-sphere gas by lm
be calculated (cf Appendix) :
(8)
lwtheo = 0, 669 ∗ L
V
(9)
2.N.4πR2
The corresponding mean collision times τw and τm are theoretically related to the mean free paths by the mean speed
Vm of the distribution [25, 28]:
(10)
l = Vm .τ
theo
= √
lm

M. Combes
/ Procedia
Computer
Science100
(2010)761–770
1–10
M. Combes
et al.et/ al.
Procedia
Computer
Science
(2012)

7
767

An additional virtual instrument was created in order to measure these statistical path quantities and was called balistometer. At each impact with a wall or another molecule, every agent sends the balistometer both its own position
and virtual date. The balistometer thus calculates the mean free path, the average collision time and the number of
collisions (on the walls or between molecules) describing the experiment.
During an experiment duration texp with N particles, the sum of virtual times of every agent is equal to N.texp , and this
quantity can also be calculated using average collision times :
N.texp = Nw .τw = Nm .τm

(11)

with Nw and Nm the numbers of impacts with a wall and a neighbor respectively, considering that Nm is double the
number of molecular collisions, since the balistometer counts every agent message. Experimental and theoretical
results are listed in Table 1 for Neon and Xenon hard-sphere gases.
Table 1: Experimental and theoretical statistics comparison for Ne and Xe hard-sphere gases.

Molecule
M (g.mol−1 )
R (10−10 m)
Vm (m.s−1 )
lwtheo (nm)
lw (nm)
Δlw (nm)
theo
lm
(nm)
lm (nm)
Δlm (nm)
Vm ∗ τm (nm)
N ∗ texp (10−5 s)
Nw ∗ τw (10−5 s)
Nm ∗ τm (10−5 s)

Neon
20.18
1.54
570,9
6,691
6,689
0,004
2,16
3,15
0,05
3,16
3,50
3,49
3,50

Xenon
131.3
2.16
217,1
6,691
6,688
0,004
1,06
1,50
0,05
1,51
3,50
3,49
3,50

This table aims at comparing theoretical and in virtuo results. To produce this table, atom’s radius R and molar mass M are given in [29]. Vm
is the molecule mean speed that corresponds to 300 K. Theoretical calculation of mean free paths lwtheo , lmtheo is presented in appendix. Mean
free path uncertainties Δlw and Δlm are calculated with the StudentFisher law [31]. Experimental results lw , lm were measured by our balistometer agent.
We can observe that for ideal gases, the experimental mean free path
is in excellent agreement with the theoretical value, which validates the
bounces management on the walls. This experiment highlights the approximation made in [25] for the theoretical calculation of lw , which is
not trivial (see appendix). For the two hard-sphere gases, there is agreement between the experimental terms of equation (11). Nevertheless,
the experimental mean free path lm and the average collision time τm
only correspond to the correct order of magnitude. This observation illustrates the fact that the balistometer does not count enough molecular
collisions during texp . The reason could be that agents face a problem
of real time adaptation of their detection zone.

4.3.3. Hard-sphere covolume
The same experimental context is used in order to evaluate the excluded covolume N.b of hard-sphere gases,
inaccessible for the N particules because of collisions. The initial velocity distribution of the molecules is identical
in both enclosures, so temperature remains the same, but pressure eﬀects can be observed independently. In this way,
state equations can be written :
(12)
N.kB .T = Pideal .V = Pcollision .(V − N.b)

which suggests two methods to measure molecular covolume b : one direct, calculating (T , P) in the Van der Waals
enclosure, and using the state equation ; and one indirect, comparing the pressure values in the two boxes :
bdirect =

kB .T
V
−
N Pcollision

(13)

Pideal
V
.(1 −
)
(14)
N
Pcollision
In the hard-sphere gas model, when two spheres A and B are in contact, the excluded volume for one molecule is half
the volume of a shpere of radius RA + RB :
bindirect =

4
4
1
V = ( π(RA + RB )3 ) = 4.( πR3 )
3
2
3

(15)

768

M.Combes
Combes et
et al. / Procedia
00 1(2010)
1–10
M.
ProcediaComputer
ComputerScience
Science
(2012)
761–770

8

This molecular covolume is slightly diﬀerent of the usual experimental results because the Van der Waals’ radius is
used here, which is a little bigger than the minimum approach distance, since it is deﬁned as the distance between
non-linked atoms in crystals.
For this experiment, Neon and Xenon characteristics and measurements are listed in Table 2, and uncertainty Δb
is calculated by error propagation. Virtual gas covolume measurements remain in a good range of values, which is
interesting in terms of validation of agent spatial autonomy, but measurement uncertainties are very high relatively to
covolume values.
Table 2: Direct and indirect results of covolume measurement

Molecule
M (g.mol−1 )
R (10−10 m)
bh−s (10−29 m3 )
bdirect (10−29 m3 )
Δbdirect (10−29 m3 )
bindirect (10−29 m3 )
Δbindirect (10−29 m3 )
bexp (10−29 m3 )

Neon
20.18
1.54
6.12
3,62
1,79
3,67
2,80
2,84

Xenon
131.3
2.16
16,9
9,30
1,52
9,32
2,85
8,47

Atom’s radius R and molar mass M are given in [29] (as
for Table 1). Theoretical covolumes bh−s can be found in
[30]. Experimental bdirect and bindirect come from our virtual experiments, while bexp comes from experiments in
the real physical world [30]. Uncertainty Δb is calculated
by error propagation.

These results are not a good agreement with the hard-sphere gas value, but they correspond quite well with experimental covolume, measured in laboratory by critical pressure measurements. This observation may question the
validity of classical hard-sphere covolume calculation in further work.
Van der Waals’ attractive coeﬃcient may also be measured in virtuo, introducing molecular electric ﬁeld, but the
manometer needs to be more precise, because it realizes surface measurements. In order to improve the instruments’ precision, a cluster management could be employed : each cluster of particles may contain a great number of
molecules, and multiagent experiments would use these clusters as agents. The challenge is to manage cluster stability
(in terms of velocity and position), and post-collision organization.
5. Conclusion
Classical thermodynamics experiments were carried out in virtual reality, using a multiagent approach. This
method, resting upon individual-based systems, consists in injecting microscopic data into gas models, and measuring macroscopic quantities thanks to virtual instruments. The multiagent architecture used in this work grants each
agent a temporal and spatial autonomy, which permits us to simulate various macroscopic phenomena in a virtual
physics laboratory. Our simulated ideal gas corresponds very well to its theoretical macroscopic state law. Moreover,
isoenergetic behavior was accurately observed during the Joule-Gay Lussac experiment, with its characteristic kinetic
thermal peak. This experiment assesses the eﬃciency of agents temporal autonomy. In addition, Neon and Xenon
hard-sphere gases were simulated in order to validate agents spatial autonomy. Mean free paths and average collision
times were measured in good agreement with theoretical previsions, concerning collision on walls. Nevertheless, improvements are necessary concerning real time adaptation of the detection zone around the agents, in order to measure
precise mean free paths between molecules. Molecular covolume of Neon and Xenon measured in virtuo are of the
order of magnitude of usual geometrical and experimental values, but measurement resolution must be improved. In
order to do so, a better manometer precison is required, and many more molecules should be simulated, working on
the link between individual and population, by managing clusters of particles. During this study, virtual instruments
were validated and may now be applied by any user to more diﬃcult thermodynamic problems. A future application is
the dynamic heat transfer in gases, operated for instance by pressure force work on interacting molecules, during the
expansion of a hard-sphere gas into an empty enclosure. The present multiagent architecture may also simulate more
complex systems. A multi-interaction application may be implemented with heat transfer, viscous forces and pressure
forces that occur during the ascent of buoyant bodies in magmatic ﬂows [32]. Few multiagent approaches have been

M. Combes
/ Procedia
Computer
Science100
(2010)761–770
1–10
M. Combes
et al.et/ al.
Procedia
Computer
Science
(2012)

9
769

carried out for volcanic phenomena [33], and if its multiagent architecture is relevant, its physical mechanisms are not
demonstrated. We now aim at implementing reliable geophysical models in virtual reality.
Appendix : mean free paths
Between two molecular impacts
After each impact, the relative velocity Vrel between a molecule A and its next target B is randomly distributed. In
this direction, during Δt, the molecule A will make < Nc > collisions on an average. < Nc > is deﬁned as the number
of particles present in a tube of axis Vrel , of radius RA + RB and of length < Vrel > .Δt [34] :
< Nc >= π(RA + RB )2 . < Vrel > .Δt.ρ

(16)

with ρ = NV the gas density in the enclosure. The quantity σ = π(RA + RB )2 is the collision cross-section of the
hard-sphere gas [35]. The average collision time τm for molecular impacts is deﬁned by the time Δt corresponding to
< Nc >= 1 :
1
(17)
τc =
< Vrel > .σ.ρ
The average quantity < Vrel > can be calculated in the center of mass reference frame. It can be demonstrated [28, 30]
.mB
= m2 and of velocity Vrel is distributed with the Maxwell’s distribution law.
that a virtual particle of mass μ = mmAA+m
B
Thus for an ideal gas at temperature T, the average relative velocity is :
< Vrel >=

√
8kB T
= 2.Vm
πμ

(18)

and using equation (10), the theoretical expression of the molecular mean free path is obtained.
Between two wall impacts
The elastic collisions properties allow us to calculate the average distance between two successive impacts with an
inﬁnite pile of 3D boxes of side L. Thus the mean free path is the average distance between two walls. For a particule
from (0,0,0) to (x,y,z), the distance is r = x2 + y2 + z2 and the number of walls encountered is x+y+z
L . Then the
√
L. x2 +y2 +z2
1
is calculated in spherical coordinates, with equiprobable directions on 8 of the 3D space,
average value of
x+y+z
since x, y and z are considered as positive values. The corresponding integral is not trivial, and can be calculated
numerically :
√
π
2
4.L
2 u − ln(u)
theo
du = 0, 6691.L
lw =
√
π 1 (1 + u2 ) 2 − u2
Acknowledgements
The authors particularly thank Fr´ed´eric Massias, Pascal Redou and Laurent Gaubert for their highly constructive
remarks about thermodynamics and statistics. Nasser Soilihi and Cyril Delb`egue, from the National Engineering
School of Brest (ENIB), contributed very signiﬁcantly to the coding of thermodynamic simulations.
References
[1] M. Matsui, G. Price, A. Patel, Comparison between the lattice dynamics and molecular dynamics methods: Calculation results for mgsio3
perovskite, Geophys. Res. Lett. 21 (15) (1994) 1659–1662.
[2] E. Bansch, F. Hausser, A. Voigt, Finite element method for epitaxial growth with thermodynamic boundary conditions, SIAM journal on
scientiﬁc computing 26 (6) (2005) 2029–2046.
[3] L. Yuan, L. Kaitai, Penalty ﬁnite element method for stokes problem with nonlinear slip boundary conditions, Applied mathematics and
computation 204 (2008) 216–226.
[4] H. Houde, H. Changhong, W. Xiaonan, Analysis of artiﬁcial boundary conditions for exterior boundary value problems in three dimensions,
Numerische Mathematik 85 (3) (2000) 367–386.

770

M.Combes
Combes et
Science
00 (2010)
1–10
M.
et al.
al.//Procedia
ProcediaComputer
Computer
Science
1 (2012)
761–770

10

[5] M. Takeda, M. Zhang, N. Takeno, Quantitative evaluation of the eﬀects of hydrogeological boundary and initial conditions on slug tests,
Practice Periodical of Hazardous, Toxic and Radioactive Waste Management 11 (1).
[6] P. Redou, G. Desmeulles, J.-F. Abgrall, V. Rodin, J. Tisseau, Formal validation of asynchronous interaction-agents algorithms for reactiondiﬀusion problems, in: 21st International Workshop on Principles of Advanced and Distributed Simulation, USA, 2007.
[7] B. Alder, T. Wainwright, Studies in molecular dynamics. i. general method, Journal of Chemical Physics.
[8] M. Allen, D. Tideslay, Computer simulation of liquids, Clarendon Press, 1989.
[9] D. Frenkel, B. Smit, Understanding Molecular Simulation: From Algorithms to Applications, Academic Press Inc, 2001.
[10] G. Weiss, Multiagent Systems: A Modern Approach to Distributed Artiﬁcial Intelligence, MIT Press Cambridge, 1999.
[11] V. Grimm, U. Berger, F. Bastiansen, S. Eliassen, V. Ginot, J. Giske, J. Goss-Custard, T. Grand, S. Heinz, G. Huse, A. Huth, J. Jepsen,
C. Jorgensen, W. Mooij, B. Muller, G. Pe’er, C. Piou, S. Railsback, A. Robbins, M. Robbins, E. Rossmanith, N. Ruger, E. Strand, S. Souissi,
R. Stillman, R. Vabo, U. Visser, D. DeAngelis, A standard protocol for describing individual-based and agent-based models, Ecological
modelling 198 (2006) 115–126.
[12] J. Tisseau, Realite virtuelle et complexite. exp´erimentation in virtuo des syst`emes complexes, Manifeste scientiﬁque du Centre Europeen de
Realite Virtuelle, France (2004).
[13] A. Coulon, Modelisation cellulaire pour l’emergence de structures multiproteiques auto-organisees, Technique et science informatiques, RSTI
serie TSI 26.
[14] J. Tisseau, Realite virtuelle : autonomie in virtuo, Habilitation a` Diriger des Recherches, Universite de Rennes 1 (2001).
[15] F. Bousquet, C. Le Page, J.-P. M¨uller, Modelisation et simulations multi-agents, Nancy, France, 2002, pp. 173–182.
[16] D. Servat, Modelisation de dynamiques de ﬂux par agents. application aux processus de ruissellement, inﬁltration et erosion, Ph.D. thesis,
Universite de Paris 6, France (2000).
[17] H. Soula, C. Robardet, F. Perrin, S. Grippon, G. Beslon, O. Gandrillon, Modelling the emergence of multi-protein dynamic structures by
principles of self-organization through the use of 3dspi, a multi-agent-based software, BMC Bioinformatics 6 (228).
[18] A. Coulon, G. Beslon, O. Gandrillon, Methods in Molecular Biology, 2008, Ch. Large Multiprotein Structures modelling and Simulation:
The Need for Mesoscopic Models, p. 484.
[19] S. Kerdelo, Methodes informatiques pour l’experimentation in virtuo de la cinetique biochimique. application a` la coagulation du sang, Ph.D.
thesis, Universite de Bretagne Occidentale, Brest, France.
[20] S. Bonneaud, P. Redou, P. Chevaillier, Pattern oriented agent-based multi-modelling of exploited ecosystems, in: 6th EUROSIM congress,
Slovenia, 2007.
[21] M. Parentho¨en, J. Tisseau, Tutorial book of virtual concept. Enactive modelling, ENSIAME/LIPSI-ESTIA, France, 2005.
[22] F. Harrouet, E. Cazeaux, T. Jourdan, Le traite de la Realite Virtuelle. AReVi, Presses de l’Ecole des Mines, 2006.
[23] E. Guyon, J.-P. J-P. Hulin, L. Petit, Hydrodynamique physique, CNRS Editions, 2001.
[24] S. Colgate, C. Sona, K. Reed, A. Sivaraman, Experimental ideal gas reference state heat capacities of gases and vapors, Journal of chemical
and engineering data.
[25] J.-P. P´erez, Thermodynamique. Fondements et applications, 3e edition, DUNOD, 2001.
[26] I. Trifonov, Experimental veriﬁcation of boyle’s law and the ideal gas law, Physics education 42 (2007) 193–197.
[27] J. Maxwell, On the dynamical theory of gases, Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London 157 (1867) 49–88.
[28] G. Bruhat, Cours de Physique Generale - Thermodynamique, Masson, 6e ed., 1968.
[29] A. Gerschel, Liaisons intermoleculaires, InterEditions / CNRS Editions, 1995.
[30] L. Landau, E. Lifshitz, Statistical physics, MIR, Moscou, 1994.
[31] R. Fisher, Applications of ”student”’s distribution, Metron 5 (1925) 90–104.
[32] E. Burov, C. Jaupart, L. Guillou-Frottier, Ascent and emplacement of buoyant magma bodies in brittle-ductile upper crust, Journal of Geophysical Research 108 (B4).
[33] P. Marcenac, Mod´elisation de syst`emes complexes par agent, Technique et science informatiques 16 (8) (2003) 1013–1037.
[34] J.-P. P´erez, M´ecanique. Fondements et applications, 6e edition, Dunod, 2001.
[35] R. Newton, Scattering theory of waves and particles, McGraw Hill, 1966.

