Procedia
Computer
www.elsevier.com/locate/procedia
Science

Procedia Computer Science 1 (2012) 2271
Procedia Computer Science 00 (2009) 000±000

www.elsevier.com/locate/procedia

International Conference on Computational Science, ICCS 2010

Knowledge Representation and Applied Decision Making
(KREAM)
D. Rodríguezc*, J.J. Doladoa, J.C. Riquelmeb, R. Ruiz d, M.A. Siciliac
a

The University of the Basque Country, 20018 Donostia - San Sebastián, Spain
b
The University of Seville, 41012 ± Seville, Spain b
c
The University of Alcalá, 28871 ± Seville, Spain
d
Pablo de Olavide University, 41013 ± Seville, Spain

Abstract

The aim of this workshop is to provide a forum for discussion and debate on the application of knowledge
representation and ontologies in computational science and the techniques used for the manipulation of such data.
Examples of topics of interest include: the gene ontology with combined research from knowledge representation
and data mining techniques; evaluation of social capital encompassing all the value-producing aspects that emerge
from the application of computational techniques to networks of social ties and the dynamics of social interaction;
financial computing with representations such as XBRL; etc.
c 2012 Published by Elsevier Ltd. Open access under CC BY-NC-ND license.
⃝
Keywords: Ontologies; data mining; decision making; repository design

This year we have selected six papers covering a broad range of the topics of interest. M. Munk, J. Kapusta and
P. Svec, present Data Preprocessing Evaluation for Web Log Mining: Reconstruction of Activities of a Web Visitor.
Authors highlight the importance of quality RIWKHGDWDWRGHDOZLWKXVHU¶VSDWWHUQEHKDYLRXU
O. Anya, H. Tawfik, A. Nagar and S. Amin, Context-Aware Decision Support in Knowledge-Intensive
Collaborative E-Work, present a framework for integrating workgroup in a knowledge-based model
J.F. Martín, et al., Wireless sensor networks in knowledge management, present a case study of applying
knowledge management and reasoning in the domain of wireless sensor networks.
A. Tofania, E. Castorini, P. Palazzari, A. Usov, C. Beyel, E. Rome and P. Servillo, Using Ontologies for the
Federated Simulation of Critical Infrastructures, describe a Knowledge Base System developed to implement the
federated and distributed simulation of critical systems.
A. Korobko and T. Penkova, On-line analytical processing based on formal concept analysis, present an
approach to decision making based on On-line Analytical Processing and the Formal Concept Analysis techniques.
Finally, N. Manouselis, M.A. Sicilia and D. Rodríguez, Exploring ontology metrics in the biomedical domain,
deal with the measurement and quality of ontologies.
We would like to thank the programme committee members for improving the quality of the papers submitted, J.
Aguilar-Ruiz, V. Alexandrov, C. Cechinel, G. Ghinea, T. M. Khoshgoftaar, C. Kop, M. Ruiz, M. Satpathy, C.
Thomas and A. Weise. Finally, we would like to thank all the authors that made this workshop possible.

*Corresponding author. Tel.: +34 918856534; fax: +34918856646.
E-mail address: daniel.rodriguezg@uah.es

c 2012 Published by Elsevier Ltd. Open access under CC BY-NC-ND license.
1877-0509 ⃝
doi:10.1016/j.procs.2010.04.254

