Procedia Computer
Science
Procedia
Computer Science
Science 001 (2010)
Procedia
Computer
(2012)1–9
1765–1773

www.elsevier.com/locate/procedia

International Conference on Computational Science, ICCS 2010

Financial Markets in Motion: Visualising stock price and news
interactions during the 2008 global ﬁnancial crisis
Elizabeth Wua,∗, Peter Phillipsb
b Discipline

a School of IT, The University of Sydney, Sydney, Australia
of IT, School of Business, James Cook University, Townsville, Australia

Abstract
This paper introduces a visualisation technique to help analyse large sets of ﬁnancial data. The dataset used consists of price and news headlines for the Dow Jones Industrial Average (DJIA) and related companies for several
weeks prior to the height of the Global Financial Crisis (GFC). Our visualisation can help analysts to uncover relationships between news headlines that can convey meaning about trader sentiment, and their inﬂuence on stock prices.
This information is displayed visually in an interactive and animated Microsoft Excel dashboard consisting of three
charts. Improvements in scalability and performance over previous techniques enables concurrent analysis of stock
prices and news headlines from large datasets. A video screen capture is available to showcase our system [1].
c 2012 Published by Elsevier Ltd. Open access under CC BY-NC-ND license.
⃝
Keywords:
Visualisation, Excel, Stock Market Data, Dow Jones, Time Series

1. Introduction
Advances and reductions in the price of computer storage and transfer technologies in recent years have led to
a vast increase in the amount of data available for analysis. A study conducted by the University of California,
Berkley [2], estimated that the increase in data on a variety of mediums was around 30% per year between 1999 and
2002. A later EMC corporation sponsored report, conducted by the International Data Corporation (IDC) estimated
that the amount of information created, captured and replicated in 2006 was around 161 exabytes, and they estimate
that between 2006 and 2010 the amount of digital information will increase by 988 exabytes [3]. Oracle also states
that ‘the average database triples in size every two years’ [4]. Such databases form part of data capture systems, which
have facilitated the capture and storage of a large volume of data and number of variables. Financial data is one ﬁeld
that has been subjected to this growth [5].
Interpreting such large quantities of data is a challenge faced by both industrial and government organisations.
Understanding this information is critical in enabling eﬀective decision-making and and strategic planning. In many
cases, analysts comfortable with Microsoft Excel will turn to this software to try to make sense of the information.
They often make-do with simple two dimensional charting tools which show two variables and their relationship with
∗ Corresponding

author
Email addresses: ewu1@it.usyd.edu.au (Elizabeth Wu), peter.phillips@jcu.edu.au (Peter Phillips)

c 2012 Published by Elsevier Ltd. Open access under CC BY-NC-ND license.
1877-0509 ⃝
doi:10.1016/j.procs.2010.04.198

1766

E. Wu, P. Phillips / Procedia Computer Science 1 (2012) 1765–1773

Elizabeth Wu and Peter Phillips / Procedia Computer Science 00 (2010) 1–9

2

one another. The main drawback is that to visualise the interaction of a number of variables, many charts must be
created and often they do not fully or clearly capture the complete interactions between all the variables. In addition,
it is often diﬃcult to absorb information from a large number of charts, so information intake is limited. Bringing
together data from a variety of sources, or data containing multiple variables, is a diﬃcult task. This paper introduces
a way to present a large amount of information in a familiar interface such as Excel.
2. Background
Visualisation is ‘a computer-aided process that aims to reveal insights into an abstract phenomenon by transforming abstract data into visualspatial forms’ [6]. Using visualisations can help to improve our ability to interpret and
understand data that would not be so easily understood in its plain textual or numeric form.
New sources and greater accessibility to information and data made available during the information age have led
to new forms of literacy - document literacy and tool literacy [7]. Document literacy is ‘the ability to interpret and use
information from diﬀerent kinds of non prose formats, such as forms, charts, graphs, maps, and other visual displays,
in which information is not arranged in sentence or paragraph form’. Tool literacy is knowledge of declarative (what),
procedural (how), and conditional (when, where, why, under what circumstances) relating to the use of tools available
for use. These new forms of literacy have become increasingly important as individuals attempt to absorb and interpret
larger volumes and varieties of information.
Visualisation of data has the ability to communicate information to more diverse audiences. In an organisational
setting this allows an improvement in communication both internally and externally [8].
Visualising ﬁnancial information is a nontrivial task. Lux [9] highlights several features of ﬁnancial data which
provide a challenge for visualisation. These include the large volume of data, its multi-dimensional and abstract
nature, its complex information structure and that it contains hidden information.
A large variety of data exists in organisations. In this work we focus on stock market data, which contains price
and news headline information about the Dow 30 companies, whose prices contribute towards the calculation of the
Dow Jones Industrial Average (DJIA).
Previous research on the most suitable visualisation technique for stock market data has been performed by Merino
et. al. [10]. This is relevant to our work as they evaluate the techniques using visualisations of historical DJIA prices
and intra-day DAX (Deutscher AktienIndex) prices. They compare the performance of experimental participants on
tasks using a variety of visualisation types including Charts, Parallel Coordinates, Colour-Icon Display, Recursive
Pattern and TreeMap. The results from 80 participants showed that the most eﬀective visualisation techniques for this
type of data are either charts or recursive patterns. Other work by Keim et. al. [11] also suggest that charts are the
most eﬀective visualisation for ﬁnancial time series data.
Recent years have also seen the development of new visualisation techniques and charting tools. Over 2007, a
series of TED.com talks given by Hans Rosling from Gapminder included a visualisation that consisted of a bubble
chart where the objects move as time progresses. This charting tool, previously known as Trendalyzer was an eﬀective
and powerful representation of the data, and was acquired by Google in March 2007 who re-branded it as a Google
Motion Chart [12]. However, Google only released the Motion Chart as an add-in to a Google Spreadsheet, which is
unable to handle large amounts of data.
One aspect that makes stock market data diﬀerent from other data is the inﬂuence that sentiment can have on stock
prices. Sentiment is well known to have a positive correlation with the price of stocks [13]. Sentiment is ‘a belief
about future cash ﬂows and investment risks that is not justiﬁed by the facts at hand’ [14]. One way of evaluating
sentiment in the marketplace is using statistics about news headlines, and speciﬁc words such as ‘rise’, ‘fall’ and
‘growth’, for example. This technique has previously been applied by Ahmad and Almas [15].
Visualising price and sentiment changes during the GFC is a diﬃcult task. Firstly, price information is numeric
while the information used to analyse sentiment from news headlines is textual. It is therefore quite challenging to
display the relationship between both variables. One technique used to overcome this issue is discussed by Wang
et. al. [16], and involves the use of multiple (two or more) distinct views to support the investigation of a single
conceptual entity. In an example provided in their paper, they divide a window into two types of graphs that both
contain data on baseball statistics from the same underlying table. The two charts interact so that they are displaying
the same subset of information when selected.

E. Wu, P. Phillips / Procedia Computer Science 1 (2012) 1765–1773

Elizabeth Wu and Peter Phillips / Procedia Computer Science 00 (2010) 1–9

1767
3

Displaying multiple distinct views of the same or several sources of information has become popular [17] along
with the increase in the use of Business Intelligence tools. In this context, it is known as a ‘dashboard’ as it tries to
present the overall picture on a single page. This enables CEO’s, senior level management and decision-makers to
quickly gauge a snapshot of the important activities in the organisation and to identify areas that may need attention.
Interaction with the visualisation tool has also been emphasised as an important consideration. Interaction techniques enable analysts to select and de-select particular attributes to focus on single items depending on their exploration objectives [18].
The stock market visualisation presented in this paper aims to develop greater insight and understanding about the
behaviour of the Dow 30 and the DJIA immediately prior to and at the start of the GFC of 2008. In particular we try to
capture the relationship between price and market sentiment. We use a combination of the techniques described above
to highlight these interactions. We create a ‘dashboard’-like interface, consisting of three distinct parts as suggested
by Wang [16]. In this dashboard we display a motion chart to visualise stock price change over time, as charts have
been shown to be one of the most eﬀective visualisation tools for stock data [10]. With each time interval, sentiment
is also analysed. On the dashboard, a radar chart is also included to help interpret the current sentiment at that point
in time in terms of words featured in the news headlines. We classify positive, negative and neutral words to enhance
the visualisation of this information, in a similar fashion to Ahmad and Almas [15]. Finally we display a cumulative
count of news headlines for each institution to provide further understanding of the eﬀects of longer term sentiment
and news exposure. Our visualisation is dynamic in that we allow the user to interact with the charts by deﬁning the
time period to visualise and by being able to add and remove particular stocks from the analysis. The visualisation is
also animated, allowing historical information to be included in the visualisation. By combining these three separate
views a greater overall picture of the current state of the market is given. The large volume of ﬁnancial data used in
this study requires special consideration to its storage, access and display. We overcome technological limitations of
Excel and show how it can be used successfully as a front end visualisation tool.
3. Financial Data
The data used for the visualisation in this paper was made publicly available by the Securities Industry Research
Centre of Asia-Paciﬁc (SIRCA) [19], who obtained the data from the New York Stock Exchange (NYSE) and National
Association of Securities Dealers Automated Quotations (NASDQ) through Thomson Reuters. The data contains
information on the Dow 30, which are the 30 stocks that make up the DJIA. Quote (bid and ask) price, trade price and
volume, along with news headlines from Reuters, is provided for each of the included stocks.
The data is signiﬁcant in size and contains a total of 19,050,304 records. Of these there are 3,634,444 trades,
15,413,586 quotes and 2274 news headlines spanning from September 29, 2008 to October 4, 2008.
4. Visualisation Technique
To visualise the ﬁnancial data we chose to present the information in a dashboard format using Microsoft Excel
2007. The dashboard consists of three main information views. At ﬁrst glance the charts appear two-dimensional,
however once the user selects the stocks, the time period they are interested in, and presses ‘start’, the views become
animated showing the evolving behaviour of the stocks. The primary reason we chose to utilize Excel is due to our
target audience’s (ﬁnancial and economic analysts i.e. traders and bankers) familiarity with this product [20]. This
familiarity aids in the adoption and usability of the dashboard as an eﬀective visualisation tool. Dyche [21] notes, in
reference to using Excel as a front-end, that ‘meeting the users where they are may [allow] them to leverage standard
and familiar tool sets against unfamiliar data with the aim of becoming self-suﬃcient with the latter’.
Figure 1 depicts the dashboard with three companies selected (Du Point Co, General Elec Co and Home Depot
Inc) and a display time frame of 30 minutes. The time frame is used to aggregate trades, quotes and news headlines
to suit the user.
Each of the components within the dashboard are dynamically updated from an external MySQL database to
overcome the size and memory limitations of Excel and also to allow for multiple concurrent access to the datasets.
Due to the large number of records in the dataset it is not possible to store the data in the Excel spreadsheet. Excel
2003 has a row limit of 65,563 while Excel 2007 has a row limit of 1,048,576 [22], well short of the 19 million

1768

E. Wu, P. Phillips / Procedia Computer Science 1 (2012) 1765–1773

Elizabeth Wu and Peter Phillips / Procedia Computer Science 00 (2010) 1–9

4

Figure 1: Visualisation dashboard.

ﬁnancial records we wish to visualise. Storing the data externally also means that multiple users can visualise the data
in diﬀerent ways concurrently. For example one user may wish to visualise only trades from General Motors over a 5
minute time frame while another user may wish to visualise all bank stocks over an hour time frame.
Figure 2 depicts the ﬁrst component of the dashboard; an interactive bubble motion chart that is able to illustrate
the inﬂuence of news events on stock trades (change in stock trade price and volume). An analyst can select one or
more companies and compare their behaviour.
The chart in this ﬁgure shows the patterns of the three selected stocks, which can be distinguished by diﬀerent
coloured bubbles. When the analyst presses ‘start’ to initiate the visualisation, a number of bubbles appear in the
motion chart. For each new time period for each of the stocks (shown as Date in Figure 1), additional bubbles will
appear to represent the new price and show the change in price, volume and news information. Rather than only show
the bubbles for the current time periods, we chose to keep earlier time periods to see how the price has changed. Solid
coloured bubbles indicate that the represented data is for the current time interval, while transparent coloured bubbles
indicate that the data represented is from earlier time intervals.
Each bubble has several pieces of information associated with it. Its location against the vertical axis indicates
the change in price for that stock over the selected interval. It’s location against the horizontal axis indicates the total
number of news articles that have appeared over the given time interval. The bubble size (diameter) indicates the

E. Wu, P. Phillips / Procedia Computer Science 1 (2012) 1765–1773

Elizabeth Wu and Peter Phillips / Procedia Computer Science 00 (2010) 1–9

1769
5

Figure 2: Dashboard component: bubble motion chart.

volume traded during that particular time period. If there is a news article for one of the stocks displayed in the chart,
then a red star will appear on the bubble.
While information from this chart is enhanced by the other two charts in the dashboard it forms the core of the
information contained in the dashboard. Because of this, it can be analysed either together or independently of the
other charts, and can provide a lot of information depending on the analysis goals of the viewer. Separate analysis of
this chart alone can highlight interactions between price, volume and news articles and are very easy to identify for
any single stock. In addition, analysts can select a number of diﬀerent stocks and easily visualise where the prices
converge or diverge and look at how the volume and/or number of news articles changes with this pattern of behaviour.
Figure 3 depicts the second component of the dashboard; a radar chart that is used to indicate the frequency
particular words appear in news headlines over the given time period. The radar chart provides a summary of the
type of news that is occurring by distinguishing between positive, negative and neutral words. Examples of positive
words include ‘Buy’, ‘Hopes’ and ‘Up’. Examples of negative words include ‘Bailout’, ‘Crisis’, ‘Drop’, ‘Falls’ and
‘Fears’. Neutral words include ‘Stocks’, ‘Shares’, ‘NYSE’ and ‘Market’. The words were selected by taking the top
50 most frequent words from news articles, and removing any conjunctions such as ‘and’ or ‘the’, whereby 40 words
remained.
The radar chart visualisation displays green lines to indicate occurrences of positive words, red lines for negative
words, and black lines for neutral words. In this way it can clearly be seen which word types are most frequent during
an interval of time. This chart is most useful when combined with the motion chart, as relationships between the
change in stock price and speciﬁc news keywords can be easily discovered. For example, if a sharp spike in particular

1770

E. Wu, P. Phillips / Procedia Computer Science 1 (2012) 1765–1773

Elizabeth Wu and Peter Phillips / Procedia Computer Science 00 (2010) 1–9

6

Figure 3: Dashboard component: radar word frequency chart.

words, such as negative words leads to a reduction in price of any stocks over an interval, we could see more prominent
red lines on the radar chart, and at the same time the bubble would move south on the motion chart.
Using this type of visualisation can provide information about the state of consumer sentiment towards particular
stocks or about sentiment towards the market overall.
Finally, Figure 4 depicts the third component of the dashboard; a stacked column chart that shows the number of
news events that have occurred for each company prior to the current date and the total so far for the current date and
time. This illustrates what news events are occurring and which companies they aﬀect. An analyst might use this to
select which companies to show in the interactive bubble chart. The use of a cumulative sum of news articles is an
important addition, as often the number of news articles can aﬀect stock prices, regardless of the positive or negative
nature of the words contained in the headlines or news stories themselves.
The stacked column chart in this component shows historical news events in the current time period as the red part
of the column, while previous news events are shown as the blue part of the column. Even where news articles do not
occur in a particular time interval, a large number of news articles earlier may be positively correlated with changes in
price or volume of stocks. The companies are listed on the horizontal axis while the number of news articles is listed
on the vertical axis. As with the other two charts, this chart updates its display with each time interval.
As with the radar chart, this chart is again an enhancement best used in conjunction with the motion chart, due to
the fact the motion chart contains price and volume information which is critical to understanding the stocks.

E. Wu, P. Phillips / Procedia Computer Science 1 (2012) 1765–1773

Elizabeth Wu and Peter Phillips / Procedia Computer Science 00 (2010) 1–9

1771
7

Figure 4: Dashboard component: news events.

All three components update simultaneously as the visualisation progresses through all the time intervals available
in the dataset. The motion chart and stacked chart display both current and historical values for each of these intervals,
giving both current and historical views of the the stocks. This assists analysts in identifying any trends that may be
occurring. For example, longer term trends or changes in price or volume may correlate to the total number of
cumulative news articles, while more news articles during a particular time interval may lead to short term ﬂuctuations
in volume and/or price. The radar chart provides insight into trader sentiment at any given time interval. The radar
chart does not identify any particular stock but can lead to up or down trends over a number of stocks, since some
stocks are related to one another (such as bank stocks) and may move in a common direction when news is released
about any of the other related stocks.
There are also two very important features of the visualisation display. First is the ability to select particular stocks
to display on the motion chart. This can present a clearer picture of stocks which the analyst may have identiﬁed as
relevant for their purposes. Second is the ability to select a variety of time intervals such as 1, 5, 15, 30 or 60 minutes.
This can allow analysts to see ﬂuctuations over shorter periods, and perhaps visualise the shorter term impact of
particular trader sentiments and/or numbers of news releases.
The relationship between the three components is very easy to grasp and allows a large amount of data to be
visualised and interpreted easily. This information would be extremely diﬃcult to interpret in its raw form without
such a visualisation tool.
4.1. Algorithm
The visualisation was created as follows:
1. Data is initially loaded and stored in a MySQL database;
2. Indexes were created on the columns to speed up SQL query performance;
3. Analyst selects the stocks they are interested in and the time intervals they would like to see this information
displayed over and the initial start date;
4. VBA Macro in Excel loads the data from the MySQL database into cells in the Excel worksheet using SQL
queries to obtain data;
5. VBA Macro increments the time and/or date. Historical data is retained on the display by creating a separate
chart series for this information and is then redrawn allowing for animation;
6. Steps 3 to 5 are repeated until all data has been iterated through and displayed or the user stops the visualisation.
4.2. Insights Gained and Usefulness of the Visualisation
Capturing the relationship between multiple companies and taking into consideration time, volume, price and
news events is a non-trivial and important task. Without the aid of eﬀective visualisation, it is very diﬃcult to see how
variables interact with each other. Users are often only able to process a limited amount of information at one time
and so tend to focus on a small subset of variables. Our visualisation provides a tool to interpret many variables at
once and to allow the user to gain an understanding of what is happening on a larger scale.

1772

E. Wu, P. Phillips / Procedia Computer Science 1 (2012) 1765–1773

Elizabeth Wu and Peter Phillips / Procedia Computer Science 00 (2010) 1–9

8

Through our visualisation it appears that following October 1, 2008, many components of the Dow 30 headed into
a steady decline in price. Increases in news events in particular lead to an increase in trade volume. It also appears that
following the initial decline in prices, the decline continued and appeared to be fueled by continual media coverage
of the negative news relating to the ﬁnancial crisis.
Our visualisation also shows that an increase in news events frequently leads to an increase in the volume of trades.
This occurs regardless of the type of words used in the news event. In the stacked column chart we can see that there
was also a particular news focus on large banks such as Citibank and the Bank of America and the investment bank
JP Morgan prior to and on October 1. It is diﬃcult to tell from the limited data if this is an usual occurrence or an
indication of events that were to follow. However, we notice that as the crisis sets in on October 2, the high number
of news events extends beyond banks to also include automotive manufacturer General Motors. This is perhaps an
indication of one company that proved to be quite vulnerable to changes in the ﬁnancial markets, after they ﬁled for
bankruptcy on June 1, 2009, having around $173 billion in debts and only $82 billion in assets [23].
Commercial organisations, governments and researchers can beneﬁt from our visualisation technique. Through a
better understanding of the relationship between news, price and volume, more information about ﬁnancial markets
can be gained that could prevent commercial organisations from sustaining heavy ﬁnancial losses during such a crisis.
This understanding can help governments to make better policy decisions given the early warning signs shown in the
data, and to understand which parties were most aﬀected by the global ﬁnancial crisis. Researchers can use this data
to analyse the events that took place and use it as a tool to isolate unusual patterns for further investigation.
5. Conclusions
The visualisation technique described in this paper is able to display a large volume of complex data about price,
volume, news and sentiment, and show the interactions between all the components together over time. One of the
features of the dashboard that is most appealing is its simplicity. We have hidden much of the complexity of the
amount of data from the users and displayed it in an easy to understand and simple to interpret set of charts. By
showing how the data points evolve over time we can take the users through each of the interactions that led to the
change in price. More common traditional charts used in Excel are unable to show this interaction. Combining
multiple charts and displaying their dynamic nature more accurately captures and displays real world data. Greater
understanding about the ﬁnancial environment could lead to a better understanding of the events leading up to the
height of the global ﬁnancial crisis, it could also aid in better decision making when trading stocks, and may help
analysts to anticipate and prepare themselves for future similar events.
This visualisation can also be applied to many other areas, particularly within ﬁnance, but it could also be used
within a number of other disciplines. In ﬁnance, other stocks could be used instead of the Dow 30, or a variety of
indicators could be displayed on charts in a dashboard form, so interactions can be quickly identiﬁed visually. This
could be useful for real-time analysis in particular. Within other disciplines, the visualisation could be used to monitor
an external environment for unusual changes, enabling a quick response, or for historical data analysis which could
identify relationships that were previously unknown.
Our planned future work is to investigate other datasets that include numeric and text information that may need
to be analysed concurrently over time. We also plan to examine other techniques to classify news articles, such as
bucket of words analysis, to enhance the visualisation of sentiment.
The suitability of this visualisation technique to large datasets is a particular advantage, and is expected to be of
increasing interest to a wide audience as the size and complexity of datasets continues to grow in the coming years.
References
[1] P. Phillips, E. Wu, Screen capture of ‘Financial Markets in Motion’ visualisation (2010).
URL http://beam.to/ViCS-PhillipsWu
[2] P. Lyman, H. R. Varian, K. Swearingen, P. Charles, N. Good, L. L. Jordan, J. Pal, How Much Information? 2003, Report (2003).
URL http://www2.sims.berkeley.edu/research/projects/how-much-info-2003/
[3] J. F. Gantz, D. Reinsel, C. Chute, W. Schlicting, J. McArthur, S. Minton, I. Xheneti, A. Toncheva, A. Manfrediz, The Expanding Digital
Universe: A Forecast of Worldwide Information Growth Through 2010 (March 2007).
URL http://emc.com/collateral/analyst-reports/expanding-digital-idc-white-paper.pdf

E. Wu, P. Phillips / Procedia Computer Science 1 (2012) 1765–1773

Elizabeth Wu and Peter Phillips / Procedia Computer Science 00 (2010) 1–9

1773
9

[4] Oracle, Oracle Advanced Compression, Oracle Data Sheet (2009).
URL http://www.oracle.com/technology/products/database/compression/index.html
[5] D. Zhang, L. Zhou, Discovering golden nuggets: data mining in ﬁnancial application, Systems, Man, and Cybernetics, Part C: Applications
and Reviews, IEEE Transactions on 34 (4) (2004) 513–522.
[6] C. Chen, Information visualization, Information Visualization 1 (1) (2002) 1–4.
[7] C. D. Raﬀerty, Literacy in the information age, Educational Leadership 57 (1999) 22–25.
[8] P. A. Argenti, How Technology Has Inﬂuenced the Field of Corporate Communication, Journal of Business and Technical Communication
2006 20 (3) (2006) 357–370.
[9] M. Lux, Visualization of ﬁnancial information, in: NPIV ’97: Proceedings of the 1997 workshop on New paradigms in information visualization and manipulation, ACM, New York, NY, USA, 1997, pp. 58–61.
[10] C. S. Merino, M. Sips, D. A. Keim, C. Panse, R. Spence, Task-at-hand interface for change detection in stock market data, in: AVI ’06:
Proceedings of the working conference on Advanced visual interfaces, ACM, New York, NY, USA, 2006, pp. 420–427.
[11] D. A. Keim, T. Nietzschmann, N. Schelwies, J. Schneidewind, T. Schreck, H. Ziegler, A Spectral Visualization System for Analyzing
Financial Time Series Data, in: EuroVis, 2006, pp. 195–202.
[12] Gapminder, Gapminder Website (2010).
URL http://www.gapminder.org/about-gapminder/history/
[13] W. J. Jansen, N. J. Nahuis, The stock market and consumer conﬁdence: European Evidence, Economics Letters 79 (1) (2003) 89–98.
[14] M. Baker, J. Wurgler, Investor Sentiment in the Stock Market, Jounal of Economic Perspectives 21 (2) (2007) 129–151.
[15] K. Ahmad, Y. Almas, Visualising sentiments in ﬁnancial texts?, in: Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Information
Visualisation (IV05), 2005, pp. 363–368.
[16] M. Q. Wang Baldonado, A. Woodruﬀ, A. Kuchinsky, Guidelines for using multiple views in information visualization, in: AVI ’00: Proceedings of the working conference on Advanced visual interfaces, ACM, New York, NY, USA, 2000, pp. 110–119.
[17] S. Few, Information Dashboard Design: The Eﬀective Visual Communication of Data, O’Reilly Media, Inc., 2010.
[18] D. A. Keim, Information Visualization and Visual Data Mining, IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics 8 (2002) 1–8.
[19] SIRCA, eResearch Australasia Visualisation Challenge Data (2009).
URL http://data.sirca.org.au/
[20] Microsoft, Case Study - American National Bank of Fremont: Desktop Software Allows Local Bank to Save Time and Increase Productivity
(2008).
URL http://tinyurl.com/MSCaseStudyANBF
[21] J. Dych, BI Adoption Evolves Part 2: Categorizing End Users, Website (July 2007).
URL http://www.b-eye-network.com/view/5620
[22] Microsoft, Oﬃce excel 2007 features that are not supported in earlier versions of excel (2007).
URL http://office.microsoft.com/en-us/excel/ha100778231033.aspx
[23] General Motors Corporation, General motors corporation bankruptcy petition (June 2008).
URL http://coop.nysb.uscourts.gov/pdf/09-50026%5Fpetition.pdf

