Procedia Computer
Science
Procedia
Computer Science
Science 001 (2010)
Procedia
Computer
(2012)1–8
1757–1764

www.elsevier.com/locate/procedia

International Conference on Computational Science, ICCS 2010

Coupling visualization and data analysis for knowledge discovery
from multi-dimensional scientiﬁc data
Oliver R¨ubela,b,1 , Sean Ahernc , E. Wes Bethela , Mark D. Biggind , Hank Childsa , Estelle Cormier-Michele , Angela
DePacef , Michael B. Eiseng , Charless C. Fowlkesh , Cameron G. R. Geddesi , Hans Hagenb,j,k , Bernd Hamanna,b,j ,
Min-Yu Huangj , Soile V. E. Ker¨anend , David W. Knowlesm , Cris L. Luengo Hendriksl , Jitendra Malikn , Jeremy
Meredithc , Peter Messmere , Prabhata , Daniela Ushizimaa , Gunther H. Webera , Kesheng Wua
a Computational

Research Division, Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory (LBNL), One Cyclotron Road, Berkeley, CA, 94720, USA.
b International Research Training Group 1131, University of Kaiserslautern, Germany.
c Oak Ridge National Laboratory (ORNL), P.O. Box 2008, Oak Ridge, TN 37831, USA.
d Genomics Division, LBNL, One Cyclotron Road, Berkeley, CA, 94720, USA.
e Tech-X Corporation, 5621 Arapahoe Ave., Suite A, Boulder, CO 80303.
f Harvard Medical School, 200 Longwood Ave., Boston, MA, 02115, USA.
g Howard Hughes Medical Institute and Department of Molecular and Cell Biology, University of California, Berkeley, Stanley Hall 304B,
Berkeley, CA 94720, USA.
h Donald Bren School of Information and Computer Science, University of California, Irvine, CA 92697, USA.
i LOASIS program of LBNL, One Cyclotron Road, Berkeley, CA 94720, USA.
j Institute for Data Analysis and Visualization (IDAV), Department of Computer Science, University of California, Davis, One Shields Avenue,
Davis, CA 95616, USA.
k Department of Computer Science, University of Kaiserslautern, 67653 Kaiserslautern, Germany
l Centre for Image Analysis, Swedish University of Agricultural Sciences, Box 337, SE-751 05 Uppsala, Sweden.
m Life Sciences Division, LBNL, One Cyclotron Road, Berkeley, CA, 94720, USA.
n Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, University of California, Berkeley, CA 94720, USA.

Abstract
Knowledge discovery from large and complex scientiﬁc data is a challenging task. With the ability to measure
and simulate more processes at increasingly ﬁner spatial and temporal scales, the growing number of data dimensions
and data objects presents tremendous challenges for eﬀective data analysis and data exploration methods and tools.
The combination and close integration of methods from scientiﬁc visualization, information visualization, automated
data analysis, and other enabling technologies —such as eﬃcient data management— supports knowledge discovery
from multi-dimensional scientiﬁc data. This paper surveys two distinct applications in developmental biology and
accelerator physics, illustrating the eﬀectiveness of the described approach.
c 2012 Published by Elsevier Ltd. Open access under CC BY-NC-ND license.
⃝
Keywords: scientiﬁc visualization, information visualization, data analysis, multi-dimensional data, laser wakeﬁeld
particle acceleration, 3D gene expression

1 Corresponding

author: oruebel@lbl.gov (Oliver R¨ubel)

c 2012 Published by Elsevier Ltd. Open access under CC BY-NC-ND license.
1877-0509 ⃝
doi:10.1016/j.procs.2010.04.197

1758

O. R¨ubel et al. / Procedia Computer Science 1 (2012) 1757–1764
Oliver R¨ubel et al. / Procedia Computer Science 00 (2010) 1–8

2

1. Introduction
Knowledge discovery from large and complex collections of today’s scientiﬁc datasets is a challenging task. Due
to advances in data acquisition and scientiﬁc computing, today’s datasets are becoming increasingly complex. With
the ability to measure and simulate more processes at ﬁner scales, the number of data dimensions and data objects
has grown signiﬁcantly in today’s scientiﬁc datasets, while the phenomena researchers are able to investigate become
increasingly complex. Researchers are overwhelmed with data and standard tools are often insuﬃcient to enable
eﬃcient data analysis and, hence, discovery of information and knowledge from the data.
We address these challenges via a combination of scientiﬁc visualization, information visualization, automated
data analysis, and other enabling technologies. The tight coupling of diﬀerent analysis methods and tools supports
knowledge discovery from complex, multi-dimensional scientiﬁc data. To illustrate the eﬀectiveness of this approach,
we survey the processes and tools used to analyze: i) 3D gene expression data, and ii) laser wakeﬁeld particle acceleration data, demonstrating the applicability of the described basic concept to a large range of applications.
Analysis of 3D gene expression data is linked to the more general problem of understanding the control of embryo
development, which is a fundamental question in biology. A cell’s unique fate is determined by speciﬁc combinations of developmental regulatory factors. These factors form part of complex genetic regulatory networks, which
ultimately coordinate the expression of all genes. In order to study these complex systems, the BDTNP2 has developed so called PointCloud data, a novel type of spatial and temporal gene expression data. Single PointClouds are
obtained via segmentation of two-photon microscopy images of whole Drosophila embryos and provide a quantitative representation of spatial gene expression levels of the Drosophila blastoderm at cellular resolution [1]. Multiple
PointClouds representing a variety of genes at various developmental time points are registered into a single Atlas
PointCloud describing the expression of about one hundred genes at multiple points in time [2]. Analysis of 3D
gene expression data is challenging in particular due to the large number of data dimensions (genes) and the complex
interactions between them.
Laser wakeﬁeld particle accelerators (LWFAs) [3] utilize an electron plasma wave to accelerate charged particles
(e.g., electrons) to high energy levels over very short distances [4, 5]. Analysis, understanding, and control of the
complex physical processes of plasma-based particle acceleration requires understanding of how particle beams are
formed and accelerated. These processes are best understood by tracing the particles that form a beam over time
and studying their temporal evolution [6, 7, 8, 9]. In laboratory experiments, however, it is impossible to record
the complete evolution of a beam and much less to trace single particles within a plasma. Researchers from the
LOASIS3 project perform simulation of LWFA experiments using VORPAL [10], in order to better understand the
fundamental physics of plasma-based acceleration and the processes involved in experiments, as well as to improve
experiments [11]. The datasets produced by LWFA simulations are (i) extremely large, (ii) of varying spatial and
temporal resolution, (iii) heterogeneous, and (iv) high-dimensional, making analysis and knowledge discovery from
complex LWFA simulation data a challenging task.
Section 2 introduces our general approach for knowledge discovery from multi-dimensional scientiﬁc data. We
demonstrate the broad applicability of the described methodology in a survey of the analysis processes and tools used
to analyze 3D gene expression (Section 3) and laser wakeﬁeld particle acceleration data (Section 4).
2. General Methodology
While the challenges in developmental biology and accelerator physics research are quite diﬀerent, the same basic
analytic methodology can be used for knowledge discovery from such complex data. The basic approach is based on
the unique combination and close integration of: (i) enabling technologies, (ii) visualization, and (iii) data analysis
(Figure 1). Enabling technologies are fundamental methods, needed for data analysis, that are not necessarily part of
the analysis itself, e.g., methods for data retrieval, access, and management.
Visualization transforms data into readily comprehensible images and is an indispensable part of the scientiﬁc
discovery process [12]. In particular in the context of multi-dimensional data, a single display is often not suﬃcient to
2 Berkeley
3 Lasers,

Drosophila Transcription Network Project (BDTNP): http://bdtnp.lbl.gov/Fly-Net/
Optical Accelerator Systems Integrated Studies (LOASIS): http://loasis.lbl.gov/

O. R¨ubel et al. / Procedia Computer Science 1 (2012) 1757–1764

1759

Oliver R¨ubel et al. / Procedia Computer Science 00 (2010) 1–8

3

Enabling Technologies
Visualization
Information
Visualization

Data
Selection

Scientific
Visualization

Data Analysis

Figure 1: Overview of the basic components we use in combination to enable knowledge discovery from multi-dimensional scientiﬁc data.

reveal all aspects of the data. Scientiﬁc visualizations support detailed analysis of physical data characteristics, while
information visualizations provide means for exploration of the variable space and identiﬁcation of relationships
between diﬀerent data dimensions. We use multiple views —each highlighting diﬀerent aspects of the data— linked
via the concept of data selection (brushing) [13, 14, 15]. Selected data subsets can be highlighted in any view enabling
detailed analysis and knowledge discovery.
While interactive data exploration based on linked multiple views is eﬀective, it also has limitations. Manual
data exploration can be time-consuming — hindering the analysis of large data collections — and visual detection
of all ﬁne and subtle data features is often impossible. Automated data analysis methods promise to overcome these
limitations of visual data analysis by assisting in the most complex and time-consuming steps of the analysis pipeline,
e.g., through automated feature detection [16].
In practice, interpretation of automated analysis results is often unintuitive and may lead to false interpretations,
and proper deﬁnition of analysis parameters is often complicated. By linking automated data analysis and visualization, we overcome the diﬃculties with both visual and automated data analysis. Automating the detection of data
features of interest enables, e.g., development of advanced visualizations that focus on the main data portions of interest, signiﬁcantly reducing clutter and occlusion of important information. At the same time, visualization eases
validation and interpretation of analysis results and deﬁnition of input parameters. Ultimately, it is the tight and
meaningful integration of all these diﬀerent methods that enables us to eﬀectively discover new knowledge.
3. Application I: 3D Gene Expression Data
With the availability of 3D PointCloud gene expression data, new ways for analyzing the complex genetic regulatory networks controlling animal development are becoming possible. PointCloud data describes the output of
these complex networks quantitatively. The information stored in a PointCloud can be represented as a table in which
each row represents a single cell of the embryo containing information about: i) the location of the cell in physical
space (x,y,z), ii) its neighbors, iii) the estimated cell-volume and surface normal, and iv) the recorded expression
levels for currently up to ≈ 100 genes at multiple time intervals. PointCloud data eﬀectively transforms hundreds of
gigabytes of image data into a for computation easily accessible format, enabling analysis of the spatial patterns of
gene expression, their temporal variation, and regulation.
PointCloudXplore (PCX) [17] is a visualization and analysis system speciﬁcally developed for the analysis of
3D PointCloud data (Figure 2). PCX supports analysis of spatial gene expression patterns via dedicated 2D and 3D
physical model representations of the embryo blastoderm [18]. The 3D embryo views show the morphology of the
embryo blastoderm and allow biologists to study the spatial expression patterns of genes relative to the shape of the
embryo. The 2D embryo views describe 2D projections of the embryo blastoderm and provide an overview of all
blastoderm cells of the embryo. Dedicated information visualizations (abstract views) provide means for exploration

1760

O. R¨ubel et al. / Procedia Computer Science 1 (2012) 1757–1764
4

BDTNP 3D Gene Expression Online Database

Oliver R¨ubel et al. / Procedia Computer Science 00 (2010) 1–8

PointCloudXplore
Physical Views
3D Embryo Views

MATLAB
Data Clustering
2D Embryo Views

Expression Surface

•PointCloud Data
•Cell Selections

Execute
Analysis
Cell Selector & Cluster
Management
Statistics

Abstract Views
Cell Magnifier

Parallel Coordinates

Create
Plot(s)

•Expression Data
•Cell Selection

Scatter plots

Figure 2: The system for knowledge discovery from 3D gene expression data. Color indicates the areas the diﬀerent components of the system
belong to, i.e., enabling technologies (light blue), scientiﬁc visualization (lilac), information visualization (orange), and data analysis (green).

of gene expression space and identiﬁcation of relationships between genes. Parallel coordinates and scatter-plots
are used for analysis and comparison of the expression of multiple genes in all cells of the embryo while the Cell
Magniﬁer provides an overview of all expression values of a single cell via a bar-graph view. The concept of cell
selection (brushing) allows the user to correlate the information shown in diﬀerent views [19]. The user can select
cells of interest in any view, e.g., via drawing on the embryo surface or via thresholding in parallel coordinates.
This mechanism allows features of interest to be deﬁned and highlighted in any view, making PointCloudXplore an
eﬀective tool for rapid data exploration (Figure 3).
While visualization is a powerful approach for knowledge discovery from complex data sets, visual detection of
all existing features is very diﬃcult in this case due to the large number and subtlety of features and intricate nature
of 3D gene expression data. A typical feature of interest deﬁnes, e.g., various groups of cells behaving similarly with
respect to the expression of several genes or a single gene over time. In the context of conceptually simpler forms of
expression data — such as microarray experiments — data clustering has already shown to be able to reveal details
hidden in the data [20]. However, appropriately deﬁning clustering parameters — such as the number of clusters —
as well as validation and interpretation of clustering results, is still complicated.
PCX integrates data clustering directly with the visualization. Using a combination of visualization and dedicated
algorithms for evaluating the quality of clustering results, the user can intuitively identify appropriate clustering parameters [21]. A cluster deﬁnes a selection of cells behaving similarly with respect to the expression of the set of
genes used in the clustering process. Similar to user-deﬁned cell selections, PCX can directly display and highlight
automatically computed clusters in any view. The meaningful integration of data clustering with the visualization
improves the visualization as well as the clustering process. Data clustering supports automatic detection and highlighting of data features in the visualization, enabling a more focused and accurate analysis process. Visualization
provides eﬀective means for accurate deﬁnition of clustering input parameters and allows intuitive validation and
interpretation of clustering results.
In particular in the context of novel scientiﬁc data — such as PointCloud data — researchers need to be able to
quickly develop new analysis functions. PCX addresses this need by providing an interface to MATLAB (The MathWorks Inc., Natick, MA, USA), allowing researchers to integrate custom analysis capabilities with PCX and providing
biologists faster and more convenient access to advanced analysis functions [22]. With its interface to MATLAB, PCX
supports fast prototyping and testing of new ideas, thus facilitating communication between bioinformatics researchers
and experimental biologists. The close integration of MATLAB with the visualization improves the visualization by
providing simple access to new, advanced analysis capabilities as well as the analysis implemented in MATLAB by
providing eﬃcient means for validation and exploration of analysis results.

O. R¨ubel et al. / Procedia Computer Science 1 (2012) 1757–1764
Oliver R¨ubel et al. / Procedia Computer Science 00 (2010) 1–8

1761
5

Figure 3: Screenshot of PointCloudXplore showing an expression surface of eve (left) and 2D/3D scatter-plots of gt, hb, and Kr (right). The user
selected a set of cells (red) via thresholding in the scatter-plots. The same cells are highlighted in the embryo view (left). A characteristic subset of
the selected cells coincides with the second stripe of the pattern of eve, indicating that gt, hb, and Kr could potentially be involved in the regulation
of eve stripe 2.

While the diﬀerent methods — i.e., scientiﬁc visualization , information visualization, and automated data analysis
— are each useful in their own right, it is ultimately the combination and close integration of all these methods that
allows us to eﬀectively analyze PointCloud data. Automatic data analysis methods are commonly used for feature
detection and to manipulate and summarize large amounts of information. Data visualization provides eﬀective means
for data exploration as well as analysis, validation, and control of the automatic data analysis.
4. Application II: Laser Wakeﬁeld Particle Acceleration Data
Analysis of and knowledge discovery from large, complex, multi-dimensional laser wakeﬁeld particle accelerator
(LWFA) simulation data is a challenging task. Scientists of the LOASIS project model LWFA experiments computationally via particle-in-cell (PIC) simulations using VORPAL [10] to better understand nonlinear plasma response,
beam trapping, self-consistent laser propagation, and beam acceleration — processes not accessible to analytic theory.
In PIC simulations, collections of real charged particles are modeled as computational macro-particles while the electromagnetic ﬁeld is spatially discretized via a computational grid. Particles are moved under Newton-Lorentz force
obtained through interpolation from the ﬁelds. The current carried by the moving particles is then deposited onto the
simulation-grid to solve Maxwell’s equations for the ﬁelds. For each dump —i.e., a snapshot of the simulation at a
particular point in time — data about the particles, ﬁelds, and auxiliary state data is saved. For the analysis discussed
here we mainly focus on the particle data. Each particle is represented as a vector describing the physical location (x,
y, z), momentum (px, py, pz), identiﬁer (id), and weight (wt) of the macro-particle. One main feature researchers are
interested in are beams of high-energy particles formed during the course of LWFA simulations. To enable eﬃcient
and accurate data analysis, dedicated mechanisms for beam selection and detection are needed.
Figure 4 provides an overview of the system for knowledge discovery from LWFA simulations. The index/query
system FastBit [23] serves as main interface to the data enabling fast computation of conditional histograms, threshold
queries, ID-based queries, and particle tracing. The close integration of FastBit and the state-of-the-art visualization
system VisIt [24] supports fast visual exploration of very large datasets [8]. VisIt implements an eﬃcient rendering
method for parallel coordinates based on 2D histograms, computed directly using FastBit. Histogram-based parallel
coordinates serve as the main interface for deﬁning multi-dimensional range queries used for selection of particle
beams (Figure 5a). Once a subset of particles of interest has been identiﬁed, the particle IDs are saved as a named
selection. Named selections can be applied to any plot in VisIt, enabling eﬀective linking of multiple physical and
abstract data views (Figure 5b, c). While parallel coordinates serve as the main interface for data selection, VisIt also
supports creation of named selections based on a large range of other views allowing the user, e.g., to select particles

1762

O. R¨ubel et al. / Procedia Computer Science 1 (2012) 1757–1764
6

Oliver R¨ubel et al. / Procedia Computer Science 00 (2010) 1–8

Named Selections

Define/Evalute ID-based Query

Abstract Views
Histogram-based Parallel Coordinates

Other Abstract Views:
 Scatter Plot
 Histogram Plot
 ...

Request/Compute 2D Histograms

FastBit

Initalization

Timestep
Analysis tn

Other Physical Views:
 Volume Rendering
 Vector Plot
 ...

Timestep
Analysis tmin

Pseudocolor Plot

Beam Path Analysis
Operators for:
 Particle Tracing
 Thresholding

Define/Evalute ID-based or Threshold-based Query

VisIt
Physical Views

Merging
Path Analysis



 Path Dataset(s)
Named Selection(s)

FastBit

Figure 4: The system for knowledge discovery from laser wakeﬁeld particle accelerator simulation data. Color indicates the areas the diﬀerent
components of the system belong to, i.e., enabling technologies (light blue), scientiﬁc visualization (lilac), information visualization (orange), and
data analysis (green).

in physical views using a bounding box. Common methods used for visualization of the particle data include pointbased pseudocolor and scatter plot visualizations as well as density-based visualizations, such as histogram views
and parallel coordinates. For visualization of the ﬁeld data we commonly use vector plots, volume rendering, and
iso-surface-based visualizations. The close integration of multiple views via the concept of named selections together
with eﬃcient data management supports interactive data exploration based on the iterative reﬁnement and validation
of data queries.
While interactive selection of particle beams is eﬀective, it requires substantial manual input from the user and can
be time-consuming. Automating the detection of particle beams supports a more focused and eﬃcient analysis process
[9, 25]. The beam path analysis algorithm [25] deﬁnes an eﬃcient analysis pipeline that supports fast detection of
particle beams (Figure 4 right). First, each time step is analyzed independently to detect individual particle bunches.
The derived information is merged to deﬁne a single description for each main particle beam. Finally, the algorithm
computes the diﬀerent temporal phases of each beam — deﬁning, e.g., the time frame when a beam was formed and
accelerated — as well as two distance ﬁelds d s and dm , deﬁning the distance of particles to the beam in physical and
momentum space, respectively.
The automated beam detection is linked with the visualization in two ways. First, the beam path analysis automatically creates a set of named selections — one per detected beam — that can be applied to any plot in VisIt, enabling
a fully automated beam analysis process. Second, a set of complementary ﬁles is created, containing additional information about the particle paths. These ﬁles can be visualized directly in the context of the simulated data and enable
a more eﬃcient manual data exploration process by providing information about: i) the temporal phases of a beam,
ii) an appropriate reference time step for each beam, and iii) the beam distance ﬁelds d s and dm , enabling a faster
and more accurate selection of particle beams. Linking the automated beam detection with the visualization improves
the visualization by enabling a more streamlined and focused analysis process as well as the automated analysis by
providing eﬀective means for investigation and validation of analysis results.
5. Conclusions
The increasing complexity and size of today’s scientiﬁc data poses tremendous challenges for data understanding and knowledge discovery. We have described an integrative approach for knowledge discovery from multidimensional scientiﬁc data based on the concept of linking visualization and data analysis. We have illustrated the

1763

O. R¨ubel et al. / Procedia Computer Science 1 (2012) 1757–1764

7

Oliver R¨ubel et al. / Procedia Computer Science 00 (2010) 1–8
PX(*109) PY(*109) PZ(*109) X(*10-3) Y(*10-6)

wt id(*106)

PY-Axis(*109)

PX

-4.188*108
2.631*1010
5.302*1010
1.295*1010
3.966*1010

2.29
0
-2.29
0.90
0.95
1.00

X-A 1.05
xis(
*10 -3
)

1.10
1.15

a)

b) c)

1.20

-0.4

0.2

0.4

-3
0 )
(*1
xis
A
Y

-0.2

0.0

Figure 5: a) Parallel coordinates of time step t = 86 of a particle dataset showing all particles with a momentum in x direction of px > 1e10 (gray)
and a selected particle beam (red). b) Semi-transparent rendering of the paths of the selected particles over time, using time steps 0 through 105.
Color indicates px (the momentum in the acceleration direction x) and height indicates momentum in y direction (py). The particles of the selected
beam at time step t = 86 are shown in addition (red). The transition in color from blue to red along the particle paths shows that the selected
particles are constantly accelerated over time. The cork-screw-like structure of the paths illustrates the oscillating motion of the particles in the
wake. c) Close-up view of the region in ﬁgure b showing the selected particles at time step t = 86.

eﬀectiveness of this methodology by describing how it is applied in practice in the analysis of 3D gene expression and
laser wakeﬁeld particle accelerator data.
The challenges we faced in both applications were quite diﬀerent. First, LWFA simulation datasets are extremely
large (several TBs) making computationally eﬃcient data management methods, such as FastBit, indispensable. In
direct comparison, PointCloud data sets consist of relatively few data objects —i.e., on the order of 6000 cells in the
case of Drosophila PointCloud data compared to several million particles in LWFA simulation data— but contain
information about many more data dimensions, i.e., gene expressions. Furthermore, the features researchers are
interested in are quite diﬀerent in the two applications. Particle beams are very small compared to the complete data.
Eﬀective means for fast data reduction are, therefore, essential for eﬃcient analysis of LWFA simulation data. In the
visual data exploration process, the user step-by-step reﬁnes advanced data queries while using multiple views for
analysis and validation of query results. Similarly, the automatic beam path analysis is aimed at identifying speciﬁc
small features of interest, i.e., particle beams. In contrast, the goal of the automatic data analysis in the context of 3D
gene expression is usually to manipulate and summarize large amounts of information rather than extracting a speciﬁc
small data subset. Data clustering is here often used to subdivide the complete data into meaningful groups (clusters),
each deﬁning a set of cells with similar expression behavior.
Despite the large diﬀerences between 3D PointCloud and LWFA simulation data, the basic concepts used to
analyze these diﬀerent types of data are similar. While diﬀerent applications require diﬀerent visual representations
and analysis methods, it is the powerful combination and close integration of multiple diﬀerent methods that enables
eﬀective knowledge discovery. The meaningful integration of visualization, data analysis, and enabling technologies
(including eﬃcient data storage, organization, and access methods) supports a more eﬃcient, detailed, and focused
analysis process than possible based solely on either visualization or data analysis methods alone.
Acknowledgment
The work concerning the analysis of 3D gene expression data was supported by the National Institutes of Health
through grant GM70444 and by Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory (LBNL) through the Laboratory Directed
Research Development (LDRD) program. Research performed at LBNL was also supported by the Department of
Energy under contract DE-AC02-05CH11231. In addition, we gratefully acknowledge the support of an International
Research Training Group (IRTG 1131) grant provided by the German Research Foundation (DFG), awarded to the
University of Kaiserslautern, Germany.
The work concerning the analysis of LWFA data was supported by the Director, Oﬃce of Science, Oﬃces of High
Energy Physics and Advanced Scientiﬁc Computing Research, of the U.S. Department of Energy under Contract
No. DE-AC02-05CH11231 through the Scientiﬁc Discovery through Advanced Computing (SciDAC) program’s

1764

O. R¨ubel et al. / Procedia Computer Science 1 (2012) 1757–1764
Oliver R¨ubel et al. / Procedia Computer Science 00 (2010) 1–8

8

Visualization and Analytics Center for Enabling Technologies (VACET) and the COMPASS project. This research
used resources of the National Energy Research Scientiﬁc Computing Center (NERSC), which is supported by the
Oﬃce of Science of the U.S. Department of Energy under Contract No. DE-AC02-05CH11231.
We thank the members of IDAV at UC Davis, the BDTNP and LOASIS at LBNL, the IRTG 1131, LBNL’s
Visualization Group, and the VORPAL team.
References
[1] C. L. Luengo Hendriks, S. V. E. Ker¨anen, C. C. Fowlkes, L. Simirenko, G. H. Weber, A. H. DePace, C. Henriquez, D. W. Kaszuba, B. Hamann,
M. B. Eisen, J. Malik, D. Sudar, M. D. Biggin, D. W. Knowles, Three-dimensional morphology and gene expression in the Drosophila
blastoderm at cellular resolution I: Data acquisition pipeline, Genome Biology 7 (12) (2006) R123.
[2] C. C. Fowlkes, C. L. Luengo Hendriks, S. V. E. Ker¨anen, G. H. Weber, O. R¨ubel, M.-Y. Huang, S. Chatoor, A. H. DePace, L. Simirenko,
C. Henriquez, A. Beaton, R. Weiszmann, S. Celniker, B. Hamann, D. W. Knowles, M. D. Biggin, M. B. Eisen, J. Malik., A quantitative
spatio-temporal atlas of gene expression in the drosophila blastoderm, Cell 133 (2008) 364–374.
[3] T. Tajima, J. M. Dawson, Laser electron accelerator, Phys. Rev. Lett. 43 (4) (1979) 267–270.
[4] C. Geddes, C. Toth, J. van Tilborg, E. Esarey, C. Schroeder, D. Bruhwiler, C. Nieter, J. Cary, W. Leemans, High-Quality Electron Beams
from a Laser Wakeﬁeld Accelerator Using Plasma-Channel Guiding, Nature 438 (2004) 538–541.
[5] W. P. Leemans, B. Nagler, A. J. Gonsalves, C. Toth, K. Nakamura, C. G. R. Geddes, E. Esarey, C. B. Schroeder, S. M. Hooker, GeV electron
beams from a centimetre-scale accelerator, Nature Physics 2 (2006) 696 – 699.
[6] C. G. R. Geddes, Plasma Channel Guided Laser Wakeﬁeld Accelerator, Ph.D. thesis, University of California, Berkeley (2005).
[7] F. S. Tsung, R. Narang, W. B. Mori, C. Joshi, R. A. Fonseca, L. O. Silva, Near-GeV-Energy Laser-Wakeﬁeld Acceleration of Self-Injected
Electrons in a Centimeter-Scale Plasma Channel, Physical Review Letters (PRL) 93, 185002.
[8] O. R¨ubel, Prabhat, K. Wu, H. Childs, J. Meredith, C. G. R. Geddes, E. Cormier-Michel, S. Ahern, G. H. weber, P. Messmer, H. Hagen,
B. Hamann, E. W. Bethel, High Performance Multivariate Visual Data Exploration for Extemely Large Data, in: SuperComputing 2008
(SC08), Austin, Texas, USA, 2008.
[9] D. Ushizima, O. R¨ubel, Prabhat, G. Weber, E. W. Bethel, C. Aragon, C. Geddes, E. Cormier-Michel, B. Hamann, P. Messmer, H. Hagen,
Automated Analysis for Detecting Beams in Laser Wakeﬁeld Simulations, in: Proceedings of The Seventh International Conference on
Machine Learning and Applications 2008 (ICMLA 08), IEEE Computer Society Press, Los Alamitos, CA, USA, 2008, p. 382387.
[10] C. Nieter, J. R. Cary, VORPAL: A Versatile Plasma Simulation Code, J. Comput. Phys. 196 (2) (2004) 448–473.
[11] C. G. R. Geddes, D. L. Bruhwiler, J. R. Cary, W. B. Mori, J.-L. Vay, S. F. Martins, T. Katsouleas, E. Cormier-Michel, W. M. Fawley, C. Huang,
X. Wang, B. Cowan, V. K. Decyk, E. Esarey, R. A. Fonseca, W. Lu, P. Messmer, P. Mullowney, K. Nakamura, K. Paul, G. R. Plateau, C. B.
Schroeder, L. O. Silva, C. Toth, F. S. Tsung, M. Tzoufras, T. Antonsen, J. Vieira, W. P. Leemans, Computational Studies and Otimization of
Wakeﬁeld Accelerators, Journal of Physics: Conference Series V 125 (2008) 12002/1–11.
[12] C. D. Hansen, C. R. Johnson, The Visualization Handbook, Elsevier Academic Press, 2005.
[13] M. Q. Wang Baldonado, A. Woodruﬀ, A. Kuchinsky, Guidelines for using multiple views in information visualization, in: AVI ’00: Proceedings of the working conference on Advanced visual interfaces, ACM Press, New York, NY, USA, 2000, pp. 110–119.
[14] C. Henze, Feature detection in linked derived spaces, in: D. Ebert, H. Rushmeier, H. Hagen (Eds.), Proceedings IEEE Visualization ’98, IEEE
Computer Society Press, Los Alamitos, CA, USA, 1998, pp. 87–94.
[15] H. Doleisch, M. Gasser, H. Hauser, Interactive feature speciﬁcation for focus+context visualization of complex simulation data, in: G.-P. Bonneau, S. Hahmann, C. D. Hansen (Eds.), Data Visualization 2003 (Proceedings of the Eurographics/IEEE TCVG Symposim on Visualization),
2003, pp. 239–248.
[16] C. Garth, X. Tricoche, Topology- and feature-based ﬂow visualization: Methods and applications, in: SIAM Conference on Geometric Design
and Computing, 2005.
[17] PointCloudXplore is available from http://bdtnp.lbl.gov/Fly-Net/bioimaging.jsp?w=pcx.
[18] O. R¨ubel, G. H. Weber, S. V. E. Ker¨anen, C. C. Fowlkes, C. L. Luengo Hendriks, L. Simirenko, N. Y. Shah, M. B. Eisen, M. D. Biggin,
H. Hagen, D. Sudar, J. Malik, D. Knowles, B. Hamann., Pointcloudxplore: Visual analysis of 3d gene expression data using physical views
and parallel coordinates, in: B. S. Santos, T. Ertl, K. Joy (Eds.), Data Visualization 2006 (Proceedings of EuroVis 2006), Eurographics
Association, Aire-la-Ville, Switzerland, 2006, pp. 203–210.
[19] G. H. Weber, O. R¨ubel, M.-Y. Huang, A. H. DePace, C. C. Fowlkes, S. V. Ker¨anen, C. L. Luengo Hendriks, H. Hagen, D. W. Knowles,
J. Malik, M. D. Biggin, B. Hamann, Visual exploration of three-dimensional gene expression using physical views and linked abstract views,
IEEE Transactions on Computational Biology and Bioinformatics 6 (2) (2009) 296–309.
[20] M. B. Eisen, P. T. Spellman, P. O. Brown, D. Botstein, Cluster analysis and display of genome-wide expression patterns, Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 95 (25) (1998) 14863–14868.
[21] O. R¨ubel, G. H. Weber, M.-Y. Huang, E. W. Bethel, M. D. Biggin, C. C. Fowlkes, C. L. Luengo Hendriks, S. V. E. Ker¨anen, M. B. Eisen,
D. W. Knowles, J. Malik, H. Hagen, B. Hamann, Integrating data clustering and visualization for the analysis of 3d gene expression data,
IEEE Transactions on Computational Biology and Bioinformatics 7 (1) (2010) 64–79.
[22] O. R¨ubel, S. V. E. Ker¨anen, M. D. Biggin, D. W. Knowles, G. H. Weber, H. Hagen, B. Hamann, E. W. Bethel, Linking Advanced Visualization
and MATLAB for the Analysis of 3D Gene Expression Data, in: Mathematical Methods for Visualization in Medicine and Life Sciences,
Springer Verlag, 2009, (submitted).
[23] FastBit is available from https://codeforge.lbl.gov/projects/fastbit/.
[24] VisIt is available from https://wci.llnl.gov/codes/visit/.
[25] O. R¨ubel, C. G. R. Geddes, E. Cormier-Michel, K. Wu, Prabhat, G. H. Weber, D. M. Ushizima, P. Messmer, H. Hagen, B. Hamann, W. Bethel,
Automatic beam path analysis of laser wakeﬁeld particle acceleration data, IOP Computational Science & Discovery 2 (015005) (2009) 38pp.

