Procedia Computer
Science
Procedia
Computer
Science
00 (2010)
1–1 2105
Procedia
Computer
Science
1 (2012)

www.elsevier.com/locate/procedia

International Conference on Computational Science, ICCS 2010

Workshop on tools for program development and analysis in
computational science
Christof Klauseckera,1,∗, Arndt Bodeb,d , Andreas Kn¨upferc , Dieter Kranzlm¨ullera,d , Jie Taoe , Jens Volkertf , Roland
Wism¨ullerg
a Ludwig-Maximilians-Universit¨
at

M¨unchen, 80538 Munich, Germany
Universit¨at M¨unchen, 85748 Garching near Munich, Germany
Universit¨at Dresden, 01062 Dresden, Germany
d Leibniz Supercomputing Centre, 85748 Garching near Munich, Germany
e Karlsruhe Institute of Technology, 76131 Karlsruhe, Germany
f Johannes Kepler University Linz, 4040 Linz, Austria
g University of Siegen, 57068 Siegen, Germany

b Technische

c Technische

Abstract
The use of supercomputing technology, parallel and distributed processing, and sophisticated algorithms is of major importance for computational scientists. Yet, the scientists’ goals are to solve their challenging scientiﬁc problems,
not the software engineering tasks associated with it. For that reason, computational science and engineering must
be able to rely on dedicated support from program development and analysis tools. The primary intention of this
workshop is to bring together developers of tools for scientiﬁc computing and their potential users. Tool developers
present how their tools support scientists and engineers during program development and analysis. The users report
their experiences employing such tools, especially highlighting the beneﬁts and possible improvements.

c 2012 Published by Elsevier Ltd. Open access under CC BY-NC-ND license.
⃝

Keywords: parallel and distributed computing, program development, performance analysis, debugging tools,
program optimization, resource management
Since its beginning at the ﬁrst ICCS in 2001, the workshop has encouraged tool developers and users from the
scientiﬁc and engineering community to exchange their experiences. The workshop addresses, but is not limited to,
the following tools and methods provided by computer scientists for scientists and engineers from their respective
application domains.
•
•
•
•
•

Tools for development of parallel and distributed applications
Problem solving environments for speciﬁc application domains
Debugging, performance analysis, and optimization tools
Tools for resource management, load-balancing, job queuing and accounting
Requirements for tools emerging from the application domain

Furthermore, it covers reports about use cases and success stories using the tools for science and engineering by
either the users or by the computer scientists or by collaboration of both.
∗ Email

address: klauseck@nm.ifi.lmu.de (Christof Klausecker)
author

1 Corresponding

c 2012 Published by Elsevier Ltd. Open access under CC BY-NC-ND license.
1877-0509 ⃝
doi:10.1016/j.procs.2010.04.235

