Available online at www.sciencedirect.com

Procedia
Computer Science
Science 00
(2009) 000–000
Procedia
Computer
1 (2012)
1951–1952

Procedia
Computer
Science
www.elsevier.com/locate/procedia
www.elsevier.com/locate/procedia

International Conference on Computational Science, ICCS 2010

Agent-based computing, adaptive algorithms
and bio computing
Krzysztof Centarowicza, Maciej Paszyńskia*,
David Pardob, Tibor Bossec, Han La Poutréd
a

Department of Computer Science, AGH University of Science and Technology, Al. Mickiewicza 30, 30-059, Krakow, Poland
b
BCAM (Basque Center for Applied Mathematics) and IKERBASQUE (Basque Foundation for Sciences),
Bizkaia Technology Park, Building 500, E-48160, Bilbao, Spain
c
Department of Artificial Intelligence,Vrije Universiteit, De Boelelaan 1081a, 1081 HV Amsterdam, The Netherlands
d
Computational Intelligence and Multi-Agent Games,Centrum Wiskunde&Mathematica,Science Park 123, 1098 XG Amsterdam, The Netherlands

Abstract
Agent-oriented system seems to be the attractive tool useful for numerous domains of applications. It gives the ability to integrate
results of different domains of computer science and constitutes the powerful tool for solving various problems. The new
approach to the simulation particularly in bio-computing and adaptive systems is possible to be developed mainly due to the
results of the interactions among intelligent agents in complex adaptive systems. The modern agent-oriented paradigm allows
understand the adaptive (e.g. finite element / finite difference) algorithms as a collection of interacting agents making local
decision about refinements. This workshop focuses on the various applications of agent-oriented and adaptive systems and the
roles of interactions of intelligent agents to build intelligent systems for miscellaneous, interesting applications.

c 2012 Published by Elsevier Ltd. Open access under CC BY-NC-ND license.
⃝
Keywords: multi-agent systems; adaptive algorithms; nature inspired algorithms; bio computing; mathematical modeling and asymptotic analysis

1. Workshop overview
The Workshop "Agent-Based Simulation, Adaptive Algorithms and Bio Computing" follows meetings which
held in Kraków, Poland 2004, Atlanta 2005, Reading 2006 and Beijing 2007, Kraków 2008, Baton Rouge 2009 in
frame on ICCS series of conferences.
The first group of papers accepted to the Workshop fits into the categories of multi-agent systems in integration
of different approaches as well as the multi-agent systems in high performance processing. The paper “A new agentbased paradigm for recognition of free-hand sketches” by Fernández-Pacheco et al. presents a new agent-based
paradigm for recognition of free-hand sketches. The recognition process is supported by two level agents: Primitive
Agents which are in charge of syntactic recognition, and Combined Agents which carry out semantic recognition

* Corresponding author. Tel.: +48126339406 fax: +48126339406.
E-mail address:paszynsk@agh.edu.pl.

c 2012 Published by Elsevier Ltd. Open access under CC BY-NC-ND license.
1877-0509 ⃝
doi:10.1016/j.procs.2010.04.218

1952

K. Centarowicz
et al.
Procedia
Computer
Science Computer
1 (2012) 1951–1952
K. Cetnarowicz, M. Paszyński,
D. Pardo,
T. /Bosse,
H. La
Poutré/ Procedia
Science 00 (2010) 000–000

using contextual information. A number of advantages of the proposed paradigm over existing approaches are
discussed. A first implementation of the Primitive Agents has been performed and evaluated by means of several
tests, achieving a success ratio of 96.41%. The paper “A Software environment for a human-aware ambient agent
supporting attention-demanding tasks” by Memon et al. introduces a software environment for a human-aware
ambient agent that provides support for a human performing an attention-demanding task. The agent obtains human
attention-awareness by use of a dynamical model of human attention, gaze sensoring by an eye-tracker, and
information about features of the objects in the environment. It has been implemented in a component-based, eventdriven manner within the Adobe® Flex® environment, thereby also integrating the Tobii® eye-tracker. It has been
applied in a setup for a task where the human has to identify enemies and allies, and eliminate the enemies. The last
paper from the group, “Platform for distributed execution of agents for trusted data collection” by Emil Gatial et al.,
presents a design and implementation of a platform, which allows for obtaining trusted data collection from
heterogeneous distributed sources including legacy systems and users. The Authors adopted the existing production
grade service platform Jini to host agents. Presented architecture was demonstrated on the use-case scenario for drug
distribution during pandemic process mitigation.
There is one paper that fits into the category of bio-computing and multi-agent systems. The paper "Individualbased simulation of sexual selection: a quantitative genetic approach” by van Dijk et al.considers sexual selection, in
particular the evolution of male display and female preference. It presents an individual-based simulation model of
sexual selection in a quantitative genetic context. It shows that under certain conditions, Fisherian self-reinforcing
sexual selection takes effect, predicted by Lande’s analytic model of female choice, and that the dynamics involved
in the co-evolution of male display and female preference is much more complex than mathematics would predict.
Based on this, it argues that the study of sexual selection through individual-based simulation could give new and
more realistic insights.
The next group of papers fits into the categories of mathematical modeling, asymptotic analysis, and application
of adaptive algorithms and simulation in context of adaptive Galerkin methods. One paper “A Multigoal-oriented
adaptivity for hp-finite element methods” by David Pardo describing a goal-oriented grid-refinement strategy
intended to simultaneously approximate several prescribed targets or goals. The multi-target refinement strategy is
defined in context of a higher-order finite element method (FEM), and numerical results are illustrated with
electromagnetic applications. An article “Design and development of an adaptive mesh manipulation module for
detailed FEM simulation of flows” by Krzysztof Banaś et al. describing flexible data-structures for meshmanipulation in adaptive finite element methods. The Authors use object oriented programming to obtain datastructures that exploit parallelism, and at the same time they efficiently use cache memory to increase the speed of
the resulting software. A paper “Automatic terrain modeling using transfinite element analysis” by Victor Calo et al.
introducing a new adaptive method that utilizes a special set of basis functions based on transfinite interpolation.
This work is an extension of the so-called isogeometric analysis. The described method is applied in the area of
terrain modeling to reconstruct the geometry of Palo Duro Canyon in northern Texas.
There is one paper that fits into the category of agent-oriented approach to adaptive simulations. The paper
“Agent-based parallel system for numerical computations” by Marcin Sieniek et al., introduces an agent-based
system for hp adaptive FEM simulations, including the management of mesh refinements, and multi-frontal direct
solver. The Authors define formally a Computing Multi Agents System (C-MAS) for adaptive FEM based on Smart
Solid Agent model and describe tasks executed by hp-FEM agents. The paper is concluded with numerical
experiments concerning the nanolithography simulations performed with an application developed accordingly to
the described model.
Two other papers fit into the categories of adaptive algorithms and simulations in context of parallel multi-frontal
solvers. The first paper from the group, “Parallel multi-frontal solver for multi-physics p adaptive problems” by
Maciej Paszyński et al. describes a new algorithm for an efficient parallel multi-frontal direct solver designed for
non-uniform meshes resulting from multi-physics adaptive simulation. The paper uses the model of graph grammar
in order to express the algorithm for managing computational nodes with different number of degrees of freedom.
The second paper from the group, “Graph grammar-based multi-thread multi-frontal parallel solver with trace
theory-based scheduler” by Paweł Obrok et al., introduces a graph-grammar based approach to express efficient
parallel solver for 1D and 2D finite difference method (FDM) simulations. The Authors express the solver algorithm
in terms of tasks related to graph grammar productions, which allows to employ the trace theory based scheduler,
executing the tasks according to the Foata Normal Form (FNF).

