Procedia Computer
Science
Procedia
Computer Science
Science 001(2010)
1–41527–1530
Procedia
Computer
(2012)

www.elsevier.com/locate/procedia

International Conference on Computational Science, ICCS 2010

Position paper on the design of a modular toolbox for the
simulation of solid state lasers
J. Wernera,b,∗, M. Wohlmutha,b , C. Pﬂauma,b
a Universit¨
at Erlangen-N¨urnberg
Lehrstuhl f¨ur Systemsimulation (Informatik 10)
Cauerstraße 6, 91058 Erlangen, Germany
b Erlangen Graduate School in Advanced Optical Technologies

Abstract
In this work we describe the design of our simulation tool for solid state lasers. The software is based on modules
to simplify several complex processes. Primarily, the adaptation of laser physics (e.g. thermal lensing, optical wave)
with the appropriate simulation technique. Another aspect is to provide the possibility of exchanging the applied
calculation methods or even to change the representation of the computational domain on demand.
c 2012 Published by Elsevier Ltd. Open access under CC BY-NC-ND license.
⃝
Keywords: solid state laser, simulation, expression templates, unit tests, modular programming

1. Introduction
Designing a laser requires to take into account various competing physical eﬀects like thermal lensing, focus shifts
and gain dynamics. For complex systems, building a laser and measuring such an reference system is diﬃcult. This
approach would be costly and some eﬀects, like thermal stress, are not measurable in acceptable quality. Often, it is
not clear which physical property is most signiﬁcant for a particular eﬀect. Therefore a laser simulation tool has to
be able to combine the prediction of physical inﬂuences with the capability to compare the simulation results with
availeable experimental data.
2. Requirements
In order to provide a complete tool to simulate lasers, one has to take into account multiple needs.
Laser physics is a ﬁeld of active research and produces new physical eﬀects worth simulating. Thus one main task
is to provide a possibility to implement additional computation techniques easily. Another one is to provide means to
integrate these methods in a way they can reuse structures and algorithms already implemented. A further requirement
is to be able to handle a wide range of materials, for example gain crystals, lens materials and cooling media. The
∗ Corresponding

author
Email addresses: johannes.werner@informatik.uni-erlangen.de (J. Werner),
matthias.wohlmuth@informatik.uni-erlangen.de (M. Wohlmuth), pflaum@informatik.uni-erlangen.de (C. Pﬂaum)

c 2012 Published by Elsevier Ltd. Open access under CC BY-NC-ND license.
1877-0509 ⃝
doi:10.1016/j.procs.2010.04.170

1528

J. Werner et al. / Procedia Computer Science 1 (2012) 1527–1530
2

C.Pﬂaum, J.Werner, M. Wohlmuth / Procedia Computer Science 00 (2010) 1–4

last aspect of the simulatory part is to provide the ability to test the correctness of the implemented techniques and
models. To this end one needs to be able to feed the modules with actual measurements as well as generic data.
Additional there are some more general needs. The tool should be conﬁgurable and usable by a common laser
developer. Also typical simulation setups should have decent runtime. Finally the user should be assisted in the choice
of suitable simulation parameters, such as the number of necessary grid points or a suitable calculation technique.
3. Code Structure
In order to fulﬁll the above requirements, the code is divided into several parts which can be grouped in three
layers.
The ﬁrst layer builds the basis for computations. Its task is to handle all computational needs like data structures
(e.g. grids) and basic numerical operations (e.g. stencils). By this, we remove the need to take care of implementory
techniques within the implementation of the physical models. The implementation of the mathematical formulae is
done by expression templates. This provides both, a way to handle multiple data sources and to feature a method
of checking correctness of the implementation of the mathematical modelling at compile time. Further advantages
of this implementation technique are its abilities to automatically parallelize the calculations or to transparently pass
calculations to external libraries.



Figure 1: Abstract Code Structure of the Toolbox

"	

#$
%&

"



	

'(


,.

!

,.

,-

!

"

,

"

,

"

,






+

"/


% 




'()*
+







On the second Layer the implementations of the physical simulation models and testing aspects happen, divided
in three parts: The ﬁrst part consists of a collection of modules that handle various simulations (such as pumping,
heat distribution, deformation, laser modes, etc.). Those modules interact by providing calculation results, loading

1529

J. Werner et al. / Procedia Computer Science 1 (2012) 1527–1530
C.Pﬂaum, J.Werner, M. Wohlmuth / Procedia Computer Science 00 (2010) 1–4

3

simulation data or output results. Each module handles a speciﬁc task and may provide several ways of calculating
the desired result. A second part provides a control code to manage the modules and to ensure proper interaction, as
well as a low level user interface. Thus, these two parts provide the simulation core of the tool.
The third part of the software is a testing backend based on CppUnit (compare [1]) that supports automated tests
on the basis of unit, integration and system testing (see Chapter 5 for further details).
Finally, the third layer is a graphical user interface to feed the simulation core with data and to visualize attained
results.
4. Flexibility
Because of the separation of the simulation core from the implementation of the numeric part, modules to simulate
laser eﬀects can easily be added to the core. Also, within a module it is easy to change the used algorithm or data
representation in order to adapt the code to speciﬁc simulation settings like resonator structures, crystal geometries or
ray paths.
Furthermore, by providing the user with the ability to choose which modules are active, it is guarantied that the
amount of unnecessary calculations is kept to a minimum.
5. Testing
Since the goal of any good simulation tool is to reﬂect the reality of physical eﬀects in the calculated results, one
needs to add a possibility to check every part of the code. The code has to be consistent with a reference model and
also with real-life measured data. To achieve this, the testing environment is structured into several parts.
In order to check the code for correct adaptation of the mathematical model, we use two diﬀerent approaches.
First, we check by standard run time tests with generic data against known results. Second, we check the soundness
of the implemented mathematical formula at compile time by using expression templates (see [2] and [3]).
In a second stage, the interaction between modules is checked. This includes testing their interfaces against the
speciﬁcation and running integration tests by loading prepared data into the modules and then running the calculation
part of the collecting module. As with the mathematical checking, the result data can be compared to precalculated
results.
As a last step, system tests are applied to simple conﬁgurations and compared to known results. The known
results are received from other simulation software, direct calculations and measured data. In more complex settings,
the results have to be compared with experimental data (see [4]).
6. Status
At the current stage various mathematical and simulation parts (on layer two) are implemented and working (see
[5]). In the numerical handler remaining tasks involve speeding up utilizing auto parallelisation and providing thread
safety on the interfaces to the driving codes in the core’s modules.
The simulation modules are implemented in accordance with the current state of research and already used in laser
simulations (see [6] and [4]).
In the testing environment the unit tests of serveral modules are already implemented and usable. For those modules integration testing is also available. It would be beneﬁcial to automate the testing against measurements, which
requires much user experience though. Therefore, the focus is on providing tools, like for example a visualization
frontend, to assist manual checking.
7. Conclusion
We presented a comprehensive view on the design of our laser simulation toolbox. It accomplishes the primary
goal of providing a development aid to the laser engineer. Furthermore, it guides the developers during the implementation of additional components and in ensuring the quality of the simulation results.

1530

J. Werner et al. / Procedia Computer Science 1 (2012) 1527–1530
C.Pﬂaum, J.Werner, M. Wohlmuth / Procedia Computer Science 00 (2010) 1–4

4

Acknowledgment
We gratefully acknowledge funding of Erlangen Graduate School in Advanced Optical Technologies (SAOT) by
the German National Science Foundation (DFG) in the framework of the excellence initiative.
[1] P. Hamill, Unit Test Frameworks, O’Reilly Media, 2004.
[2] J. H¨ardtlein, C. Pﬂaum, A. Linke, C. H. Wolters, Advanced expression templates programming, Computing and Visualization in Science 12
(2009) 59–68. doi:10.1007/s00791-009-0128-2.
[3] C.Pﬂaum, Z. Rahimi, Automatic parallelization of staggered grid codes with expression templates, International Journal on Computational
Science and Engineering 4 (4) (2009) 306–313. doi:10.1504/IJCSE.2009.029166.
[4] M. Wohlmuth, C. Pﬂaum, K. Altmann, M. Paster, C. Hahn, Dynamic multimode analysis of Q-switched solid state laser cavities, Optics
Express 17 (20) (2009) 17303–17316.
[5] M. Wohlmuth, K. Altmann, C. Pﬂaum, Finite Element Simulation of Solid State Laser Resonators, in: Proceedings of SPIE, Vol. 7194, SPIE,
SPIE, 2009, pp. 16–1 – 16–10.
[6] C. Pﬂaum, D. Seider, K. Altmann, Three-Dimensional Finite Element Computation of Laser Cavity Eigenmodes, Applied Optics 43 (9) (2004)
1892.

