Available online at www.sciencedirect.com

Procedia
ComputerScience
Science 00
(2009) 000–000
Procedia
Computer
1 (2012)
2207–2216

Procedia
Computer
Science
www.elsevier.com/locate/procedia

www.elsevier.com/locate/procedia

International Conference on Computational Science, ICCS 2010

Computing for construal: an exploratory study of desert ant
navigation
Daniel Keer, Steve Russ, Meurig Beynon*
The Empirical Modelling Research Group, Computer Science, University of Warwick, Coventry CV4 7AL, UK

Abstract
The study of ant navigation is a rich source of empirical data and speculative theories that has been well-documented in the
scientific literature. We describe and illustrate how an approach to computer-based modelling ("Empirical Modelling") can be
used to devise construals to support the exploratory experimental activities that inform an understanding of desert ant navigation.

c 2012 Published by Elsevier Ltd. Open access under CC BY-NC-ND license.
⃝
Keywords: computational science; exploratory experiment; Empirical Modelling; construal; ant navigation

1. Introduction
A previous paper by Beynon and Russ [1] distinguishes two kinds of experimental activity: post-theory and
exploratory. To date, the application of computational science has been primarily directed at post-theory
experiment, which enjoys computer support well-aligned to the classical theory of computation. In [1], Beynon and
Russ argue that exploratory experiment demands a broader conception of computing and propose Empirical
Modelling (EM) [2] as a conceptual framework better oriented to providing appropriate computational support.
In this paper, we give a practical illustration of how EM can support exploratory experiment in connection with
documented scientific studies in ant navigation [3,4]. Our objective is to show how EM can be helpful in devising a
construal that is consistent with the empirical evidence and with speculative scientific theory. We shall first use the
theme of ant navigation to review the notions of post-theory and exploratory experiment that are introduced in [1].
1.1. Post-theory and exploratory experiment
By a theory of ant navigation we mean a putative mechanism that explains how an ant behaves with reference to
what we construe the ant as able to perceive and act in response to. Of course, this explanation of behaviour cannot

* Corresponding author. Tel.: +44 24 7652 3089; fax: +44 24 7657 3024.
E-mail address: wmb@dcs.warwick.ac.uk.

c 2012 Published by Elsevier Ltd. Open access under CC BY-NC-ND license.
1877-0509 ⃝
doi:10.1016/j.procs.2010.04.247

2208

D. Keer et al. / Procedia Computer Science 1 (2012) 2207–2216
Keer, Russ, Beynon / Procedia Computer Science 00 (2010) 000–000

reasonably be expected to predict the actual behaviour of a specific ant in precise detail. It should however be able
to account in broad terms for the typical patterns of behaviour that can be observed from studying a real ant. Posttheory experiment concerns the study of ant behaviours that are predicated on an established theory. Such
experiments can exploit the power of the computer as a computational device that simulates the repeated application
of a set of stimulus-response rules.
A theory of ant navigation rests upon experimental evidence derived in a speculative and exploratory fashion.
Such evidence testifies to what senses may be employed – whether an ant navigates by using scent or vision, for
instance. It may also serve to corroborate a specific hypothesis about what an ant responds to - such as whether it
can distinguish objects, and is sensitive to their size and colour. Other relevant ingredients that require exploration
include the mechanisms that are deemed to be involved (such as recognising and remembering landmarks) and the
range of environmental conditions and situations in which a navigation strategy can succeed.
We use the term ‘exploratory experiment’ to refer to activities of a preliminary and provisional sense-making
nature that precede the articulation of a theory. Whereas post-theory experiment is associated with a stable objective
context of observation in which parameters can be changed and the outcomes observed, exploratory experiment is
concerned with identifying appropriate contexts for reliable observation, distinguishing between essential and
accidental features of interaction, deciding what is deemed to be an outcome and what is deemed to have significant
influence over this outcome. The scope and complexity of the exploratory investigations required in studying ant
navigation reflects the richness of the sensory and navigational mechanisms involved. Such studies can benefit
computer science in many ways. The naturally evolved navigational mechanisms and behaviours of ants are likely to
differ greatly from those that a computer scientist might contrive, and a deeper understanding of their nature may
provide useful insight into intelligent agents.
1.1. Sensory and navigational capabilities of ants – a brief overview
Ants possess a wide range of sensory capabilities, though acuity and the manner in which they are relied upon or
combined differs greatly between species. Some key capabilities are as follows:
Scent: Most ant species are very sensitive to scent, and particularly scent markers left by other ants of the same
species and colony. The behaviours related to the use of scent in ants are well-documented and understood. Marking
paths to food with scent trails is common, as is using scent to alarm or direct nest-mates.
Touch: Ants are covered in tiny hairs, which give them the ability to feel. This is particularly useful when they
are navigating the inside of their nest but can also play a significant role in navigating an outside environment.
Touch is also used by many species for communicating with nest-mates.
Vision: An insect’s vision is significantly different from that of humans or other animals. They possess
compound multifaceted eyes, made up of thousands of tiny ommatidia – primitive individual eyes with their own
lens and several long visual cells. Instead of sensing Red, Green and Blue light like human eyes, an ant’s eyes are
sensitive to Green, Blue and Ultraviolet light. Ants have eyes on the sides of their heads, so have a wide field of
view. In most species vision is more sensitive towards the front of the ant where the two eyesight fields overlap and
vision cells are most concentrated. Visual aptitude varies between species; desert ant species for example have
excellent vision and make extensive use of it, while other species have severely limited vision.
Ants are also known to possess some very specific capabilities that are directly adapted for navigation and
direction-finding. These include complex visual-memory navigation techniques, as well as inbuilt abilities that
utilise directional cues imperceptible to humans, such as polarised light, magnetic fields and path integration:
Polarization Compass: It is well known that many insects orient themselves using the sun or moon. However, it
is not strictly the sun that such insects use, but the presence of polarized light in the sky. Such insects have
ommatidia that are sensitive to polarized UV light (which penetrates clouds better than the humanly visible

D. Keer et al. / Procedia Computer Science 1 (2012) 2207–2216

2209

Keer, Russ, Beynon / Procedia Computer Science 00 (2010) 000–000

wavelengths). These ommatidia are orientated at a variety of different angles, such that by analysing the input, the
ant brain can determine the direction and intensity of the polarized light in the sky. The benefit of this complex
polarization hardware to the insect is to provide a kind of compass with which to orient itself.
Magnetic Compass: Some ants can also sense their orientation relative to the earth’s magnetic field. However,
this seems to be a less important ability, used only in the absence of visual guidance from the polarization compass.
Path Integration: Ants have a well-documented ability to keep track of their distance and direction from the nest
when they are out foraging. Even after travelling some distance from their nest in varied directions, experiments
have shown them to be able to return directly to their nest, judging direction and distance very accurately. This
ability (which is not unique to ants) is called path integration, as when the ability was first suggested it was named
after the integration technique used by human marine navigators to perform a similar function.
Experiments have since shown however that there are consistent errors in the calculations made by ants, and that
they actually appear to use an approximation method that calculates the new distance and direction from the nest at
every step. They are thought to estimate distance travelled at each step using sensory information from the muscles
in their legs (proprioceptive senses). An algorithm that ants may use for calculating the distance and direction from
the nest has been proposed by Müller and Wehner [5].
Visual-Memory Techniques (Using Landmarks and Snapshots): Navigating by use of memory and landmarks
is one of the most interesting areas of ant behaviour. Ants are capable of recognising and remembering landmarks,
and using them to find their way back to food sources or other sites of interest. There are, however, a variety of
ways that different species of ants use and interpret this ability. Many species are thought to take 'snapshots' of their
surroundings at specific intervals, which they subsequently use to retrace their steps to important objects. Different
species are known to follow 'walls' and other long objects, to aim at landmark 'beacons' and to navigate using
vectors. A combined example is described in the navigation scenario in section 2.2.
As explained in Collett and Collett [3], Collett, Graham and Durier [4] and Wehner [6], ants do not typically rely
on one sensory capability in navigation; they combine these capabilities into an overall navigation behaviour system.
By way of illustration, the combined navigation scenario discussed in section 2.2 focuses on path integration and
visual techniques but excludes the scent, magnetic compass and sun compass abilities. This would be very typical of
species such as desert ants (genus cataglyphis) that are known to use visual navigation extensively.
1.2. Support for exploratory experiment through computer-based construal
From the above discussion, the complexity of the task faced by an experimenter seeking to develop a theory of
ant navigation is clear. An ant can potentially exploit many different senses in navigating, may adopt a navigational
strategy that combines different capabilities, and may deploy different strategies according to its current situation.
What is more, any putative explanation for an ant's navigational behaviour must make credible assumptions about
the kind of processing that can be carried out in its simple brain. For instance (cf. section 2.3 below), experimental
results suggest that ants can record landmarks by taking visual snapshots, and registering the elevation angle to the
top of each landmark in their snapshot. When they later compare a snapshot with the current view, they are thus able
to judge distance, and assess whether they are closer or further from objects than when the snapshot was taken.
Making computer models in conjunction with gathering empirical data and formulating speculative theories can
be helpful in addressing the experimenter's task. Ideally, computer models constructed for this purpose should be
fluid and readily revised as more data is gathered and new provisional interpretations are conceived. As is wellrecognised, traditional software development principles are ill-suited to this purpose – modifying the functional
requirements of a program typically means significant revision of a program, especially where the implementation
has been optimised to achieve specific functional goals. The "Empirical Modelling" principles and tools advocated
for this modelling role operate within a radically different semantic framework. The product of EM activity is an
interactive artefact whose interpretation is unlike that of a program. Crucially, the interpretation of interaction with
an EM artefact is not formally specified (as is the functional specification of a program). In contrast, the

2210

D. Keer et al. / Procedia Computer Science 1 (2012) 2207–2216
Keer, Russ, Beynon / Procedia Computer Science 00 (2010) 000–000

interpretation is open-ended and reflects connections made in the modeller's immediate experience that in general
have to be learned and rely upon acquired observational and manipulative skills.
In his historical studies of Faraday's early work on electromagnetism [7,8], the philosopher of science David
Gooding introduced the term 'construal' to refer to interactive artefacts that play a role in representation and
communication similar to that of computer models in exploratory experiment.
The principles that guide the construction of computer models that serve as construals are quite different in
character from those that inform classical computer programming. Empirical Modelling [2] favours an approach to
building construals that involves embodying within computer artefacts the patterns of interaction observed in
phenomena. The objective in this embodiment is to endow the construal with interactive characteristics that
correspond closely to those exhibited by all the state-changing agents deemed to be associated with a phenomenon,
as identified through exploratory experiment. In this context, the correspondence to which the experimenter aspires
is primarily experiential rather than formal in character. What atomic changes of state can be observed and/or
effected in the phenomenon, as identified through experiment, have direct counterparts in interactions with the
computer-based construal.
1.3. The rudiments of Empirical Modelling
Three basic concepts underpin EM principles: observables, dependencies and agents. (For more details of these
concepts, see [2].) The agents relevant to a construal include all the entities deemed to be capable of producing statechange. The primary agent is the model-builder. Conceptually, the model-builder's view of their construal is
expressed as a network of dependencies linking observables. Observables in the computer-based construal are
associated with scalar values, such as numbers or strings, geometric entities such as points, lines and shapes, and
display components such as panels, boxes and labels. The current values of these observables reflect the state of the
phenomenon as (or as if) it is currently being experienced by the modeller. Dependencies express the way in which
the modeller expects a change to one observable to affect another in an atomic indivisible fashion. By using the EM
tools, it is possible to specify families of observables and formulate definitions to frame the way in which the current
value of each observable is dependent on the values of others (cf. the way in which the value of a spreadsheet cell
can be defined in terms of the values of other cells).
The current values of observables in a construal, as displayed on the computer screen or recorded in the computer
memory, together with a family of definitions of observables that express the latent dependencies between changes
to these observables, are the counterparts of "the sketches of images, objects and actions" to which Gooding alludes
in [8]. The full appreciation of the construal requires knowledge of meaningful ways in which the construal can be
exercised by invoking suitable manual, semi-automated or fully automated changes of state, for which counterparts
of the "procedural explanations and instructions" to which Gooding alludes in [8] are required.
In EM, a complex phenomenon is construed as a multi-agent interaction. The same principles that are used to
frame the current state of the construal as it is experienced by the model-builder can be applied to modelling the
environments within which all other agents are deemed to act. In this way, a human perspective on state and action,
as mediated by a family of definitions, can be projected onto other agents. The most significant distinction between
the construal and a program is that the behaviours in which the construal can participate are open-ended in respect of
their extent and their interpretation. As in the processes that led Faraday from construals of electromagnetic
phenomena to the invention of the electric motor (cf. [7]), there is scope for interactions with construals to expose
system-like and theory-like patterns of behaviour. In this respect, there is a key role for the identification of
protocols for agent interaction and of invariant relations between observables.
2. A construal for desert ant navigation
The principles and concepts of EM will be illustrated with reference to the development of a construal for ant
navigation [9,10]. This construal was developed by the principal author, Daniel Keer, in his final year undergraduate

D. Keer et al. / Procedia Computer Science 1 (2012) 2207–2216

2211

Keer, Russ, Beynon / Procedia Computer Science 00 (2010) 000–000

project in 2005. In this paper we shall focus on how Keer’s construal illustrates the theme of EM support for
exploratory experiment. For fuller details of its construction, the interested reader should consult [9].
2.1. Keer’s ant navigation model
A screenshot from Keer’s ant navigation model is shown in Figure 1. It depicts the use of the model to
demonstrate how an ant might make use of visual snapshots in returning to a previously discovered source of food.
Developing this construal of ant navigation had three aspects:
1. Informally identifying the kinds of behaviour that were to be addressed, and the sort of observables,
dependencies and agents that would need to be taken into account.
2. Constructing an interactive environment in which the relevant observables, dependencies and agents were
realised and actions and interpretations on the part of agents could be rehearsed.
3. Interacting with the environment in an exploratory fashion to find coherent patterns of behaviour that conform to
experimental findings.

Figure 1: A screenshot from Keer's ant navigation model

Aspect 1 was addressed using a ‘PEAS’ specification (cf. Russell and Norvig [11], p38) – a method of analysis
that defines an agent problem from the point of view of the Performance Measures, Environment, Actuators and
Sensors for that agent. In this case, the appropriate agent problem was to simulate the navigational performance of a
desert ant, as documented in a number of scientific papers on the subject [3,4,5,6].

2212

D. Keer et al. / Procedia Computer Science 1 (2012) 2207–2216
Keer, Russ, Beynon / Procedia Computer Science 00 (2010) 000–000

Performance Objectives: The agent must locate food sources, and navigate between the nest and the source on
repeat visits as quickly and as effectively as possible. As a model of a real ant, it must perform in a realistic manner
(even with the same inherent flaws), and make decisions in ways that ants are understood to use.
Environment: A suitable experimentation environment will consist of a walled enclosure from which the ant
cannot escape. The environment will contain objects of different colours and sizes, and which we will assume the
ant cannot climb over. There will be a nest located in the environment, which the ant can recognise as ‘home’. There
may also be food deposits present, which the ant will be able to detect. The enclosure will be divided into a grid and
objects, food and water will all occupy discrete squares on this grid.
Actuators: The ant is capable of turning by rotating around its current position. It can also step forward a
predetermined step length. Though it is imagined to pick up and deposit food, these actions will have no effect on
the environment.
Sensors: The ant agent possesses the following sensory abilities, a subset of those in section 1.2:
• The ant can detect the contents (e.g. food or nest) of its current location, as well as the contents of the squares
directly adjacent in the forward arc (from -90o to 90o).
• The ant has a path integration sense telling it the distance and direction to the nest. This is regarded as an
‘internal’ navigation sense, and is calculated based on the algorithm in Müller and Wehner [5].
• The ant can perceive coloured objects/landmarks in the surrounding environment. To simulate an ant’s longrange visual sense in the model, the ant agent is able to view the elevation and colour of any objects in front of it
in its forward field of view (from -45o to 45o). In the model the horizontal visual resolution is limited to 17 fixed
equally spaced headings within this field of vision, resolving to the 17 coloured bars visible in Figure 1.
• The ant can detect the position of the sun in the sky (which gradually shifts), relative to its current position.
Aspect 2 of the model-building made use of the principal EM tool ("the EDEN interpreter") to construct the
interactive environment depicted in Figure 1. In this environment, there are counterparts of the significant
observables required to explore the agent problem framed above. Because of the nature of modelling in EDEN, it is
appropriate to conceptualise the current state of the environment as a family of definitions, expressing a network of
dependencies that link the significant observables. These definitions were originally introduced to the model through
an input window that is not currently displayed. In principle, they are still open to further extension and revision in
this way. As the model-building activity matures, specific kinds of interaction are distinguished as particularly
topical; the environment and interface depicted in Figure 1 has been customised for experimentation motivated by
the PEAS specification.
In EM, the primary focus for the modeller is on developing the interactive environment in such a way that the
many different varieties of relevant agency can be exercised within it. In studying ant navigation, the modeller
shapes the environment whilst interacting in several agent roles: that of a developer with expert knowledge of the
modelling tools, that of a scientist performing exploratory experiments, and that of the ant itself. A distinctive
characteristic of EM is that agent interactions of all these different kinds can be carried out in precisely the same
way – by redefining the values of observables in the model in an appropriate manner. It is even possible in general
for two or more roles to be played concurrently. This is appropriate when, for instance, the modeller-as-scientist
wishes to explore the impact of moving landmarks whilst the ant is in the process of navigating, the modeller-asdeveloper wishes to enhance the interface for the scientist whilst an experiment is in process, or the modeller-as-ant
wishes to probe the robustness of a navigational procedure by perturbing the motion of the ant.
The roles that observables and dependencies for the various agents play in shaping the environment are illustrated
in Figure 1. Observables relevant to the ant include the colour and height of landmarks in its field of vision (cf. the
ant's current view of the environment as displayed in the top-right hand panel of Figure 1), as well as the current role
("follow route") it is playing and the snapshots taken on the route it is currently retracing. These observables stand in
a subtle relationship to the location of the ant and the disposition of the landmarks as recorded by the modeller - a
relationship that is dynamically maintained by the dependencies in the model. In this way, the ant's view of the
environment is updated whenever it turns or takes a step, or when a new object is introduced into its visual field.

D. Keer et al. / Procedia Computer Science 1 (2012) 2207–2216

2213

Keer, Russ, Beynon / Procedia Computer Science 00 (2010) 000–000

There is a semantically important discrepancy between the actual location of the nest and the ant's estimated
position of the nest as determined by 'path integration'. The model includes observables to represent the ant's
estimated position, as computed by the algorithm proposed by Müller and Wehner [5]; any discrepancy between the
actual and estimated position of the nest is registered in the panel on the right-hand side of Figure 1.
Other observables in the model are significant in relation to the developer's role. By zooming in on the
environment (using the button at the bottom-left of the screen display in Figure 1), it becomes possible to see the
actual height of obstacles at each square. Knowledge of this kind is helpful when checking that the profile of
obstacles in the ant's current view is being displayed correctly, for instance.
In EM, the interactive environment is the arena within which the behaviour of agents is realised. Creating this
environment is conceptually prior to the specification of behaviours, and its refinement continues as behaviours
emerge and are elaborated. The button currently labelled "stop" near the top-left of Figure 1 is used to switch on or
off the animation of the ant's rule-based movement within the environment. The panel at the bottom-right of the
display in Figure 1 can be used by the modeller to play the role of the ant manually (e.g. turning clockwise and
anticlockwise, stepping forward or back), as well as to reset key parameters and set up specific scenarios.
The environment depicted in Figure 1 is the product of an extended development from an initial basic prototype
environment devised by K-C Tan in an MSc project. The fact that Tan’s environment was originally conceived with
a study of ant navigation based on scent in mind highlights the open-ended exploratory nature of this development.
In its subsequent development, Keer’s model itself underwent many transformations, and in its current form reflects
an emerging focus on particular experimental interactions relating to certain kinds of observed navigational
behaviour. This – the third aspect of the model-building activity – is the theme of the following subsections.
2.2. Construing a combined ant navigation scenario
The modelling activity that is illustrated in Figure 1 relates to the following scenario, which describes how ants
combine their path integration sense with their visual landmark recognition capabilities to navigate between nest and
food. It would be fairly typical of a desert ant (cataglyphis):
• From the nest, an ant may set out foraging to try and locate food. When a foraging ant discovers a new food
source it will collect some food, and will then face the task of returning to the nest. The ant is able to determine
direction and distance back to the nest from the path integration ‘sense’, and will set off along that vector.
• At set distance intervals on the route back to the nest, the ant will painstakingly stop and turn through 180o to
look back at the way it has come from (i.e. towards the food source). It is strongly believed [3,4] that the ant is
taking a ‘snapshot’ memory of the current location, recording the respective locations of landmarks on its retina.
The ant will perform this task several times before it reaches the nest, thus recording an ordered set of snapshots
for the route it has just travelled. Any obstacles encountered may also be navigated around.
• When the ant reaches the nest, it may ‘deposit’ the food, before ultimately seeking to return to the food source to
collect more. On setting out from the nest, the ant will make use of the most recent ‘snapshot’ in memory, and
will orient itself towards the visual direction that most closely resembles the snapshot. The ant will then set off in
this direction until the image it sees on its retina completely matches the snapshot it has memorised. By
performing this procedure for each snapshot it has stored in memory, the ant is able to retrace its steps to the
food source with great accuracy – even if obstacles in the original path make the route non-straight-line.
• If the food source has not been moved, the ant will be able to return to it many times with very good precision. If
for any reason it does not find the food source where expected, or finds its remembered route disrupted, it might
briefly search the surrounding area before giving up and beginning a random forage for food.
In order to understand the combined behaviour of a cognitive 'ant' agent in the above scenario, the behaviour can
be modelled as a set of behavioural 'modes'. Each of these modes will have certain conditions (linked to the agent's

2214

D. Keer et al. / Procedia Computer Science 1 (2012) 2207–2216
Keer, Russ, Beynon / Procedia Computer Science 00 (2010) 000–000

fo
od

fo
un
d

sensory abilities) under which the current behaviour will switch to another mode. Figure 2 shows the modes that
were identified in the ant navigation construal, and the conditions on which the behaviour mode would change.
For example, the At Nest mode is the natural starting mode where the ant would, on preparing to set out,
determine whether it has a route in its snapshot memory. If so, it would attempt to align itself visually with the start
of the route, before moving to the Follow Route mode to follow a previous route back to a food source.
Alternatively, in the absence of a remembered route that it can match, the behaviour might move to Search mode,
where the ant will forage semi-randomly looking for new food sources, and avoiding obstacles.
Depending on whether the ant finds a food source, or has visited it before, it may enter Return (Simple) mode, the
ant makes use of its path integration sense to travel directly home to the estimated position of its nest, navigating
around obstacles in its path. In Return (Take Snapshots) mode, the ant returns in a similar way but additionally takes
snapshots at set intervals on the way back. After reaching the estimated nest location (according to its path
integration sense which is not entirely accurate), the ant may enter Locate Nest mode to search for its actual nest.

Figure 2: Behaviour mode transition diagram for the AI

Each of these behaviour modes represents a specific part of the cognitive agent's AI, of which the Follow Route
mode is the most complex and important. This mode allows the ant to return accurately to a previously discovered
source of food, by visually matching 'snapshots' stored in memory against the current viewpoint. A major aim of the
project was to develop an insight into this real-world cognitive behaviour, through the process of modelling.
2.3. Snapshot following
Treating each of the AI modes mentioned above as an individual AI problem, Empirical Modelling principles
were extensively applied to the process of understanding, modelling and developing the AI for each mode. Though
there was limited scope to observe real ants, the documented scientific studies (which are summarised in section 1.2)
contain a wealth of detailed experiments and observation of real ants. These were used to build up a complete
picture of how the ant agent should behave in each mode – even including how it might handle unexpected cases
(such as an obstacle, or the ant itself being unexpectedly moved).

D. Keer et al. / Procedia Computer Science 1 (2012) 2207–2216

2215

Keer, Russ, Beynon / Procedia Computer Science 00 (2010) 000–000

Applying the Empirical Modelling process to the AI development, the functionality for each mode was built up in
layers, and through a process of experimentation with the model - at all times referring to the picture of how the ant
should be behaving. To begin with, AI algorithms and procedures were implemented with the aim of being 'as
simple as possible' to produce the desired behaviours. The ant agent was then run and tested in different
environments, changing various parameters or aspects of the environment, and the results closely observed to see
how it matched expectations. Through this process of experimentation, observation and adjustment, the AI
functionality can be incrementally refined at each stage to more closely approach the desired behaviour.
This aspect of the modelling can be illustrated with specific reference to the previously mentioned Follow Route
mode of behaviour, whereby an ant returns to a previously visited food source by following snapshots in memory. In
this mode, the ant would be expected (as per scientific studies) to follow a snapshot trail in memory by moving in
the correct direction until the snapshot of current interest is perfectly aligned with visible landmarks, before moving
on to the next snapshot. Real ants are capable of following these routes even around obstacles, on a dogleg path.
In realising such a mode of behaviour in the model, the key problem is to find a realistically simple reasoning
mechanism that can be used to compare a route of snapshots in memory with what the ant currently sees. This
mechanism must determine the correct direction in which to move to take the ant closer to the original location
where the snapshot was taken. It must also estimate distance to this location, so that it knows when it has reached it.
An example of this problem is shown in Figure 1, where 'what the ant can currently see' is displayed in the top
right hand panel, and the 'snapshot of current interest' (labelled 1) is highlighted on a pink background. Note that, in
line with EM principles, the model has been built to show all of the ant's perceptive inputs in a visual representation,
in order to facilitate easy experimentation and understanding of the agent's cognitive processes by a human user.
Initial experimentation with the model yielded several ideas about how cognitive mechanisms might be employed
in the snapshot following behaviour. For example, we can consider that the ant would at each step compare the
current view with the snapshot it is targeting, and compare any significant landmarks in each to see how it needs to
move to line up the two views. When comparing the ant's current view with the current snapshot in Figure 1, it is
apparent to a human eye that there is a large yellow landmark in both views, and that the ant would need to turn
approximately four bar-widths to the right to align this landmark. The height and width of this landmark in the two
snapshots also indicates that it is further away in the current view than it was when the target snapshot was made.
The next stage in the process was to convert these ideas into an actual quantitative direction-finding mechanism
in the modelled agent – and one simple enough that a real ant might plausibly use a similar method. The approach
explored in the model was to first resolve the 'raw visual data' (the coloured bars in the snapshot) into a set of
distinct coloured objects. Classifying these objects primarily by colour makes it possible to compare the images of
one or more objects in the target snapshot view with that in the current view. One simple quantitative measure that
can be obtained from this is the relative height and width ratios, computed by the following simple formulae:
object_height_ratio = (height_in_current_view / snapshot_height)
object_width_ratio = (width_in_current_view / snapshot_width)
Checking these ratios for each object provides a simple measure by which to assess whether the current position
of the ant is likely to be further away from (ratio < 1) or closer to (ratio > 1) the point where the snapshot was taken.
As far as movement is concerned, it is only necessary to determine the direction in which to move at each step.
For each matched object, an indication of the turn needed to align the current view with the target snapshot can be
simply derived from the points in the visual field at which the object starts and ends, as measured in bar-widths. A
suitable formula to compute the required turn amount (in bar-widths of 11.25o) is:
object_turn_factor = ½ (start_point_snapshot – start_point_view + end_point_snapshot – end_point_view)
If we apply this formula to the leftmost yellow object visible in the example in Figure 1, the estimated required turn
is calculated as ½(3 – 7 + 7 – 10) = -3.5, i.e. a turn to the right of 3.5 bar-widths (or 39.375o). By making this
turn, the ant would line up the images of the yellow object in the current view with the target snapshot perfectly.

2216

D. Keer et al. / Procedia Computer Science 1 (2012) 2207–2216
Keer, Russ, Beynon / Procedia Computer Science 00 (2010) 000–000

The navigation strategy that is employed in the construal employs the average values of these metrics, computed
over all discriminated objects, in order to determine movement. Assuming the snapshot contains sufficient reference
points, the strategy uses the height/width ratios to determine whether the current position is still further away from
the objects than the point at which the snapshot was taken. If so, it will perform any necessary turn (equivalent to the
average of the turn factors) to adjust its orientation, and then take a step in that direction. If the height/width ratios
approach 1, indicating that it has reached the snapshot point, it can start following the next snapshot in the route.
After implementing a basic form of this algorithm within the AI, the resulting behaviour was refined through a
process of interaction with the model - experimenting with different situations and reasoning rules, and exploring
their effectiveness. Particularly useful insight was gained by attempting to 'confuse' the agent by moving obstacles,
the ant, or the nest, and exploring how the cognitive reasoning mechanism performed in the face of unexpected
situations. Some of these same experiments are also documented in the biological studies, which gave an excellent
basis for comparison; some interesting similarities were noted.
3. Conclusion
A typical activity in EM is making a model of the environment in which many kinds of relvant agents can act.
Systematic behaviours and theories about behaviour then typically emerge from the modeller's interaction with this
environment. The ant navigation model illustrates this kind application of EM with reference to several kinds of
agents and roles, including those of a developer, a scientist and an ant. The model-builder develops cognitive
perspectives on this agency through the close integration of different agent perspectives that EM affords.
The highly visual interface built into the model played an important role here. The main cognitive senses and
inputs (sight, memory, path integration) are all represented visually in the display, greatly aiding human modellers
to develop an insight into the reasoning problems involved, and to explore solutions (a core idea of EM). The
eventual resulting agent was capable of navigating effectively around its (albeit simplified) environment, displaying
a reasonable facsimile of a real ant's navigational behaviour, and using all the key senses in a realistic way.
Making EM construals promotes a fluidity and flexibility in sense-making activity that contributes to the
emergence of theory out of exploratory experiment. It also represents an application of the computer in a role
complementary to that in which it has been most commonly used in science to date. The ant navigation construal
points to potential yet to be exploited for developing construals in conjunction with conducting live experiments.
Acknowledgements
We are indebted to Kok-Cheng Tan for his preliminary work on the development of the ant model.
References
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.

M. Beynon and S. Russ, Experimenting with Computing, Journal of Applied Logic 6 (2008), pp. 476-489
The Empirical Modelling website at http://www.dcs.warwick.ac.uk/modelling/
T. Collett and M. Collett, Path Integration in Insects in Current Opinion in Neurobiology 10, pp. 757-762. Elsevier Science Ltd. 2000
T. Collett, P. Graham and V. Durier, Route Learning by Insects in Current Opinion in Neurobiology 13, pp. 718-725. Elsevier, 2003
M. Müller and R. Wehner, Path Integration in Desert Ants in Proceedings of National Academic Science vol 85, pp. 5287-5290. 1988
R. Wehner, Desert Ant Navigation: How Miniature Brains Solve Complex Tasks in J Comp Physiol A 189, 579-88. Springer-Verlag. 2003
D. Gooding, Experiment and the Making of Meaning: Human Agency in Scientific Observation and Experiment. Kluwer Academic
Publishers, 1990
8. D. Gooding, Some Historical Encouragement for TTC: Alchemy, the Calculus and Electromagnetism “Thinking Through Computing”
Workshop, University of Warwick, November 2007, http://www2.warwick.ac.uk/fac/sci/dcs/research/em/thinkcomp07/gooding2.pdf
9. D. Keer, Modelling Navigation and Landmarking in Ants, Final year project report, Computer Science, University of Warwick, 2005
10. D. Keer, Ant Navigation Model, http://empublic.dcs.warwick.ac.uk/projects/antnavigationKeer2005/
11. S. Russell and P. Norvig, Artificial Intelligence – A Modern Approach, 2nd Ed. Prentice-Hall. New Jersey. 2003

