Procedia
Computer
Science

Available online at www.sciencedirect.com

Procedia
1 (2012)
1185–1193
ProcediaComputer
Computer Science
Science 00
(2009) 000–000

www.elsevier.com/locate/procedia
www.elsevier.com/locate/procedia

International Conference on Computational Science, ICCS 2010

Molecular modelling of peptide folding, misfolding and
aggregation phenomena
Nevena Todorova* and Irene Yarovsky
RMIT University,GPO Box 2476V Melbourne, Victoria, 3001 Australia

Abstract
In this article we present computer modelling studies using classical molecular dynamics techniques and their derivative
methods such as umbrella sampling and bias-exchange metadynamics to investigate protein folding, misfolding and aggregation
behaviour under various conditions. The effects of oxidation, mutation and lipid concentrations on the structure and dynamics of
a peptide model were investigated in detail. The relative stability of pre-formed fibrils and the effect of termini charge were
studied to elucidate the initial stages of fibril formation. Using computational techniques we were able to identify key
conformational features and kinetic mechanisms relevant to the fibrillation propensities of the peptide models. Here we present
applications related to two important proteins – insulin and apolipoprotein C-II (ApoC-II).
c 2012 Published by Elsevier Ltd. Open access under CC BY-NC-ND license.
⃝
Keywords: molecular dynamics, umbrella sampling, bias-exchange metadynamics, protein folding, protein aggregation, insulin, apoC-II,
mutation, lipids, oligomers, amyloid fibrils

1. Introduction
Over the last few decades molecular dynamics (MD) simulations have emerged as a powerful tool for the
characterization of biomolecular structure and dynamics at the atomic level. This technique has helped us
understand complex molecular processes associated with protein conformational changes, ranging from studies of
enzyme-reaction mechanisms and ligand binding to problems of protein folding and denaturation. With continuing
advances in methodology and computer power, molecular dynamics studies are being applied to larger systems,
longer time scales and can reveal molecular mechanisms of more complex phenomena. Molecular dynamics enables
sampling of structural states of a protein under controlled conditions and has been shown to be a complementary
technique to experiments for studying protein dynamics, such as folding, unfolding and aggregation. We have
recently implemented different computational techniques to gain insight into these important areas of protein
behavior, with specific applications to the dynamics of insulin and apoC-II.
* Corresponding author. Tel.:+61-3-99251065; fax: +61-3-99255290.
E-mail address: Nevena.Todorova@rmit.edu.au

c 2012 Published by Elsevier Ltd. Open access under CC BY-NC-ND license.
1877-0509 ⃝
doi:10.1016/j.procs.2010.04.132

1186

N. Todorova, I. Yarovsky / Procedia Computer Science 1 (2012) 1185–1193
Author name / Procedia Computer Science 00 (2010) 000–000

A fundamental phenomena in nature is the capability of proteins to fold de novo to their native conformation, also
known as their biologically functional state. A major milestone in protein science was the hypothesis of Christian
Anfinsen [1], who proposed that the native structure of a protein is the thermodynamically stable conformation,
which depends only on the amino acid sequence and the conditions of the solution, not on the kinetic folding route.
To reach this stable native structure, the physical process of protein folding occurs, where the polypeptide chain
folds into its three dimensional state. However, a random search to sample all possible conformations to reach the
native state through the vast conformational space available to a protein is unfeasible. Computational and theoretical
advances have aimed to shed some light on the protein folding problem, and have complemented experiments by
elucidating some of the folding mechanisms at atomic detail. However, to this day the folding process of a linear
polypeptide strand to its three-dimensional, biologically active conformation is poorly understood and theoretical
prediction of the folding pathways remains a challenge. Using a methodology called bias-exchange metadynamics
(BE-META) we were able to identify the structural transitions and possible folding pathways of insulin [2]. A brief
summary of our results is presented in Section 3.
In a crowded cellular environment, surrounded by interacting proteins, nascent polypeptides face a formidable
challenge in finding the correct interactions that result in a folded and functional protein. Many become trapped in
meta-stable intermediate structures which are usually recognized by proteasomal machinery and degraded or
refolded by chaperones. Alternatively, they can also misfold and self-associate that may lead to formation of either
amorphous compounds or structures of elongated-unbranched morphology, known as amyloid fibrils. An
accumulation of these fibrils can result in a range of human diseases, such as Alzheimer’s, variant Creutzfeldt-Jakob
disease, Parkinson’s, type II diabetes and many others. An excellent review on the more recent discoveries
associated with protein aggregation and fibril formation can be found by Chiti and Dobson [3]. Little is known of
the mechanism of fibril formation. It is believed to be a multistage process driven by hydrophobic interactions where
a variety of intermediate structures are formed. Fibrillation may be enhanced by the local environment, such as
changes in the metal ion concentration, temperature, pH conditions, organic solvents, or cosolvents. Other factors
include mutations, transmitted prion proteins, or simply the inevitable aging process. Interestingly, insulin and
apoC-II belong to the family of unrelated proteins that are prone to form amyloid fibrils under different conditions
[4, 5]. Fibrillation in insulin has created difficulties in production, storage and therapeutic use. The aggregates of
apoC-II are a major component of human atherosclerotic plaques and are known to affect the macrophage
inflammatory response which is detrimental to the human health. Fibril formation is believed to follow a series of
steps: monomerisation, formation of partially folded intermediates, nucleation, and fibril growth. All the models
proposed so far involve significant conformation changes during the fibrillation process; however, the exact
structural mechanism continues to remain ambiguous.
We have performed computational studies to investigate the influences of residue mutations and phospholipids
on amyloid formation by peptides derived from apoC-II [6, 7]. The structural stability of pre-formed oligomeric
composites of different sizes and arrangements was also analyzed. Based on our results we identified the peptide
conformations with aggregation and fibrillization propensities (see Sections 4.1, 4.2 and 4.3). In this article we
present an overview of computational modelling techniques we have applied to several case studies to gain an
insight into the protein folding mechanisms and the environmental conditions that can lead to misfolding and
aggregation of proteins.
2. Methodology

2.1. Molecular Dynamics
The molecular dynamics simulation method is based on Newton’s second law or the equation of motion, F=ma,
where F is the force exerted on the particle, m is its mass and a is its acceleration. From knowledge of the force on
each atom, it is possible to determine the acceleration of each atom in the system. Integration of the equations of
motion then yields velocities and trajectories that describe the atomic positions as they vary with time. From this
trajectory, a thermodynamic ensemble of the system configurations can be obtained for a given temperature and
average values of a number of properties can be determined. Fundamental to MD simulations are the forces that

1187

N. Todorova, I. Yarovsky / Procedia Computer Science 1 (2012) 1185–1193
Author name / Procedia Computer Science 00 (2010) 000–000

govern the atomic motions, derived from a pairwise atom-atom interaction function usually referred to as an
empirical potential energy function or a forcefield [8]. One functional form of such forcefield can be represented as:
⎡⎛ σ ⎞12 ⎛ σ
N
N ⎛
ki
ki
Vn
⎜
2
2
(1 + cos(nω − δ ) ) + ∑ ∑ ⎜ 4ε ij ⎢⎜⎜ ij ⎟⎟ − ⎜⎜ ij
V (r ) = ∑ (li − li ,0 ) + ∑ (θ i − θ i ,0 ) + ∑
2
2
2
⎢⎝ rij ⎠
dihedrals
i =1 j =i +1⎜
angles
bonds
⎝ rij
⎣
⎝
N

⎞
⎟
⎟
⎠

6

⎤
qq
⎥+ i j
⎥ 4πε 0 rij
⎦

⎞
⎟
⎟⎟ (1)
⎠

where V(rN) denotes the potential energy, which is a function of the positions (r) of N particles. The first three terms
in Equation 1, model the bonded or intramolecular interactions, where the interatomic bonds and angles are
represented by a harmonic potential and the dihedrals by torsional potential. The forth contribution is the nonbonded interaction term, which in a simple forcefield is usually modelled using a Coulomb potential term for the
electrostatic interactions and a Lennard-Jones potential for the van der Waals interactions. The terms contain
parameters that are either determined empirically or from high level ab-initio calculations. The choice of
mathematical function and the parameters describing a forcefield is important, since it will ultimately determine the
quality of the results.
We recently performed a systematic comparison of multiple simulations of insulin chain B using five different
forcefields to gain an improved understanding of the forcefield influences on the representation of the
conformational behavior of insulin [9]. The effect of these widely used forcefields on the secondary structure of
insulin and its dynamics were investigated in detail by comparison of our results with X-ray crystallographic
structures, calculating the conformational evolution, solvent accessible surface area, radius of gyration and
interproton distance violations for each forcefield simulation. We have observed that different forcefields favour
different conformational trends, which is important to be aware of for the interpretation of classical simulation
results.
Insufficient sampling of the conformational space available to a biological system remains a problem for
theoreticians even with the significant improvements in computer technology. The complexity and ruggedness of the
free energy surface, comprised of numerous minima induces difficulties in using classical MD for studying complex
processes such as protein folding as the system can easily get trapped in one of the local minima and fails to
properly sample the rest of the conformational space. In order to overcome this complexity it is necessary to employ
a methodology that is capable of accelerating rare events, specifically, configurational changes that involve the
crossing of large free energy barriers. Few novel techniques capable of exploring wider conformational space have
recently been developed, such as BE-META method and umbrella sampling, described below.
2.2. Bias-Exchange Metadynamics (BE-META)
Bias exchange metadynamics [10] is a recently introduced methodology, which allows free energy reconstruction
in a virtually unlimited number of variables, and as such can be considered for investigating complex processes like
protein folding, protein-protein interactions and enzyme reactions. This novel theoretical tool incorporates two
previously reported powerful techniques, replica exchange [11] and metadynamics [12]. In BE-META approach, the
dynamics of the system is biased by a history dependent potential constructed as a sum of gaussians centered on the
trajectory of a selected set of collective variables (CV). After transient period, the gaussian potential compensates
the free energy, allowing the system to efficiently explore the space defined by the CVs’. All replicas are evolved at
the same temperature and allowed to periodically exchange the metadynamics potential, where an exchange is
accepted or rejected according to a Metropolis criterion. As a result, the system of interest is capable of efficiently
exploring a free energy landscape in several dimensions due to the multidimensional nature of the bias applied. New
tools of analysis have been introduced [13] that exploit the outcomes of a BE-META simulation for constructing a
thermodynamic and kinetic model of a biomolecular process being investigated. Using these techniques we
investigated the folding pathways of chain B and the results are summarized in Section 3 of this article.

1188

N. Todorova, I. Yarovsky / Procedia Computer Science 1 (2012) 1185–1193
Author name / Procedia Computer Science 00 (2010) 000–000

2.3. Umbrella Sampling
The changes of the free energy as a function of an inter- or intra-molecular coordinate, such as the distance
between two atoms, or the torsional angle around a bond within a molecule are often of interest when investigating
molecular association/dissociation, conformational stretching or protein folding. The free energy surface along a
chosen coordinate is known as the potential of mean force (PMF): i.e. free energy as a function of the distance
between the centers-of-mass of two atoms, A(x) = -kTln[P(x)] where P(x) is the probability density over the
coordinate x, intermolecular separation. Although this quantity may in principle be obtained from long timescale
MD simulation, in practice P(x) is very slow to converge, as a large region of the PMF corresponds to a region of
low occupancy. This leads to inaccurate values for the PMF, so one way around this problem is to apply a technique
called umbrella sampling.
The umbrella sampling method of Torrie and Valleau [14] overcomes the problem of insufficient sampling for
certain regions on the reaction coordinate x by introducing an additional biasing potential. Typically, a number of
simulations with different biasing potentials are carried out, each one confining the position of the particle to a
particular region or “window” i on x (hence the name, umbrella sampling). A common choice for the window
potentials is a harmonic one. The resultant probability density over the reaction coordinate is the biased density
P(x’). A common algorithm to obtain the unbiased density, P(x), and thereby retrieve the unbiased PMF, is the
Weighted Histogram Analysis Method (WHAM) [15]. In our work, we have applied umbrella sampling with
WHAM to examine the effect of lipid concentration on the conformational energies of apoC-II(60-70) peptide, and
the results from these calculations are discussed in Section 4.2.
3. Folding Study of Insulin Chain B
Explicit solvent BE-META simulations were performed to effectively sample the conformational space available
to chain B of insulin and to shed some light on the complex structural transitions this important protein undergoes
upon folding [2]. To exploit the statistics accumulated using this powerful technique, a recently developed analytical
method was used to construct a model describing the complex conformational transitions chain B experiences. The
model suggested an existence of three metastable basins separated by large free energy barriers, as shown in Fig. 1.
The two most populated basins have structures with molten-globule characteristics, one being governed by
electrostatic interactions and another primarily by hydrophobic contacts. The third basin is comprised of
conformations with folded structural elements, resembling the known crystallographic states of chain B (α-helix, βturn and flexible termini).

Folded state
Molten globule 2
(hydrophobic interactions)
Molten globule 1
(electrostatic interactions)
Fig. 1. Schematic representation of the insulin chain B folding dynamics. Each basin is labeled with a number in order of increasing population
(percentages of population are also shown). Transitions between the basins are represented by an arrow along with the corresponding transition
time. Transitions that occur on a time scale larger than 1 μs are represented as dashed arrows.

N. Todorova, I. Yarovsky / Procedia Computer Science 1 (2012) 1185–1193

1189

Author name / Procedia Computer Science 00 (2010) 000–000

Using the Markov cluster analysis method (MCL) and rate calculations we determined a three state model for the
folding pathway of insulin chain B. We propose the following folding mechanisms. Starting from an extended
structure, at first the protein is governed by electrostatic interactions (molten-globule 1, Fig. 1). This finding is
supported by experimental studies which suggested this type of conformation to be biologically active. Progressive
building of hydrophobic core is initiated by the burial of Tyr16, followed by further packing of Phe24 and Phe25
(molten-globule 2, Fig. 1), resulting in stable compact structures. Furthermore, the hydrogen bonding interactions
between the buried backbone groups commence the formation of an α-helix at the core of the protein. An unfolded
N-terminal region is found in the structures at the border of molten-globule 2 and the folded basin, suggesting that
the last stage of the folding of chain B is the complete formation of the α-helix. The transformation from moltenglobule 2 to a folded state requires crossing of a high energy barrier, and as a consequence of this tens of
microseconds are required to make this transition. The calculated transition times gave further insight into the
dynamics between the three wells, suggesting that the residence time of the three wells is of the order of a several
microseconds. We believe that the native disulfide pairing of chain A with chain B (A7-B7 and A2-B19) plays an
important part in the stability of the α-helix, which effectively prevents the protein from unfolding and becoming a
molten-globule.

4. Misfolding and Aggregation Studies of ApoC-II(60-70)
The human plasma apolipoprotein C-II (apoC-II) is a 79 residue protein involved in lipid metabolism. In the
presence of lipids, apoC-II is composed of α-helical elements, however in lipid-free environment it folds into crossβ sheet structure to form amyloid fibrils. Using hydrogen/deuterium exchange and proteolysis studies, peptide
fragments composed of residues 60 to 70 and 56 to 76 have been shown to exhibit an inherent propensity for
amyloid fibril formation in solution [16]. The small size of these protein fragments make them excellent peptide
models to be investigated in detail using computational techniques such as those described here.
4.1. Effects of mutation on fibrillation propensities of apoC-II(60-70)
A possible therapeutic strategy against amyloid diseases could be the application of specific mutant or truncated
variants that prevent the nucleation of the fibrils or assist in their dissociation. Detailed knowledge of the structure
of the respective species at different stages of formation is essential in order to design such compounds. Using
experimental and computational methods we identified the effects of mutation on the fibril forming propensities of
the amyloidogenic peptide apoC-II(60-70). Methionine (Met60) substitutions by hydrophilic Gln and hydrophobic
Val residues were investigated and the results were compared with the recent observations on the wild-type and
oxidized apoC-II(60-70) peptide [17]. ThT fluorescence measurements results showed fibril formation by all
peptides, however with different kinetics. The wild-type and Met60Val peptides were found to form fibrils fastest,
while oxi-Met and Met60Gln peptides exhibited significantly longer lag phase (published elsewhere).
Our molecular dynamics simulations identified structural features and properties consistent with fibril-forming
propensity, such as the formation of a β-hairpin, higher solvent accessible surface area and relative orientation of the
aromatic side-chains, which confirmed the experimentally observed similarity between the wild-type, Met60Val and
Met60Gln peptides (Fig. 2). Based on the side-chain interaction and aromatic ring orientation analysis performed on
the two mutations Met60Val and Met60Gln we also identified some important differences. Comparison of the wildtype and Met60Val systems with the oxidized and Met60Gln system revealed structural and dynamic features that
can explain the observed differences in the aggregation rates. These features include increased flexibility and
broader distribution of angles between the aromatic residues (Tyr63 and Phe67) that were observed by the latter
systems, and explain the slower rate of fibril formation seen experimentally. Overall, all systems exhibited strong
hydrophobic core regions, from which we can infer that the β-turn region of the peptides (Thr64, Gly65, Ile66, Fig.
2) is a segment responsible for initiating the aggregation process, as the fibril formation is believed to be driven by
the availability of the backbone atoms for hydrogen bonding and hydrophobic interactions with nearby molecules.

1190

N. Todorova, I. Yarovsky / Procedia Computer Science 1 (2012) 1185–1193

Residues

Author name / Procedia Computer Science 00 (2010) 000–000

(a)

(b)

MET
SER
THR
TYR
THR
GLY
ILE
PHE
THR
ASP
GLN

oxi MET
SER
THR
TYR
THR
GLY
ILE
PHE
THR
ASP
GLN

0

630

50%

(c)

(d)
GLN
SER
THR
TYR
THR
GLY
ILE
PHE
THR
ASP
GLN

VAL
SER
THR
TYR
THR
GLY
ILE
PHE
THR
ASP
GLN

0

630

19.4%

0

Time (ns)

650

26.1%

0

650

27.8%

Fig. 2. Secondary structure evolution plot for each mutation of apoC-II(60-70) peptide; (a) Wild-type; (b) oxi-Met; (c) Met60Val; (d) Met60Gln.
The secondary structure colour codes: magenta – α helix, red – π helix, cyan – turn, white – coil, yellow – extended conformation and green –
hydrogen bridge. The most populated structures obtained by cluster analysis are shown as insets.

4.2. Effects of lipid concentration on fibrillation propensities of apoC-II(60-70)
Recent experimental studies have shown that micellar and sub-micellar concentrations of short-chained
phospholipids have different effects on the propensities for fibril formation by the native and shorter segments of
apoC-II protein [18, 19]. This finding highlighted the need for improved understanding of the lipid-peptide
interactions and their influence on the mechanisms of fibril formation.
Explicit solvent, molecular dynamics simulations were implemented to investigate the effect of several
phospholipid concentrations on the conformation of the amyloidogenic peptide apoC-II(60-70). The 5-carbon chain,
dipentanoylphosphatidylcholine (D5PC) lipid was utilized, with sub-critical micelle concentrations of 1 to 6 lipids
per peptide. To investigate the effects of starting conformations, calculations were performed on two distinct
structures, coil and α-helix. The umbrella sampling technique was also applied to obtain a more quantitative analysis
of the conformational free energies with respect to lipid concentration.
The analysis of the lipid-peptide interactions showed that the highest number of interactions are occurring
between the lipids and the hydrophobic residues (Tyr63, Gly65, Ile66, Phe67) of apoC-II(60-70). The head
component of the lipid was found to interact with all residues, however more favourably with the hydrophilic
regions, while the lipid tails prefer to interact with the hydrophobic region. The observed presence of lipid heads in
the region of hydrophobic residues could suggest a micellar-like formation where the tails are buried in the peptide
while the heads are exposed to the solvent, as shown in Fig. 3.
The results also showed progressive reduction in solvent accessible surface area of apoC-II(60-70) with
increasing lipid concentration, indicative of increased lipid-peptide interactions. Favourable interaction sites were
found to be the aromatic residues, Tyr63 and Phe67. The high stability of lipid-peptide contacts resulted in reduced
conformational flexibility in the peptide. The umbrella sampling results showed that higher energy is required to
extend the peptide with increasing lipid concentration, which suggests that the lipids have a restricting effect on the
peptides dynamics. These findings are consistent with our unbiased simulations. Overall, our results showed that the
lipid coating effect experienced by the peptide, in particular, in the area of the aromatic residues directly mediates
the initial interactions between the monomers which could be the mechanism for fibril inhibition in apoC-II(60-70)
peptides.

N. Todorova, I. Yarovsky / Procedia Computer Science 1 (2012) 1185–1193

1191

Author name / Procedia Computer Science 00 (2010) 000–000

(b)

g(r)

(a)

r(nm)
Fig. 3. (a) The typical radial distribution functions of the lipid head/s and tail/s with respect to hydrophobic and hydrophilic residues of the apoCII(60-70) peptide; (b) Schematic of the micellar-like formation of lipids surrounding the peptide. The peptide is represented in cyan, the
hydrophobic lipid tails in red and the hydrophilic lipid head in yellow.

4.3. Oligomers of apoC-II(60-70): stability and effect of mutation
Recent findings have suggested that the precursors to amyloid fibrils, such as low-molecular-weight oligomers,
and/or structured protofibrils, are the cytotoxic species in the amyloid diseases [20]. Therefore the mechanisms of
formation and stability of these oligomeric species are crucial to understand. Continuing from our studies of the
monomeric apoC-II(60-70) peptide, we performed MD simulations of apoC-II(60-70) oligomeric assemblies of
various sizes and arrangements. The relative stability of pre-formed dimers, trimers and tetramers, in a single βsheet arrangement was investigated using classical MD. Two different strand orientations were examined, parallel
(P) and anti-parallel (AP). The effect of termini charges on the stability of the formed oligomers was examined by
simulating each system with charged (C), NH3+ and COO-, and neutral (N), NH2 and COOH termini ends. Once
the stable oligomer was identified, single point residue mutations to oxiMet, Met60Val and Met60Gln were
performed to examine their effects on the structural integrity of this oligomer.
The stability of each oligomer was monitored by calculating the root mean square deviation (RMSD) of the
backbone over the entire trajectory of 100 ns. In order to determine the most populated structure of every oligomer,
clustering analysis was performed using every second frame of the trajectory (12500 frames). The RMSD plot
together with the most populated structures and their population for the dimer, trimer and tetramer of apoC-II(60-70)
are presented in Fig. 4.
The simulations showed that an increase in the number of strands improved the stability of the oligomers
dramatically, regardless of the strands orientation. However, the anti-parallel arrangement between the strands was
more favourable, as indicated by the lower RMSD compared to the parallel oligomers, and the observed reorientation of strands in some parallel systems, such as 1-2-PN and 1-3-PC, shown in Fig 4a and 4b, respectivelly.
This finding is in agreement with the results of our recent study on the dimerisation of apoC-II(60-70) in a lipid and
lipid-free environment [18].
We proceeded to investigate the effects of mutation on the structural stability of the most stable oligomer (1-4APC) by performing single residue substitutions at the location of Met60. During the 80 ns of equilibrium
simulation of each system the oligomers retained their β-sheet structure with some differences in their conformation.
The high stability of the β-sheet structure can be attributed to the presence of strong hydrophobic core between the
aromatic residues, Tyr63, Gly65, Ile66 and Phe67. Furthermore, the presence of two aromatic residues, Tyr63 and
Phe67 enhanced the durability of the β-sheet by the ring π-stack formations throughout the entire trajectory of every
system.

1192

N. Todorova, I. Yarovsky / Procedia Computer Science 1 (2012) 1185–1193
Author name / Procedia Computer Science 00 (2010) 000–000

(a)

(b)

(c)

47.9%

43.6%

58.5%

27%

14.3%

92.2%

93.7%

67.4%

29.7%

71.1%

85.2%

72.9%

Fig. 4. Root mean square deviation (RMSD) plots of the trajectories of apoC-II(60-70) (a) dimer; (b) trimer; and (c) tetramer oligomers. The
structures of the most populated clusters of every system and their population are also presented.

Overall, our results also showed that the critical nucleus size for fibril formation by apoC-II(60-70) may not be
very large, since tetrameric oligomers in anti-parallel configuration were very stable within the 100 ns of
simulations. Furthermore, during the equilibrium simulations of each mutated system the oligomers did not
dissociate and remained stable. Our simulations indicate that once the fibril nucleus has been formed, the oligomers
are stable, at least in the timeframe of the current simulations which is in agreement with the ThT experiments on
these peptides (discussed in Section 4.1).

5. Conclusions
Theoretical molecular simulations have been demonstrated to be a useful complementary technique to
experiments which enable molecular mechanisms, dynamics and structure-function relationship to be revealed at the
atomic level. We have applied molecular dynamics technique and several derivative methods to gain insight in the
folding, misfolding and aggregation mechanisms of insulin and apoC-II in different environments.
Using the novel methodology BE-META we were able to identify the folding mechanisms of chain B of insulin,
with good agreement to experiment. We also identified key structural changes in apoC-II derived peptides under
various fibril forming and inhibiting conditions. Our molecular dynamics simulations showed that the mutated
monomers exhibited structural features consistent with fibril-forming propensity, such as β-hairpin conformation
and a hydrophobic core. However, important differences with the wild-type were also noted, such as increased
structural flexibility (oxi-Met and Met60Gln systems) and a broader distribution of the aromatic angle orientation,
which could contribute to the different fibrillation kinetics observed in these peptides. Using MD combined with
umbrella sampling we studied the effects of short-chained D5PC phospholipid at various concentrations in aqueous
solution on the structure and dynamics of apoC-II(60-70) peptide. Our results showed that different lipid
concentrations can have significant impact on the structure and stability of apoC-II(60-70) monomers, which
ultimately results in different fibril inhibition mechanisms at low and high lipid concentrations. The structural
stability and dynamics of pre-formed apoC-II oligomers with various sizes and arrangements was also investigated

N. Todorova, I. Yarovsky / Procedia Computer Science 1 (2012) 1185–1193

1193

Author name / Procedia Computer Science 00 (2010) 000–000

where the anti-parallel orientation between the strands was determined to be the most favourable. Our results
suggest that the initial structural transitions experienced by the peptide monomer are the rate-determining step for
fibril formation, and MD simulations can be used to identify conformational preferences responsible for the peptide
fibrillogenicity.
In conclusion, with the case-studies presented in this article we have demonstrated the ability of classical MD
simulations to explore the molecular-motion or evolution of a system and under controlled conditions. We have also
showed that computational methods such as those applied here (MD, umbrella sampling and BE-META) are very
useful for studying various protein behaviors, which can complement and be compared with experiments.

Acknowledgements
The authors would like to thank the Australian Research Council for providing funding for the project. The
Australian National Computational Infrastructure (NCI) and Victorian Partnership for Advanced Computing
(VPAC) for providing the computational resources. We also acknowledge our colleagues Andrew Hung and Sue
Legge for useful discussions.

References
1. C.B. Anfinsen, Science. 181 (1973) 223.
2. N. Todorova, F. Marinelli, S. Piana, I. Yarovsky, J. Phys. Chem. B 113 (2009) 3556.
3. F. Chiti and C.M. Dobson, Ann. Rev. Biochem. 75 (2006) 333.
4. J. Brange, L. Andersen, E.D. Laursen, G. Meyn, and E. Rasmussen, J. Pharma. Sci. 86 (1997) 517.
5. D.M. Hatters, C.A. MacRaild, R. Daniels, W.S. Gosal, N.H. Thomson, J.A. Jones, et al. Biophys. J. 85 (2003) 3979.
6. N. Todorova, A. Hung, S.M. Maaser, M.D. Griffin, G.J. Howlett, I. Yarovsky, J. Mol. Biol. (2010) accepted.
7. N. Todorova, A. Hung, I. Yarovsky, 10th WSEAS International Conference on Mathematics and Computers in Biology and Chemsitry,
Prague, Czech Republic ISBN: 978-960-474-062-8 (2009).
8. A.D. MacKerell Jr, J. Comp. Chem. 25 (2004) 1584.
9. N. Todorova, F.S. Legge, H. Treutlein, I. Yarovsky, J. Phys. Chem. B, 112 (2008) 11137.
10. S. Piana and A. Laio, J. Phys. Chem. B, 111 (2007) 4553.
11. Y. Sugita and Y. Okamoto, Chem. Phys. Lett. 314 (1999) 141.
12. A. Laio and M. Parrinello, PNAS 99 (2002) 12562.
13. F. Marinelli, F. Pietrucci, A. Laio, S. Piana, PloS Comput. Biol. 5 (2009) e1000452.
14. G.M. Torrie, J.P. Valleau, J. Comput. Phys. 23 (1977) 187.
15. S. Kumar, J.M. Rosenberg, D. Bouzida, R.H. Swendsen, P.A. Kollman, J. Comput. Chem. 13 (1992) 1011.
16. L.M. Wilson, Y.F. Mok, K.J. Binger, M.D. Griffin, H.D. Mertens, F. Lin, et al. J. Mol. Biol. 366 (2007) 1639.
17. A. Hung, M.D. Griffin, G.J. Howlett, I. Yarovsky, Eur. Biophys. Journal, 38 (2008) 99.
18. A. Hung, M.D.W. Griffin, G.J Howlett, I. Yarovsky, J. Phys. Chem. B 113 (2009) 9447.
19. M.D.W. Griffin, M.L.Y Mok, L.M. Wilson, C.L.L. Pham, L.J. Waddington, M.A. Perugini, et al. (2008). J. Mol. Biol. 375 (2008) 240.
20. C.A. McLean, R.A. Cherny, F.W. Fraser, S.J. Fuller, M.J. Smith, K. Beyreuther, et al. Annals of Neurology 46 (1999) 860.

