Procedia Computer
Science
Procedia
(2012)1–9
2511–2519
ProcediaComputer
Computer Science
Science 001 (2010)
www.elsevier.com/locate/procedia

International Conference on Computational Science, ICCS 2010

Beyond Biometrics
Egon L. van den Broek
Human-Centered Computing Consultancy, http://www.human-centeredcomputing.com/, Vienna, Austria
Human-Media Interaction, Faculty of EEMCS, University of Twente, P.O. Box 217 7500 AE Enschede, The Netherlands
Karakter University Center, Radboud University Medical Center, P.O. Box 9101, 6500 HB Nijmegen, The Netherlands

Abstract
Throughout the last 40 years, the essence of automated identiﬁcation of users has remained the same. In this
article, a new class of biometrics is proposed that is founded on processing biosignals, as opposed to images. After a
brief introduction on biometrics, biosignals are discussed, including their advantages, disadvantages, and guidelines
for obtaining them. This new class of biometrics increases biometrics’ robustness and enables cross validation. Next,
biosignals’ use is illustrated by two biosignal-based biometrics: voice identiﬁcation and handwriting recognition.
Additionally, the concept of a digital human model is introduced. Last, some issues will be touched upon that will
arise when biosignal-based biometrics are brought to practice.

c 2012 Published by Elsevier Ltd. Open access under CC BY-NC-ND license.
⃝

Keywords: biometrics, biosignal processing, digital human model, validation, robustness

1. Introduction
Four decades ago, IBM envisioned the identiﬁcation of persons (ID) by machines [1]. IBM stated that this could
be achieved through:
1. something the user knows or memorizes
2. something the user carries
3. a personal physical characteristic
From this concept, a new ﬁeld of research emerged: biometrics1 . Anil K. Jain, Patrick Flynn, and Arun A. Ross [2,
p. 1] start their Handbook on Biometrics with its deﬁnition: “Biometrics is the science of establishing the identity
of an individual based on the physical, chemical or behavioral attributes of the person.” The attention for biometrics
ﬂuctuated throughout the last decades, following the attention in society for security issues [1]. During this century
the attention for biometrics was reinforced by the need for large-scale identity management systems.
Essentially, biometrics is a pattern recognition problem; e.g., see [2]. It can be applied to either verify or identify a
person’s identity. In the former case, biometric data of a person is captured and compared with that person’s biometric
Email address: vandenbroek@acm.org (Egon L. van den Broek)
URL: http://www.human-centeredcomputing.com/ (Egon L. van den Broek)
is derived from the Greek language, meaning: life measuring.

1 Biometrics

c 2012 Published by Elsevier Ltd. Open access under CC BY-NC-ND license.
1877-0509 ⃝
doi:10.1016/j.procs.2010.04.284

2512

E.L. van den Broek / Procedia Computer Science 1 (2012) 2511–2519
Egon L. van den Broek / Procedia Computer Science 00 (2010) 1–9

2

data stored in a database (DB); i.e., 1:1 matching. In the latter case, the biometric data captured is compared with all
biometric data available in a DB, with the aim to identify the person who’s biometric data was captured [2]; i.e., 1:n
matching, with n being the size of the DB.
In this paper, the diﬀerence between identiﬁcation and veriﬁcation will not be discussed in depth, as they are in
essence identical. The following formal deﬁnition of ID illustrates this:
Ix =

In if maxn {D(I x , In )} < T
I x otherwise

(1)

where I x is the representation (e.g., a vector) of an unidentiﬁed person, his bioproﬁle. In is the nth sample from the
DB. D is a distance metric (e.g., a Minkowsky or quadratic metric) [3] and T is a threshold. Note that in the case Eq. 1
results in I x = I x , the person remains unidentiﬁed after the DB is consulted.
In case of veriﬁcation of persons, 1:1 matching is applied. So, the DB, as depicted in Eq. 1, contains one proﬁle.
Then,
(2)
max{D(I x , In )} < T
n

still holds but can be simpliﬁed to
D(I x , In ) < T.

(3)

In practice, frequently a way in between 1:1 and 1:n matching can be employed. Such a search can be classiﬁed
as neither veriﬁcation nor identiﬁcation. Having (some) knowledge on the ID of an unknown person (I x ), a subset (s)
of the DB (i.e., s ⊂ n) can be queried instead of the complete DB.
The tremendous boost of technology in the last decades has had its inﬂuence on the ﬁeld of biometrics. IBM’s
original methods for ID have been adapted. ID is nowadays mostly approached through one of the following two
types of methods or a combination of them:
1. Manual ID:
(a) through an object; e.g., ID card, its reader, or a USB stick.
(b) via knowledge; e.g., personal identiﬁcation number, password, and secret questions.
2. Biometrics:
(a) Behavioral attributes; e.g., signature, keystroke dynamics, and gait;
(b) Physical attributes: ﬁngerprint, iris and retina, facial image and facial thermogram, geometrical features
of the face; e.g., ear and nose [4], and geometrical features of the hand (incl. vein pattern) and feet [5].
(c) Other: audio-based (e.g., voice), chemical attributes (e.g., odor), and DNA.
The combination of ID methods is, in practice, also based on several trade-oﬀs; e.g., level of accuracy, ease of use
/ intrusiveness / convenience, security / barrier to attack, public acceptability, long-term stability, costs, and size. In
addition, issues such as speed, connectivity, and compatibility (e.g., ports, operating systems, and CPU) play their
role.
From the two types of methods and the trade-oﬀs, one can extract a taxonomy on biometrics. This can help
in understanding and, consequently, in describing biometrics. A taxonomy on biometrics can be deﬁned on several
dimensions, of which the most important are [2]:
• universality: all persons should possess the trait
• uniqueness: the level of discrimination it provides between persons
• permanence: invariance or stability of the trait.
• measurability: eﬀort related to acquisition and processing in practice; e.g., to what extent a person needs to
cooperate in obtaining the biometric and in how far the environment needs to be controlled?
• performance: the reliability of the biometric.
• acceptability for the people.

E.L. van den Broek / Procedia Computer Science 1 (2012) 2511–2519
Egon L. van den Broek / Procedia Computer Science 00 (2010) 1–9

2513
3

• circumvention: sensitivity to fraud.
In addition, other dimensions are mentioned in literature, such as:
• Overt versus covert: To what extent measurement of a biometric can be covered?
• Requirement of supervision: Results on some biometrics need to be manually checked; hence, they cannot be
processed automatically or only to a certain extent.
• Optional versus mandatory: Is the biometric required for ID or can it be replaced by another? This refers
to a biometric’s concurrent validity: its reliability and discriminative power compared to the other biometrics
applied.
Using these dimensions, a well argued choice of biometrics can be made for an application, taking into account its
characteristics. For example, in case an ID is needed for physical access, the choice of biometrics will be completely
diﬀerent from when ID is needed for computer logon/logoﬀ.
Although diﬀerent biometrics are clearly distinct, their processing pipeline is identical. First, persons have to be
enrolled and signals, most often images, need to be captured of parts of them. Capturing is done through various
sensors and materials; e.g., optical, capacitance, resistance, thermal, and polymer [6, 7, 8]. Second, these images are
processed and features are extracted [9, 10]. Third and last, the extracted features are used for veriﬁcation (i.e., 1:1
matching) and identiﬁcation (i.e., 1:n matching) [2]; see also Eq. 1–3. In practice, this processing pipeline suﬀers
from the following problems:
• Capturing images requires highly controlled environmental circumstances.
• Templates for biometrics are not compatible among vendors.
• Template size (i.e., from < 102 to > 104 bytes) and type (e.g., vectors and minutiae) varies.
As a result of these issues both speed and accuracy of biometrics diﬀers signiﬁcantly.
Given the attention for biometrics, it is not surprising that frequently new processing paradigms, fusion methods,
and even new physical characteristics are proposed to enhance biometrics. For example, the nose was recently proposed as a new element for biometrics [4]. However, in the majority of cases, more advanced schemes or extensions
of known methods are introduced, instead of introducing new elements or even classes into the ﬁeld of biometrics;
cf. [2, 5, 10, 11, 12]. In contrast, in this article, a new class of biometric methods will be introduced.
The new class of biometrics concerns the utilization of biosignals for ID, as will be explained in Section 2. It will
be explained how biometrics can be used to validate traditional, image processing based, methods and can enhance
their robustness. Moreover, this section discusses both the advantages and disadvantages as well as guidelines for
biosignals, as class for biometrics. Next, in Section 3, two examples of this new class of biometrics will be discussed.
Section 4 introduces the more general concept from which it originated: digital human modeling. This paper ends
with a brief discussion and conclusions in Section 5.
2. Processing biosignals
A new class of biometrics, biosignals, is introduced and depicted in Fig. 1. Biosignals (or physiological signals)
originate as electrochemical changes in neurons (nerve cells), muscles, and gland cells. These biosignals spread
from their sources throughout the body to the surface of the skin. Via surface electrodes attached (or close) to the
body surface, these signals can be recorded. Signals from a broad range of sources can be recorded. For example,
from the heart, the electrocardiogram (ECG) can be recorded; the muscles’ activity can be recorded through the
electromyogram (EMG); and the sweat glands determine the electrodermal activity (EDA).
Biosignal processing is expected to be of signiﬁcant value for biometric applications. This can be illustrated by
mentioning problems that can occur with traditional biometrics [2]; e.g.,
1. facial image: recording, processing, and matching is notoriously problematic,
2. movement analysis (e.g., gait): often simply not feasible in practice, and

2514

E.L. van den Broek / Procedia Computer Science 1 (2012) 2511–2519
Egon L. van den Broek / Procedia Computer Science 00 (2010) 1–9

4

Figure 1: The general proposed processing scheme for ID. Manual ID based on objects and knowledge is included. The two methods based on
image processing for biometrics (i.e., behavioral and physical attributes) as well as a set of other attributes (e.g., audio, chemical, and DNA) are
also included; see also 1. Additionally, the new class of biosignal-based biometrics is included; see also Section 2. With the latter class included,
the robustness and the cross validation of ID can be even further enhanced. In time, this will show to provide a richer and more reliable bioproﬁle
or human digital model; see also Sections 3–4. Robustness of proﬁles can be improved and cross validation can be applied. These processes are
indicated by the arrows in the scheme; see also Section 2.

3. voice: speech is often either absent or suﬀering from severe distortions in many contexts.
However, it are not only limitations such as these that stress the need of introduction of biosignals as a new class of
biometrics. It is also the rapid progress sensor development made over the last decade; e.g., [6, 7, 8]. Sensors that
enable biosignal recording have become cheaper, more reliable, and can be applied in a wireless manner [7, 8].
In this section, advantages and disadvantages of biosignals as biometrics will be discussed. After this, some
guidelines for the application of biosignal-based biometrics will be denoted.
2.1. Advantages
Traditional biometrics can be manipulated; biosignals, in contrast, are free from social masking. With the development of non-invasive and even wireless sensors [6, 7, 8], they are suited for a wide range of applications [13, 14].
Hence, such biosignals can act as a very useful interface between man and machine.
In combination with traditional biometrics, biosignals increase the information available on a person. This is in
particular the case as biosignals are known to discriminate among people, like traditional biometrics do. Consequently,
a more reliable proﬁle can be generated. In generating persons’ proﬁles this can provide the following advantages
(see also Fig. 1):
1. Enhancing robustness: Information obtained through biosignals can be used to verify information obtained
through traditional ID methods; see Section 1. Missing data in the proﬁle can be complemented with information extracted from biosignals. Also, noise canceling can be enhanced through integration of these sources.
2. Cross validation: Traditional (image processing based) biometrics can be validated against biosignals. The
same constructs can be mapped to both biometric features and features extracted from biosignals. In the next
section, two examples of this advantage will be provided. Where the added value of robustness is expressed on
signal processing and pattern recognition level, the added value of cross validation is expressed on a conceptual
level. It concerns the mapping of bio-information on the representation of a person’s characteristic; e.g., his
voice or handwriting.

E.L. van den Broek / Procedia Computer Science 1 (2012) 2511–2519
Egon L. van den Broek / Procedia Computer Science 00 (2010) 1–9

2515
5

2.2. Disadvantages
As with all processing techniques, also biosignal processing has its downside. Several crucial concerns that limit
both their acceptation and application in practice have to be acknowledged; see also Section 1. Some of the most
important concerns are:
1. Sensors are still obtrusive to a certain extent [6, 7, 8]
2. Sensors are unreliable; e.g., movement artifacts, bodily position, air temperature, and humidity [6, 7, 8]
3. Many-to-many relationships: Multiple biosignals can be used as indicator for multiple constructs from psychology as well as for various physiological processes. This makes biosignals inherently noisy [13, 15]
4. Time windows of biosignals vary
5. Humans are not linear time invariant; e.g., they habituate
It should be acknowledged that, although a signiﬁcant progress in biosignal processing has been realized, these issues
still have not been solved.
2.3. Guidelines
Biosignals can become a promising new class of biometrics. This is best illustrated by its advantages, as expressed
in the former subsections. However, as denoted in the latter section, there is still a long way ahead of us in bringing
biosignals to biometrics. One of the core issues in making biosignal-based biometrics a success is the acquisition of
these signals. For this reason, this section is devoted to presenting guidelines for biosignal recording.
One of the main problems with biosignal processing, so far, has been the lack of a coherent and concise set of
guidelines for obtaining them. Literature on biosignal processing is scattered as are its guidelines. A set of main
guidelines that can improve the quality of recording biosignals will now be provided:
1. Validation; in particular:
(a) content validity: agreement among experts and the degree of representation of construct through signals
(b) concurrent validity: reliability of the biometric in relation to the ground truth
(c) ecological validity: unravel the context of measurements
2. Integration of data sources, in particular triangulation (i.e., using multiple operationalizations of constructs).
3. Physical characteristics; e.g., type of electrodes (i.e., dry or wet), gel, location of electrodes, and environmental
characteristics.
4. Temporal construction, which is important as:
(a) people habituate and physiological activity tends to move to a neutral state
(b) physiological processes develop over diﬀerent time windows
(c) physiological responses are likely to be layered.
5. Baselining; i.e., applying suitable corrections to the biosignals
These guidelines do not solve all disadvantages mentioned in the previous subsection. However, perhaps they can
help in making progress in the ﬁeld of biosignal-based biometrics or at least in comparing studies in this ﬁeld.
In addition to the ﬁve guidelines mentioned above, the importance of respecting the rich history on biosignal
processing needs to be stressed. Please note that biosignals are already processed since the 17th century. Regrettably,
this rich history is ignored to a large extent; hence, a vast amount of knowledge remains unused.
3. Towards biometrics based on biosignals
This section will ﬁrst introduce two recently presented methods. Of both methods, their use in general has been
shown and now their use for biometrics will be explained. Both methods can be considered as instances of the new
proposed class of biometrics.

2516

E.L. van den Broek / Procedia Computer Science 1 (2012) 2511–2519
Egon L. van den Broek / Procedia Computer Science 00 (2010) 1–9

6

3.1. Speech interface
Recently, it has been shown that speech recognition can be achieved even without sound, without processing the
speech signal itself [16]. This new technique relies on surface electromyography (EMG) [14] and is baptized silent
speech interfaces [16]. It also enables the development of tools for advanced speech synthesis [14]. Such silent
speech interfaces are envisioned to improve verbal communication in noisy environments; e.g., in combat or disaster
situations [14]. In addition, such interfaces enable speaker identiﬁcation and veriﬁcation [17]; see also Section 1.
With the latter applications, silent speech interfaces become of interest to biometrics.
The EMG signals obtained through silent speech interfaces can be combined with voice recordings and, as such,
a multi-modal voice identiﬁcation and veriﬁcation can be realized. Such an approach will provide more robust results
than solely processing the speech signal for voice identiﬁcation and veriﬁcation. Moreover, the speech signal and
EMG signals can be validated against each other; see also Fig. 1. Consequently, recording of both signals can aid the
understanding of the voice, as is now used for identiﬁcation and veriﬁcation purposes. In time, this will result in more
robust identiﬁcation and veriﬁcation of persons.
3.2. Handwriting recognition
Handwriting recognition (HWR) has a long tradition within the ﬁeld of biometrics [2, 12] but also outside this
ﬁeld; e.g., [14, 18]. Its challenge is well illustrated by the “. . . very broad ﬁeld dealing with numerous aspects of this
very complex task. It involves research concepts from several disciplines: experimental psychology, neuroscience,
physics, engineering, computer science, anthropology, education, forensic document examination, etc.” [19].
In the ﬁeld of biometrics, oﬀ-line HWR is applied, which is a much harder task than on-line HWR. [19]. With
the birth of biometrics, this was a choice founded on technical limitations. However, nowadays these limitations have
vanished and on-line HWR can as easily be conducted as oﬀ-line HWR, using simple, cheap tablets. So, the use of
on-line HWR should be included much more in biometrics applications.
On-line HWR can even be taken a step further than its acquisition through a tablet. As has been recently shown,
HWR can be realized through processing EMG signals [14, 18]. It has even been shown that EMG-based HWR can
be of help in the discrimination among persons, as each person has his own bioproﬁle with this application [18].
Although HWR is still the dominant application for pen-based computing, pen input can also be used for a range
of other applications. Not only writing but, for example, also drawing would be of use. Moreover, using on-line
pen-based acquisition methods, a parameter such as the pressure imposed on the pen is of interest.
4. Digital human modeling
In the previous section, two applications of biosignal-based biometrics were discussed. However, as introduced
in Section 2, there are many more biosignals that are of interest for the new class of biometrics. Moreover, not only
the distinct biosignals are of interest but also their combinations. Multi-modal biosignal processing provides a rich
source of information. It can reveal both physiological and psychological aspects of a person [13, 15]. From multimodal (traditional) biometrics, a range of behavioral, chemical, and physical characteristics can be derived (see also
Section 1). Together these two multi-modal sources can provide the foundation for a digital human model (DHM);
e.g., see Fig. 1 and [20], in particular Ch. 16 and 35.
A DHM of persons can be seen as the ultimate model for biometrics, also including biosignal-based biometrics; see
also Fig. 1. It is envisioned that in time, modules for a DHM will be deﬁned in which both traditional biometrics and
biosignals will take a prominent place. However, so far, there is only limited progress in the development of models
that relate biometrics and biosignals to each other as well as to physiological and psychological characteristics [20].
An exhaustive discussion on DHM is well beyond the scope of this article. In the previous section, two examples of classical biometric applications were given, which illustrated the relation between biosignals and traditional
biometrics. The knowledge extracted from such examples could be integrated in DHM. As opposed to the previous
section, this section adopts an atypical aspect of DHM: people’s aﬀective proﬁle [13, 15]; i.e., the relation between
biosignals and the concepts arousal, emotion, and personality. In the remainder of this section the measurement of
a person’s aﬀective proﬁle will be explained, as this can be a valuable contribution to a range of applications of
biometrics; e.g., security issues.

E.L. van den Broek / Procedia Computer Science 1 (2012) 2511–2519
Egon L. van den Broek / Procedia Computer Science 00 (2010) 1–9

2517
7

Arousal is most often addressed as being related to unspeciﬁc excitation processes in the central nervous system.
As such, it is considered as a basic process that catalyzes the transfer from percept to behavior. Most often, arousal is
approached as a one dimensional concept. This is in particular the case in applied sciences and engineering; e.g., the
ﬁeld of aﬀective computing [13, 15]. Although often ignored, there is a signiﬁcant amount of research that showed
that arousal is a complex, multi-dimensional phenomenon, which possibly needs up to four dimensions to be described
accurately [20, Ch. 35]. In practice, various biosignals can be applied to assess arousal; e.g., ECG, blood pressure,
EDA, and (skin) temperature [13, 15].
Despite the tremendous amount of research conducted on the concept of emotion, it still lacks a generally accepted
deﬁnition [20, Ch. 35]. Although the debate on the physiological origin of emotion is still ongoing, there is general
consensus on the limbic system being a part of it. Often emotion is described in terms of arousal and valence (i.e.,
(dis)pleasure), using a two, three, or four dimensional model. Arousal was already addressed, as it is also considered
frequently separate from valance. Valence is assessed through the same biosignals as arousal and, in addition to these,
EMG is often included and even regarded as a ground truth for valence [15].
Personality can be of key importance for forensics and, as such, also for biometrics. Traditionally, personality
traits are assessed through interview techniques, observation, tests, questionnaires, and so forth [13]. However, it
is known that through biosignals people’s personality traits can also be assessed. For personality assessment, the
same biosignals can be applied, as with arousal and valence. The latter gives rise to the question, what the relation
is between this set of biosignals and the three concepts (i.e., arousal, valence, and personality) discussed; see also
Section 2. Moreover, it illustrates the lack of large scale research, which integrates these three concepts and tries to
untangle them.
The development of a DHM is an endeavor that will be passed from generation to generation. Although, with
the increasing interest of both science and engineering in human-centered computing and cognitive engineering, the
future looks promising. A DHM can be considered as the ultimate goal for biometrics. It can include behavioral,
chemical, and physical attributes as well as psychological attributes, as denoted in this section. In addition, brain
activity could be recorded and automatically analyzed, as is done with brain-computer interfaces (BCI) [21]. For now,
however, a combination of traditional biometrics and biosignal-based biometrics can be considered as a bioproﬁle or
DHM. A such, it will already serve as a rich source of information. Such a rich proﬁle would already be of great value
for all application areas of biometrics.
5. Discussion
This paper started with an introduction on biometrics. Next, in Section 2, a new class of biometrics was introduced:
biosignals, as opposed to more traditional approaches to achieving progress in biometrics [11]. Both advantages
and disadvantages of biosignal-based biometrics were denoted as well as guidelines for their application. Section 3
provided two examples of applications of biosignals that can aid biometrics. Section 4 introduced a more general
goal: the development of a digital human model (DHM). This can be considered as the ultimate bioproﬁle, consisting
of both traditional biometrics and features derived from biosignals; see also Fig. 1.
With the application of biosignals, ﬁltering becomes a core issue of these signals [22]. In the case of biometric
applications, traditional sources of noise have to be considered, see also Section 2. However, in addition, various types
of noise have to be ﬁltered, as introduced on purpose by the persons, whose biosignals are recorded. This makes it an
even more challenging issue than it already would have been without these type of noise sources. Luckily, progress in
the development of sensors has accelerated in the last decade; cf. [6], [7], and [8]. It is expected that this development
will continue as sensor’s prices have made it feasible to integrate them in consumer electronics on much larger scale
than has been possible until recently [7, 8].
Obtaining the highest possible quality of signals is the ﬁrst phase in the processing pipeline of biometrics. The
second is the pattern recognition process, which heavily relies on the ﬁrst phase. In Section 2 it was posed that one
of the advantages of including biosignals for biometric applications is the information it adds to a person’s proﬁle.
However, this has its downside. The dimensionality of the information increases signiﬁcantly with incorporating
such a new class of biometrics. Hence, dimension reduction [23] becomes even more important than it already was.
This is in particular important as the current trend is to collect biometrics of more and more persons; consequently,
the size of biometric databases increases rapidly; cf. Eq. 1, with n → ∞. In combination with an increase of the

2518

E.L. van den Broek / Procedia Computer Science 1 (2012) 2511–2519
Egon L. van den Broek / Procedia Computer Science 00 (2010) 1–9

8

amount of information (i.e., features [9, 10]) per person (i.e., the vectors or minutiae (I) in Eq. 1), as will be the case
when biosignals would be included, this stresses the need for i) dimension reduction of biometric data, ii) identifying
eﬃcient distance or similarity metrics [3], and iii) developing eﬃcient data mining schemes.
With applications such as silent speech and handwriting recognition (see Section 3), both via the biosignal EMG,
it has been illustrated that the integration of traditional biometrics with biosignals, as posed in Section 2, would
provide a much richer bioproﬁle of persons. Section 4 posed an even more ambitious goal: the development of a
DHM. Although the ultimate DHM is far beyond science reach, simpliﬁed models can already be of great use. This
is already illustrated by work on BCI [21]. Using EEG signals rough estimations of signiﬁcant brain activity can be
made. But even this can already be of use, as is shown in various clinical application areas.
With the introduction of a new class of biometrics not only technical issues will play a role, also issues concerning both law and ethics are of importance. Law considerations comprise: i) rules of privacy, ii) the constitutional
background, and iii) privacy under law, including physical, decisional, and information privacy [2, Ch. 18]. Biosignalbased biometrics deviate in multiple ways from traditional biometrics. They require other registration and processing
schemes. Possibly even more important, they enable much broader information collection than solely a person’s ID.
As such, they can be considered as possibly even more intrusive than traditional biometrics. One of the ethical issues
is that biometrics introduces the risk of social exclusion [24], which would increase with the introduction of biosignalbased biometrics, as it enables the extraction of much more information than solely traditional biometric data; see also
Section 4.
Although there is still a long way to go, it would be good if biosignals will ﬁnd its way through, as a new
class of biometrics. With the rapid developments in biosignal processing and, even more, in unobtrusive sensor
technology, biosignal-based biometrics should have a bright future. Consequently, dual modal biometrics, including
both traditional, mostly image-based, biometrics and biosignal processing, will become the next step in the evolution
of biometrics.
Acknowledgments
The author gratefully acknowledge the support of the BrainGain Smart Mix Programme of the Dutch Ministry
of Economic Aﬀairs and the Dutch Ministry of Education, Culture, and Science. Frans van der Sluis and Winnie
Teunissen are acknowledged for reviewing preliminary versions of this article.
References
[1] K. de Leeuw, J. Bergstra, The History of Information Security: A Comprehensive Handbook, Amsterdam, The Netherlands: Elsevier B.V.,
2007.
[2] A. K. Jain, P. Flynn, A. A. Ross, Handbook on Biometrics, New York, NY, USA: Springer Science+Business Media, LLC, 2008.
[3] J. S. Pan, F. R. McInnes, M. A. Jack, Bound for Minkowski metric or quadratic metric applied to VQ codeword search, IEE Proceedings –
Vision, Image and Signal Processing 143 (1) (1996) 67–71.
[4] A. Moorhouse, A. N. Evans, G. A. Atkinson, J. Sun, M. L. Smith, The nose on your face may not be so plain: Using the nose as a biometric,
in: Proceedings of the 3rd International Conference on Crime Detection and Prevention, Stevenage, Herts, UK: The Institution of Engineering
and Technology (IET), London, UK, 2009, p. P03.
[5] N. Duta, A survey of biometric technology based on hand shape, Pattern Recognition 42 (11) (2009) 2797–2806.
[6] J. Fraden, Handbook of Modern Sensors: Physics, Designs, and Applications, 3rd Edition, New York, NY, USA: Springer Science+Business
Media, Inc., 2004.
[7] M. Ouwerkerk, F. Pasveer, G. Langereis, Unobtrusive Sensing of Psychophysiological Parameters: Some Examples of Non-Invasive Sensing
Technologies, Vol. 8 of Philips Research Book Series, Dordrecht, The Netherlands: Springer, 2008, Ch. 15 (Part II: Probing in Order to Feed
Back), pp. 163–193.
[8] Y. Hao, R. Foster, Wireless body sensor networks for health-monitoring applications, Physiological Measurement 29 (11) (2008) R27–R56.
[9] H. Liu, L. Liu, H. Zhang, Boosting feature selection using information metric for classiﬁcation, Neurocomputing 73 (1–3) (2009) 295–303.
[10] Y. Xu, D. Zhang, J.-Y. Yang, A feature extraction method for use with bimodal biometrics, Pattern Recognition 43 (3) (2010) 1106–1115.
[11] S. Prabhakar, J. Kittler, D. Maltoni, L. OGorman, T. Tan, Introduction to the special issue on biometrics: Progress and directions, IEEE
Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence 29 (4) (2007) 513–516.
[12] M. Bulacu, L. Schomaker, Text-independent writer identiﬁcation and veriﬁcation using textural and allographic features, IEEE Transactions
on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence 29 (4) (2007) 701–717.
[13] E. L. van den Broek, J. H. D. M. Westerink, Considerations for emotion-aware consumer products, Applied Ergonomics 40 (6) (2009)
1055–1064.
[14] C. Jorgensen, S. Dusan, Speech interfaces based upon surface electromyography, Speech Communication 52 (4) (2010) 354–366.

E.L. van den Broek / Procedia Computer Science 1 (2012) 2511–2519
Egon L. van den Broek / Procedia Computer Science 00 (2010) 1–9

2519
9

[15] E. L. van den Broek, M. H. Schut, J. H. D. M. Westerink, K. Tuinenbreijer, Unobtrusive Sensing of Emotions (USE), Journal of Ambient
Intelligence and Smart Environments 1 (3) (2009) 287–299.
[16] B. Denby, T. Schultz, K. Honda, T. Hueber, J. M. Gilbert, J. S. Brumberg, Silent speech interfaces, Speech Communication 52 (4) (2010)
270–287.
[17] S. A. Patil, J. H. Hansen, The physiological microphone (PMIC): A competitive alternative for speaker assessment in stress detection and
speaker veriﬁcation, Speech Communication 52 (4) (2010) 327–340.
[18] M. Linderman, M. A. Lebedev, J. S. Erlichman, Recognition of handwriting from electromyography, PLoS ONE 4 (8) (2009) e6791.
[19] R. Plamondon, S. N. Srihari, Online and oﬄine handwriting recognition: A comprehensive survey, IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis
and Machine Intelligence 22 (1) (2000) 63–84.
[20] V. G. Duﬀy, Handbook of Digital Human Modeling: Research For Applied Ergonomics And Human Factors Engineering, Human Factors
and Ergonomics, Boca Raton, FL, USA: CRC Press / Taylor & Francis, 2009.
[21] M. van Gerven, J. Farquhar, R. Schaefer, R. Vlek, J. Geuze, A. Nijholt, N. Ramsay, P. Haselager, L. Vuurpijl, S. Gielen, P. Desain, The
brain-computer interface cycle, Journal of Neural Engineering 6 (4) (2009) 1–10.
[22] S. Haykin, Adaptive Filter Theory, 4th Edition, Prentice Hall Information and System Sciences, Upper Saddle River, NJ, USA: Prentice-Hall,
Inc., 2002.
[23] N. Ailon, B. Chazelle, Faster dimension reduction, Communications of the ACM 53 (2) (2010) 97–104.
[24] J. Wickins, The ethics of biometrics: The risk of social exclusion from the widespread use of electronic identiﬁcation, Science and Engineering
Ethics 13 (1) (2007) 45–54.

