Procedia Computer
Science
Procedia Computer
Procedia
ComputerScience
Science001(2010)
(2012)1–10
2345–2354

www.elsevier.com/locate/procedia

International Conference on Computational Science, ICCS 2010

Risk perception and disease spread on social networks
Stephan Kitchovitcha,∗, Pietro Li`oa
a University

of Cambridge Computer Laboratory, 15 JJ Thompson Avenue, Cambridge CB3 0FD, UK

Abstract
Social networks have become vital in the modeling of disease spread in populations, but so far these models have
failed to take into account human risk perception: the fact that human beings, when aware of a disease outbreak, will
take precautions to reduce their susceptibility. We study an existing model of risk perception on a social network and
note the changes in the eﬃciency of the disease spread to previous studies that failed to take human behavior into
account. We also discuss the accounts that need to be taken into consideration in the construction of accurate models
of the population. ⃝
c 2012 Published by Elsevier Ltd. Open access under CC BY-NC-ND license.
Keywords: epidemiological modeling, disease dynamics, scale-free networks, Barab´asi-Albert model, risk
perception

1. Introduction
The ﬁeld of epidemiological modeling has evolved considerably over the past couple of decades. Originally concerned with compartmental models [1] and assuming homogeneous mixing between all individuals of the population
concerned, it has evolved into considering networks of contacts between which the disease may spread. This new
form of modeling allowed accounting for the fact that people tend to have only a limited number of contacts to whom
they may pass an infection [2]. This allowed for the more accurate modeling of the spread of disease at the individual, as opposed to population-level. Initially homogeneous networks (homogeneous in their connectivity properties)
were studied extensively, such as the Erd¨os-R´enyi [3] and Watts-Strogatz [4] models, the latter in particular for its
‘small-world’ property. Following on from the work of Barab´asi and Albert [5] in the late 90’s, it became increasingly
common to model the underlying population as a scale-free network.
A scale-free network is a network whose degree distribution obeys a power law P(k) ∼ k−γ , where usually 2 < γ ≤
3. An important property of these networks when it comes to epidemiological modeling is that their mean connectivity
k is ﬁnite, where as the variance is dominated by the second moment k2 which tends to inﬁnity as the network
grows. In their work Pastor-Satorras and Vespignani [6, 7, 8] studied extensively the spread of disease, following
the classical Susceptible-Infected-Susceptible (SIS) model on scale-free networks and discovered, as the network size
tends to inﬁnity, the absence of an epidemic threshold: a spreading rate below which the virus will not be able to
spread and become extinct. Even for extremely low spreading rates the disease would be able to diﬀuse through the
population and prevail, and this was due to the diverging variance of the network’s connectivity. Further work by
∗ Corresponding

author
Email address: sk490@cam.ac.uk (Stephan Kitchovitch)

c 2012 Published by Elsevier Ltd. Open access under CC BY-NC-ND license.
1877-0509 ⃝
doi:10.1016/j.procs.2010.04.264

2346

S. Kitchovitch,
P. Li`o / Procedia Computer Science 1 (2012) 2345–2354
Stephan Kitchovitch / Procedia Computer Science 00 (2010) 1–10

2

May and Lloyd [9] conﬁrmed this, and pointed out that reason for this is that the most highly connected nodes play a
major role in both spreading the infection and containing it. A major conclusion was that scale-free networks are in
particular prone to the spread of infection. This ﬁnding has had a massive impact on how we model certain diseases:
for example, most sexually transmitted diseases (STD) models assume that the main spread of the disease originates
from a small set of ‘high-activity’ nodes, since many network of sexual contacts have a degree distribution that can
be ﬁt by power laws with exponents that would agree with the theoretical ﬁndings of Pastor-Satorras and Vespignani
(for example, see [10]). The reason why scale-free networks are so important for epidemiology is not just for their
properties concerning the disease dynamics, but also because many real-world networks are thought to be scale-free,
and some have been ﬁtted by power law degree distributions [11]. Furthermore, it has been shown that the degree
distributions of locations where people interact and infections may occur also obey power law distributions [12, 13].
Recently, there has been growing interest in discovering ways to model aspects of human reactions to disease outbreaks into epidemiological models. Ferguson [14] argues that people, when aware of an infectious disease outbreak,
will sometimes change their behavior in order to reduce the risk of infection. This human reaction can have a dramatic
eﬀect on the disease spread. From an economics point of view, Klein et al [15] have also called for an incorporation
of human behavior, based on simple economic principles, to improve the accuracy of existing models. So far progress
in this direction has been limited although recent work has been done in modeling human behavior under voluntary
vaccination campaigns [16], and considering a second network over which spread of disease awareness occurs [17].
In this work we would like to explore the eﬀect of risk perception on the SIS-model disease spread over the
classical BA model scale-free network. We deﬁne risk perception as information concerning the disease which drives
an individual to take measures in order to reduce his susceptibility to infection. The model of risk perception that we
describe below has been introduced and studied before on homogeneous ‘small-world’ networks [18] and on directed
scale-free networks of exponent γ = 2 [19]. It is based on two factors: a global level of awareness and a personal
one, the latter being based on the individual observing known disease symptoms in their neighbors. We have chosen
the model and network in order to explore the eﬀects that a simple incorporation of risk perception can have on the
disease dynamics in terms of the classic studies done by Vespignani and Pastor-Satorras [7]. Even if many realworld networks exhibit power law degree distributions with 2 < γ ≤ 3, epidemic outbreaks are actually quite rare,
even for highly infectious diseases, and smallpox has even been eradicated. Furthermore, recent studies by Piccardi
and Casagrandi [20] have discovered that, under certain conditions, scale-free networks would be less eﬃcient at
spreading and maintaining a disease, than their homogeneous counterparts. We develop a mean-ﬁeld model of the
rate of infection occurring per unit time and also run agent-based simulations to test our model. Our ﬁndings suggest
that incorporating risk perception greatly reduces the number of transmissions that occur, and that, at high levels of
risk perception, the disease only propagates between the high-connectivity (central) nodes, while the majority of their
low degree neighbors and the periphery of the network are largely unaﬀected. We conclude that our model of risk
perception has caused a great reduction in the scale-free network’s eﬃciency of spreading the virus and, at very high
levels, can dramatically reduce its prevalence.
This work proceeds as follows: we start by brieﬂy describing the network model and introducing our deﬁnition
of risk perception. We then deﬁne a mean ﬁeld model and compare its behavior to the average of a large number of
agent-based simulations. We conclude with discussions on the importance of the underlying network model and with
suggestions for future work on risk perception.
2. Model
We model the underlying population as a scale-free network, constructed using the classical Barab´asi-Albert (BA)
model of growth and preferential linkage. To brieﬂy summarize: we start with a small network of m connected nodes,
and we would like to construct a scale-free network of size N nodes (N >> m). At every time step we introduce a new
node with degree m, connected to the existing nodes. We keep doing so until we have allocated all N nodes. When
choosing the nodes to which the new node will connect we consider the degrees of the existing nodes and are more
likely to connect to a high degree node than to a low degree one. The probability of connecting to a node i with degree
ki is:

S. Kitchovitch,
P. Li`o / Procedia Computer Science 1 (2012) 2345–2354
Stephan Kitchovitch / Procedia Computer Science 00 (2010) 1–10

Figure 1: Distribution of the nodes in our network construction for diﬀerent values of m (= 5 crosses; = 10 squares; = 15 circles). The dashed line
has gradient −3. N = 1x105 nodes.

(ki ) =

2347
3

Figure 2: A 3D plot of A(s, k) for varying H and J and s/k set to 1/20.

ki
kj
j

As this network grows it evolves into a scale-free network with exponent γ = 3. Fig. 1 shows the log-log degree
distribution of the nodes of our network for varying m, following the BA model. For the BA model it is known that
the mean connectivity k = 2m and that the degree distribution P(k) = 2m2 k−3 [9, 21, 22]. Each node in our model
represents an individual and the links between them represent contact suﬃcient for the propagation of the disease.
Each node has a state, which is either susceptible or infected.
In [15] the authors state that the way people respond to the threat of infectious disease “depends on their perception
of risk, which is inﬂuenced by public and private information”. Our model of risk perception seeks to incorporate
both these types of information, with public information being global, or shared between all nodes, whereas the level
of private information depends on the number of infectious neighbors that the node has: the more infected people
an individual observes around him the more concerned he becomes with preserving his personal well-being. Both of
these are separate as they come from diﬀerent sources and have a diﬀerent eﬀect on the level of risk perception. We
model the risk perception or alertness of an individual, with connections k of which s are in the infected state, as the
following function, which reduces his susceptibility:
s
(1)
k
where H is the parameter denoting global awareness and J is the private perception based on the infected neighbors.
Fig. 2 shows a plot for the value of A(s, k) for varying values of H and J, for a constant s/k ratio. Note that for
high H the contribution of the value of J diminishes. As an individual becomes aware of a disease through increasing
government or media attention he or she is already in a heightened state of alert, and the eﬀect of observing the illness
in neighbors has a lower eﬀect. Given that the rate of infection/transmission rate for a particular disease is τ, then any
individual faces the probability of becoming infected of A(s, k)τ, and the probability that an individual receives the
infection from at least one of its neighbors is:
A(s, k) = exp − H + J

p(s, k) = 1 − [1 − A(s, k)τ] s

(2)

2348

S. Kitchovitch,
P. Li`o / Procedia Computer Science 1 (2012) 2345–2354
Stephan Kitchovitch / Procedia Computer Science 00 (2010) 1–10

4

We would like to point out to the reader that the parameters H and J have diﬀerent eﬀects on the network. They
both result in dampening the infectivity τ, however the way they aﬀect the network is diﬀerent. H is a global parameter
– changing this parameter results in the entire network’s exposure to the disease being dampened. J also has this eﬀect
on the network, with the subtle diﬀerence that the eﬀect of J is pronounced diﬀerently at each node, because it is scaled
according to that individual’s connectivity and number of infected neighbors. Thus, J causes the disease to propagate
diﬀerently at diﬀerent points in the network. This variation in the spread of infection is equally important to the
disease spread as is the underlying model [23]. In this study H is kept at 0, unless stated otherwise.
3. Results
3.1. Mean ﬁeld approximation
In [6] Pastor-Satorras and Vespignani deﬁne the classical mean-ﬁeld equation for scale-free networks, which
considers the infectivity present in nodes of varying degrees and combines these equations to receive the overall
fraction of infected. Considering the probability (2) of receiving an infection from at least one of your infected
neighbors we can describe rate of change in the fraction of infected individuals i of degree k at time t as:
dik
= −γik + (1 − ik )g(k)
t

(3)

where γ is the rate of recovery, such that the expected time spent sick is 1/γ and g(k) is a function approximating the
number of infected neighbors and the exposure to them according to (2), derived as follows. For any node the degree
distribution of any of its neighbors (see [22]) is
kP(k)
qk =
k
From this we can estimate the number of infected neighbors to be
˜i =

kmax

qk ik

(4)

kmin

and this leads us to the deﬁnition of g(k):
k

g(k) =
s=0

k
p(s, k)˜i s (1 − ˜i)k−s
s

(5)

To summarize, equation (6) represents an approximation of the number of infected nodes that any node of degree
k is exposed to, and all the possible scenarios under which transmission may occur. Note that if we wish to obtain the
total fraction of infected in the population we sum over all k: i = k pk ik . At t = 0 i is set to 0.2. We can compare
the behavior of our mean ﬁeld approximation to that of actual numerical simulations to check for correctness. The
results for two cases of the fraction of infected i after a suﬃciently large period of time of the mean ﬁeld and the
numerical simulations are shown in Fig. 3. Note that although they are mostly in agreement, there is a slight variation
for some values of J in which the mean ﬁeld overestimates the size of the infected population. This is because
the mean ﬁeld can only approximate the number of infected nodes that are in our vicinity, where as the numerical
simulations, running on an actual network, would be able to take account of cases where some individuals exist in the
periphery of the network and are not exposed to the ‘super-spreading’ high connectivity nodes. As expected H has
the eﬀect of greatly dampening the disease’s infectivity and brings down i much more eﬃciently, whereas J causes
variations across nodes as its impact relies heavily on their connectivity. As J grows an increasing fraction of the
nodes become less susceptible to the disease, resulting in a decreasing number of infected individuals. For the disease
to stop propagating to the high-connectivity nodes J would have to grow to extremely large values, comparable to
kmax . However, even at low values J already has had a large impact on the disease dynamics by protecting the lower
degree nodes from the infection.
We now proceed by examining additional properties of this model incorporating risk perception by averaging over
a large number of agent-based simulations.

S. Kitchovitch,
P. Li`o / Procedia Computer Science 1 (2012) 2345–2354
Stephan Kitchovitch / Procedia Computer Science 00 (2010) 1–10

2349
5

Figure 3: A plot of the mean ﬁeld and microscopic simulation results of fraction of infected i over J, for two cases H = 0 and H = 2. For both
cases N = 2500 nodes were considered with m = 5, τ = 1.

3.2. Numerical simulation results
As mentioned in the previous section although the mean ﬁeld approximation is an important method for evaluating
the dynamics of our model, it does not in fact take into account the eﬀect of varying network topologies. The results
in Fig. 3 allow us to check the correctness of the implementation of our agent-based simulations so that we can derive
additional data from them. We generate a network topology using the BA model and then infect a fraction of c nodes
at random. We have noted that for long simulations the statistics explored here tend to converge to the same values,
as the model eventually settles to a certain behavior, regardless of the initial number of infected individuals. However
we have kept c single valued throughout at c = 0.2. At every time step each node can become infected (if they have
at least one infected neighbor) with probability A(s, k)τ. Once infected a node can recover from the disease in any
subsequent time step with probability γ.
In the following studies we mainly examine the individual (J) parameter or a combination of it and the global
(H) awareness parameter. We do not consider the case in which J = 0, H > 0. This is because this is equivalent to
running the simulations with a disease infectivity τ reduced by a factor of e−H . This would would be equivalent to
simply running the same simulations for a diﬀerent eﬀective infectivity and will not produce interesting results. On
the other hand, the case J > 0, H > 0 is included to illustrate the impact of a model where an individual’s awareness
is inﬂuenced both by private and public factors.
We start by examining the amount of time spent sick during a long (time t = 10, 000 steps) set of simulations.
We group the results according to the individuals’ connectivity k to observe what eﬀect the connectivity has on an
individual’s exposure to an infectious disease, and how it varies as we increase the perception. The results are shown
in Fig. 4. An important aspect to note here is that the variance of the time spent sick for nodes of low connectivity is
much greater than that of those of high connectivity (although, over a large period of time and many simulations they
should converge to the actual mean value). This is because there are many times more nodes of low k, and there are
only extremely few highly connected nodes. When generating network topologies this means that low degree nodes
can have a wide range of diﬀerent neighbors, whereas for high degree nodes this variation is much less. As Christakis
and Fowler [24] have pointed out, when studying disease spread over complex networks, visualization of the network
topology plays an important role in understanding the process taking place. Positioning the high connectivity nodes,
and those closest to them in the center of the network (and the rest in the periphery) would allow us to better visualize
the spread of disease in a network, since it is not only the connectivity of the nodes that matters but also their position
in the social network or more precisely: to whom they are actually connected. The nodes in the periphery, especially
in the case of increasing risk perception, may be largely unaﬀected by the disease since they are being ‘shielded’ by

2350

S. Kitchovitch,
P. Li`o / Procedia Computer Science 1 (2012) 2345–2354
Stephan Kitchovitch / Procedia Computer Science 00 (2010) 1–10

6

Figure 4: Fraction of time spent sick as a function of the degree k. Number of nodes used in this simulation N = 1x105 , t = 1x105 , τ = 0.1.

their neighbors that are nearer to the center and thus are closer to the ‘source’ of infection.
Despite these variations due to the varying topologies Fig. 4 is still representative of the average time we would
expect a node of connectivity k to be ill. We note that as we increase J the low connectivity nodes experience a
dramatic decrease in the average time of illness, however the higher k ones are aﬀected much less, with the highest
nodes being unaﬀected at all. Increasing H however has the eﬀect of decreasing the time throughout the whole range
of connectivities, as we assumed when we introduced our model of awareness. It is interesting to note that the curves
seen in Fig. 4 take on a sigmoid or a Gompertz curve like shape. Since we are considering a very large network of
100, 000 nodes there are very few nodes with extremely high connectivity. In a realistic model the maximum number
of contacts (suﬃcient for the propagation of the virus) that an individual has in a given time period (whether it is days,
weeks, months, etc) is strictly limited, and an individual with approx. 4000 contacts may seem quite unrealistic. In
our study nodes of such high degree are included for completeness. In later studies we reduce the number of nodes
for more realistic maximum connectivity. The following studies consider a scale free network of 2500 individuals.
The results in Fig. 4 agree with the ﬁndings of many other works, such as [8, 9] on the role of high connectivity
nodes in maintaining the infection by acquiring it easily. A further ﬁnding is that these high connectivity nodes also
are responsible for the transmissions that maintain the disease’s prevalence. That is, the high degree nodes are also
responsible for the majority of transmissions taking place in the scale-free network. Although we do not expect this
to change in our model incorporating risk perception, we would like to explore how changes in the awareness aﬀect
their role. A plot of the number of average transmissions originating from a node of degree k is shown in Fig. 5.
The values have been normalized so that they correspond to the same number of total transmissions. We discover
that, although increasing the personal perception J reduces the number of transmissions from high connectivity nodes
much more than their low degree counterparts, the overall shape of the curve remains unchanged. That is, despite the
introduction of risk perception, high connectivity nodes will maintain their status as the main spreaders of disease.
Meanwhile, increasing H has the eﬀect of decreasing the number of transmissions equally across all connectivities, as
expected. We would like to draw the readers’ attention to the inset of Fig. 5, which shows the average total number of
transmissions occurring over t = 5000 time steps of the simulations. We observe that the total number of transmissions
occurring in that time window decreases dramatically, and would argue that, with the incorporation of risk perception,
the number of transmissions occurring becomes more realistic for the population than it is if risk perception is not
taken into account at all. As mentioned previously, even highly infectious diseases hardly ever grow into pandemics,
which would not be true given the eﬃciency of scale-free networks at propagating disease [6, 7, 8, 9, 22]. There
can be many causes for these discrepancies between the real world and the theoretical ﬁndings, but in our view two
important ones are:
• Even if most real-world networks are scale free they are much more sophisticated than the classical BA model,

S. Kitchovitch,
P. Li`o / Procedia Computer Science 1 (2012) 2345–2354
Stephan Kitchovitch / Procedia Computer Science 00 (2010) 1–10

Figure 5: Percent of total transmissions attributable to a node of degree
k, normalized over a common number of transmissions. Inset: total transmissions for each case. N = 2500, t = 5000, τ = 0.1.

2351
7

Figure 6: Number of new cases at time t for varying levels of risk perception within a 100 step window. N = 2500, τ = 0.1.

as the processes that result in their creation are complicated and not limited to growth and preferential attachment (see [25])
• Risk perception plays an important role in the disease dynamics as people who are sick are likely to remain at
home and healthy individuals are likely to avoid contact with people they perceive to be sick.
Examining Figs. 4 and 5 together we see that, despite the number of transmissions decreasing as a result of
increasing risk perception, the higher connectivity nodes do not experience a drop in the time they spent as infected.
This suggests that, as risk perception increases, the majority of transmissions in fact occur between the small number
of high connectivity nodes, and only few occur in the rest of the network. This would be an important result as
it would suggest that, in the presence of risk perception, the vast majority of the population would actually avoid
infection, and only a small number of people with many social contacts would suﬀer from the disease. This means
that even a highly infectious disease will not turn into an epidemic, and treatment would only be necessary for a small
number of individuals. To test this we have further considered the number of new infections over time.
In epidemiology the force of infection λ is deﬁned as the per capita number of new infections per time step [26].
We now quantify the impact that risk perception has on the force of infection. Fig. 6 shows the number of infections
occurring within a small time window of 100 steps of the entire simulation, again for varying levels of risk perception.
For increasing levels of risk perception we observe a signiﬁcant decrease of the mean number of cases occurring as
well as their variance, suggesting that the two are linked. Looking at the case of J = 0, and using the mean number of
cases, λ ≈ 345/2500 = 0.138 or 13.8% of the nodes in the network. Table 1 contains these approximations of all four
cases considered in Fig. 6.
Looking at Table 1, for the last two cases we obtain a force of infection which corresponds to 1.08% and 0.6% of
the nodes in a network. For such a low force of infection it is very likely that the number of new cases is attributable to
the few high connectivity nodes, generated from the long tail of the power law probability distribution. Further steps
that would be useful to conﬁrm this is to visualize the network [24] and to determine nodes of which degrees and of
what position within the network are involved in this infection spread.

2352

S. Kitchovitch,
P. Li`o / Procedia Computer Science 1 (2012) 2345–2354
Stephan Kitchovitch / Procedia Computer Science 00 (2010) 1–10

Risk perception level
J=0
J=5
J=10
J=10, H=1

Mean number of infections/unit time (approx)
345
75
27
15

8

λ
0.138
0.03
0.0108
0.006

Table 1: Average force of infection for varying levels of risk perception.

4. Discussion and Conclusion
The modeling of human behavior contains many aspects and has been largely overlooked in epidemiological modeling. In this work we have studied an existing model of risk perception on a standard scale-free network constructed
using the BA model. We have observed the eﬀect that increasing the level of alertness of an individual, both privately
and across the whole network, can have on the spread of an infectious disease. Although work has been done on
connectivity-dependant transmission [23] and a re-emergence of threshold eﬀects was noted, the method involved in
our work depends not only on the connectivity of a node, but also on the state of its neighbors. Similarly to the works
of Pastor-Satorras and Vespignani [6, 7, 8], we discover that the most highly connected nodes (sometimes referred
to in epidemiology as the cores) are responsible for the majority of transmissions and for the maintenance of the
infectious disease. However, with the incorporation of risk perception we now note that scale-free networks are no
longer eﬃcient at spreading the disease, and in fact, in some cases, the periphery of the network may remain largely
unaﬀected. As well as causing varying transmission rates across the whole network, the risk perception allows us to
reduce the infectivity τ, thus bringing down a potential pandemic in our theoretical model to a mild infection, aﬀecting
only a small fraction of the population.
Of course, however, modeling human behavior for epidemiology is not just limited to applying a measure for
the level of alertness that an individual might have in the face of an epidemic outbreak. Of equal importance is
the underlying social network, which in itself is produced as a result of complex human relationships. Although
important to the ﬁeld, scale-free networks have certain drawbacks that cannot be ignored. One such problem is that
they do not allow for homophily, or the ‘birds of a feather ﬂock together’ principle. In the real world individuals tend
to form groups of contacts based on various sociological factors, such as personality, living area or workplace, ethnical
origin, religion, income, etc. These groups can potentially be modeled as communities, and each community could be
subjected to various levels of alertness or risk perception. In an accurate model the underlying social network should
also certainly be dynamic over large periods of time: some people may change their contacts - that is they may lose
old ‘friends’ and make new ones. The factors that result in the construction and evolution of social networks are many
and are an active area of research that can greatly beneﬁt epidemiologists.
Another important drawback to note is one that has been pointed out by Keller in [27]: even though we may be
able to ﬁt a power law to many networks occurring in the real world, regardless of how good or accurate the ﬁt is, the
process does not actually improve our knowledge of the actual topology of the network, how it came to be, or how
it might evolve. As Christakis and Fowler [24] accurately point out visualizing complex topologies is important in
aiding our understanding of the process of disease spread in a given network.
Despite the inaccuracies of scale-free networks their use is in fact very convenient. Gathering data to construct
an accurate social network is a very long and complicated process. In many cases egos (the individuals under study)
provide incomplete information about their alters (their contacts relevant for the study), either by accident or on
purpose and in some cases alters may reside outside of the research area and their contribution may be ignored. When
constructing a social network from real data you often need to collect data beyond the set of egos and also collect
information from the alters that they have speciﬁed to avoid inaccuracies (e.g. ‘one-way relationships’) [28, 29].
Despite the diﬃculties however, to develop accurate epidemiological models for certain diseases constructing such
empirical networks could be a necessary step.
Let us examine the case of the modeling of STDs as an example. As mentioned earlier, power law curves have
been ﬁt to the degree distributions of many networks of sexual partners [10], and one of the main models of spread
of STDs involves the concept of a ‘core’: a group of individuals (e.g. sex workers) who are highly connected to the
outside and spread the disease to the periphery or lower-activity part of the network. Some research has even suggested

S. Kitchovitch,
P. Li`o / Procedia Computer Science 1 (2012) 2345–2354
Stephan Kitchovitch / Procedia Computer Science 00 (2010) 1–10

2353
9

that to prevent the spread of STDs preventative measures should target only those individuals as opposed to the entire
population [30]. Some recent studies on STDs that have constructed empirical networks have however failed to locate
such high-activity cores, putting into question the accuracy of this traditional model. Bearman et al [28] studied the
sexual network of adolescents in a US high school, and discovered that its topology is that of a spanning tree with no
cores. This topology was eﬃcient for the diﬀusion of disease but very fragile, in that the removal of few links could
greatly disjoint the structure. Attempting to reconstruct the network Bearman et al discovered that it was the result of
some human (in paritcular, some potentially adolescent) attitudes: example factors are homophily and preventing the
loss of social status in front of peers. The authors also point out that, in their case, preventative measures need to be
applied across the entire subject population to be eﬀective and that obtaining an accurate network topology is vital for
designing eﬃcient intervention techniques.
We would also like to give as an additional example the study of HIV spread in Likoma Island by Helleringer and
Kohler [29]. The network that the authors constructed empirically in this study was much diﬀerent to that of Bearman
et al, in that it was very robust and that many individuals in it were members of a bicomponent, i.e. there were two
or more independent paths through which they could acquire the infection. The network they discovered was still
highly prone to the propagation of infection, despite the lack of high-activity cores. In fact they discovered that HIV
prevalence was highest in the sparser regions of the network, contrary to the theoretical ﬁnding that the disease is
maintained in the denser highly-connected regions [8]. This was in fact due to socioeconomic factors: the individuals
in the sparser regions were those that are more likely to have been infected and whose exposure to risk factors was
in fact higher. The authors also pointed out that changes in the network topology over time may be responsible for
the distribution of HIV that they observed. By studying two completely diﬀerent groups of people, the authors of
those two works discovered network topologies that were not only very diﬀerent from the traditional models, but
were completely diﬀerent to each other as well. Populations belonging to diﬀerent social groups can in fact have a
very diﬀerent social network structure. Considering an accurate network to represent the underlying population when
constructing an epidemiological model is not only important for obtaining accurate results, but it is also in itself a way
of incorporating human behavior into the model.
In this work we have studied how an individual’s risk perception can alter the spread of disease in a network
topology that had previously been studied extensively without this consideration. We obtained our results through
both a mean ﬁeld approximation and numerical simulations. Our aim was to demonstrate the beneﬁt of incorporating
human behavior in epidemiological modeling. Since social network topologies are also largely the product of human
behavior we also gave examples of two separate cases in which the network, constructed from real-world data, did
not have the expected theoretical or traditional topology or behavior. In conclusion an alertness measure such as
the one we have examined here may be insuﬃcient to truly model human behavior. To do so it would be necessary
to generate an appropriate network to represent the population, which in itself requires some consideration of the
complex processes of human behavior that generated it. When constructing such a network with the aim to study the
spread of infectious diseases it may further be necessary to reﬂect on some of the sociological factors that are relevant
to the disease under consideration.
Acknowledgements
The authors would like to thank Franco Bagnoli, ﬁrstly for his previous work on risk perception, and secondly for
his useful suggestions and feedback. This work is supported by the EC’s IST SOCIALNETS project, 217141.
References
[1]
[2]
[3]
[4]
[5]
[6]
[7]
[8]
[9]

H.W. Hethcote, The Mathematics of Infectious Diseases, SIAM Review 42, 599 (2000).
M.J. Keeling and K.T.D. Eames, Networks and epidemic models, J.R. Soc. Interface 2, 295, (2005).
P. Erd¨os and A. R´enyi, On random graphs, Publ. Math 6, 290 (1959).
D.J. Watts and S.H. Strogatz, Collective dynamics of ‘small-world’ networks, Nature 393, 440 (1998).
A. Barab´asi and R. Albert, The emergence of scaling in random networks, Science 286, 509 (1999).
R. Pastor-Satorras and A. Vespignani, Epidemic spreading in Scale-Free Networks, Phys. Rev. Lett. 86, 3200 (2001).
R. Pastor-Satorras and A. Vespignani, Epidemic dynamics and endemic states in complex networks, Phys. Rev. E 63, 066117 (2001).
R. Pastor-Satorras and A. Vespignani, Immunization of complex networks, Phys. Rev. E 65, 036104 (2002).
R.M. May and A.L. Lloyd, Infection dynamics on scale-free networks, Phys. Rev. E 64, 066112 (2001).

2354
[10]
[11]
[12]
[13]
[14]
[15]
[16]
[17]
[18]
[19]
[20]
[21]
[22]
[23]

S. Stephan
Kitchovitch,
P. Li`o / Procedia Computer Science 1 (2012) 2345–2354
Kitchovitch / Procedia Computer Science 00 (2010) 1–10

10

A. Schneeberger et al, Scale-Free Networks and Sexually Transmitted Diseases, Sexually Transmitted Diseases 31, 380 (2004).
R. Albert and A. Barab´asi, Statistical mechanics of complex networks, Rev. Mod. Phys. 74, 47 (2002).
S.S. Eubank et al, Modelling disease outbreaks in realistic urban social networks, Nature 429, 180 (2004).
E. Massad et al, Scale-free network of a dengue epidemic, Applied Mathematics and Computation 195, 376 (2008).
N. Ferguson, Capturing human behaviour, Nature 446, 733 (2007).
E. Klein et al. Economic incentives and mathematical models of disease, Environment and Development Economics 12, 707 (2007).
A. Perisic and C.T. Bauch, Social Contact Networks and Disease Eradicability under Voluntary Vaccination, PLoS Comput Biol 5(2) (2009).
S.Funk et al, The spread of awareness and its impact on epidemic outbreaks, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 106, 6872 (2009).
L. Sguanci et al, The Inﬂuence of Risk Perception in Epidemics: A Cellular Agent Model, LNCS 4173, 321 (2006).
F. Bagnoli et al, Risk perception in epidemic modeling, Phys. Rev. E 76, 61904 (2007).
C. Piccardi and R, Casagrandi, Ineﬃcient epidemic spreading in scale-free networks, Phys. Rev. E 77, 026113 (2008).
A. Barab´asi et al, Mean-ﬁeld theory for scale-free random networks, Physica A 272, 173 (1999).
S. Boccaletti et al, Complex networks: structure and dynamics, Physics Reports 424, 175 (2006).
R. Olinky and L. Stone, Unexpected epidemic thresholds in heterogeneous networks: The role of disease transmission, Phys. Rev. E 70,
030902(R) (2004).
[24] N.A. Christakis and J.H. Fowler, Social network visualization in epidemiology, Norsk Epidemiologi 19, 5 (2009).
[25] J.H. Fowler et al, Model of genetic variation in human social networks, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 106, 1720 (2009).
[26] R.M. Anderson and R.M. May, Infectious diseases of humans: Dynamics and Control, Oxford Univ. Press, New York (1991).
[27] E.F. Keller, Revisiting ”scale-free” networks, BioEssays 27, 1060 (2005).
[28] P.S. Bearman et al, Chains of aﬀection: The Structure of Adolescent Romantic and Sexual Networks, AJS 110, 44 (2004).
[29] S. Helleringer and H. Kohler, Sexual network structure and the spread of HIV in Africa: evidence from Likoma Island, Malawi, AIDS 21,
2332 (2007).
[30] M.E.J. Newman, Spread of epidemic disease on networks, Phys. Rev. E 66, 016128 (2002).

