Procedia Computer Science
Volume 29, 2014, Pages 683–691
ICCS 2014. 14th International Conference on Computational Science

Visual Analytics of Topological Higher Order Information
for Emergency Management based on Tourism Trajectory
Datasets
Ye Wang, Kyungmi Lee, and Ickjai Lee
School of Business (IT), James Cook University, Cairns, Queensland, Australia
Ye.Wang@my.jcu.edu.au, Joanne.Lee@.jcu.edu.au, Ickjai.Lee@jcu.edu.au

Abstract
Trajectory datasets have presented new opportunities for spatial computing applications and
geo-informatics technologies with regard to emergency management. Existing research of trajectory analysis and data mining mainly employs algorithmic approaches and analyzing geometric
information of trajectories. This study presents an eﬃcient analytics tool based on visualization approaches for analyzing large volume of trajectory datasets. This approach is particularly
useful for emergency management when critical decisions based on semantic information are
needed. Tourism trajectory datasets are used to demonstrate the proposed approach.
Keywords: Higher order information, visual analytics, Voronoi diagram, emergency management

1

Introduction

Trajectory data, trails of moving objects, are valuable sources of information. They include
spatial and temporal aspects of moving entities and additional quantitative and qualitative
attributes about the movement as well as the environment or context in which the movement
takes place. Especially, trajectory data plays an important role in the increasing number of
emergency management applications. Emergency/disaster management is the discipline related
to avoiding and dealing both natural and man-made disasters. Decision-making can be a crucial
diﬃculty throughout unexpected emergencies. The rise of GPS-empowered mobile devices,
advance of Internet technologies, and aﬀordable data storage mechanisms allowed collection
and distribution of huge amounts of user-generated trajectory data. It has presented new
opportunities for spatial computing applications and geo-informatics technologies with regard
to emergency management.
As our society moves into a more data-rich, information-rich, but knowledge-poor environment, people try to access a rich set of data to obtain information for decision-making. Due to
uncertainties and complexities of trajectory dataset, High Order Information (HOI) for what-if
analysis when the ﬁrst preferred solution is no longer in use is highly demanded. For instance,
Selection and peer-review under responsibility of the Scientiﬁc Programme Committee of ICCS 2014
c The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V.
doi:10.1016/j.procs.2014.05.061

683

Visual Analytics of Topological Higher Order Information

Wang, Lee and Lee

the second nearest evacuation center information is required when the ﬁrst nearest evacuation
center is full or closed in emergencies. Analyzing trajectory dataset and HOI could provide
great beneﬁts for emergency management.
Existing approaches for analyzing trajectory datasets are mainly based on data mining techniques such as DBSCAN [12], k-mean/k-medoid [10], k-nearest neighborhood [5] and regionsof-interest [3, 4, 7]. Recently, a few visual tools are found in existing studies. These tools have
used colors, lines, textures, shapes, shadings, and bevels to represent HOI [11, 14, 16].
However, research on visualizing large trajectory datasets and HOI trajectories is limited.
This study aims to use topological visualization approach for analyzing large trajectory datasets
and HOI trajectories. This approach is particularly eﬃcient to provide topological HOI to help
decision-making required for semantic answers such as far/close, yes/no, same/diﬀerent etc instead of accurate numerical or geometric information. Moreover, this approach is computationally eﬃcient and will not create a huge burden of computation typically suﬀered by algorithmic
trajectory analysis approaches.
This paper is organized as follows. Section 2 reviews background preliminaries and previous
works to draw problem statements. Section 3 proposes the data structure and algorithm for
computing topology higher order trajectory information and discuss various visual analytical
approaches. Section 4 presents applications with tourism trajectory datasets. Section 5 brieﬂy
reviews and concludes this study.

2

Preliminaries

HOI is information about more than one object for a given set of objects. That is,“Higher”
means more than one target object and “Order” means the number of query (source) objects.
There are two popular HOI: k-Nearest Neighbor (kNN) information and k-Order Region (kOR)
information. In this research, HOI refers to kNN and kOR information. HOI can also be
classiﬁed into three categories depending on its geospatial characteristics: geometric, topological
and directional. Geometric HOI is information about shape, size, location and the properties of
space. Topological HOI analyzes information of such basic properties of relationships as space,
dimension, and transformation. Directional HOI is about relative positioning properties with
distance information. Existing research of HOI mainly focuses on geometrical information with
limited attention on topological and directional information. This study attempts to ﬁll part
of this research gap; and hence focuses on topological HOI.

2.1

Problem Deﬁnition

The areas data mining and information visualization oﬀer various techniques, which eﬀectively
complement one another supporting discovery of pattern in the data. Whereas traditional (algorithmic) techniques are analyzing the data automatically, information visualization techniques
can leverage the data mining process from an orthogonal direction by providing a platform for
understanding the data and generating hypotheses about the data based on human capabilities such as domain knowledge perception and creativity. To successfully apply data mining
algorithms, visualization and interaction capabilities become crucial factors since they enable
the user to incorporate domain knowledge, to steer the data mining process and to better understand the results. While existing research on trajectory analysis and HOI trajectory used
mainly data mining algorithmic approaches to analyze trajectory datasets, this study attempts
to a visual analytics approach to facilitate trajectory analysis and visualize HOI trajectories.
684

Visual Analytics of Topological Higher Order Information

Wang, Lee and Lee

Generally, Ordinary Voronoi Diagram (OVD) and its Oigher Order Voronoi Generalizations
(HOVD) can provide a robust framework for both kNN and kOR queries.

2.2

Related Work

Visual Analytics (VA) leveraging analytical capabilities of humans is greatly needed to answer
questions for better decision-making. VA is a human-centric interactive visualization based
analysis approach. It is based on the fact that the human brain is an excellent pattern recognition machine [2]. With VA, human solves complex problems with the perceptual and cognitive
capabilities of the human. VA also uses the computing and processing power of computers, thus
it combines the strengths of humans and computers to deal with complex information [1]. The
main aim of VA is to enable analysts to use their perceptual and cognitive skills to gain insights,
detect the expected, and discover the unexpected from data through progressive deepening analysis and exploration (overview ﬁrst, zoom in and ﬁlter to show details-on-demand) [13], and
steerable analysis through interactions [8].
Studies on HOVD visualization emerge recently, but not HOI support for kNNQ and kORQ.
Palmer [11] investigates visual aspects of OkVD (highlighting unordered kORQ) through contour lines and textures based on raster OkVD. He introduces order-k plots (overlaying nearest
neighbor plots for 1,. . . ,k-1). For instance, order-3 plot is the order-3 Voronoi diagram overlaid with contour lines of order-1 and order-2 (1st nearest plot and second nearest plot). Since
order-k plot is based on raster Voronoi diagrams (without data structure model) it does not support interactive visualization. It is neither well suited for visual analytics, nor dynamic what-if
analysis. It also becomes too complex when k or n grows. Another approach [14] attempted
to visualise OkVD regions using color, shading and bevels. Shading with cushion (diﬀerent intensity levels of shading) is used to represent the distance to the closest site; brighter as closer
to the generators and darker as close to the edges. Bevels are used for visualizing OkVD with
colored for inﬂuencing sites and scaled to reﬂect the kth order distance and hierarchy), and to
superimpose to implicitly show the k sites. Basically these approaches focus on visually answering which are the k sites that inﬂuence a given partition. Although all of these pervious works
provide visual tools for trajectory dataset, none of the research could support HOI. Wang et
al. [16] used diﬀerent widths and colors to highlight topological relationships between/among
HOVD families, and enhances the readability of ordered order-k diagram. Also, they used
interactive visualization to display interested area.
These traditional approaches share some common drawbacks: 1) non-interactivity; 2) based
on raster Voronoi diagrams, thus incapable of visualizing rich topological relations; 3) based
on without data structure model that is not well suited for dynamic what-if analysis; 4) only
for visualizing one OkVD for a given k; 5) unable to visualize various topological relations (for
instance the relationship between 4NNQ and 5NNQ) of kNNQ for various k; 6) lack of visual
analytics support.

3
3.1

Computing Higher Order Topological Trajectory Information
Uniﬁed Data Structure

This paper is based on the uniﬁed Delaunay triangle based data structure which consists of
a complete set of data structure. It consists of a complete set of Order-k Delaunay triangles
(from Order-0 to Order-(k-1)) [9]. A complete set of HOVD families could be drawn from this
685

Visual Analytics of Topological Higher Order Information

Wang, Lee and Lee

Table 1: The relationship between HOVD families and the uniﬁed data structure.
Order-k
1
2
3
4
...
k

OkVD
Order-0 triangle
Order-0 & Order-1 triangle
Order-1 & Order-2 triangle
Order-2 & Order-3 triangle
...
Order-(k-2) & Oder-(k-1) triangle

OOkVD
O1VD
O1VD-O2VD
O1VD-O3VD
O1VD-O4VD
...
O1VD-OkVD

kNVD
O1VD
O1VD-O2VD
O2VD-O3VD
O3VD-O4VD
...
O(k-1)VD-OkVD

data structure, and the relationship between the data structure and HOVD families is shown
in Table 1. For example, O4VD can be obtained by a combination of Order-2 triangle and
Order-3 triangle; OO4VD is an overlay from O1VD to O4VD, while 4NVD is a join of O3VD
and O4VD.
The Delaunay triangulation is a dual graph of the OVD with edges connecting neighboring
points. It can be constructed by linking two adjacent Voronoi generators if they share a Voronoi
edge together. For Order-0 triangles, no generator is on the circumcircle of each Delaunay
triangle in the triangulation. However, there could be triangles whose circumcircles include a
number of generators within them. Order-1 triangles are those triangles whose corresponding
circumcircles include only one generator in it. Therefore, Order-k triangles are those ones whose
corresponding circumcircles include k generators in it. Please refer to [9] for more details.

3.2

Algorithm

Figure 1(a), (b), and (c) display screen captures of visualization tools developed by the authors with O7VD diagrams for a given P and trajectory data Q. Figure 1(a) shows Order-7
Voronoi Diagram (O7VD), Figure 1(b) depicts Ordered Order-7 Voronoi Diagram (OOV7VD)
and Figure 1(c) displays 7th Nearest Voronoi Diagram (7NVD). The implementation enables
users to change various k values to get diﬀerent types of HOI from trajectory data. Since different HOVDs are visualized from the same dataset P , users could interact with the program
to retrieve dataset points for any user-interested location within the study query point [15].
Figure 1(d), (e), and (f) illustrate topology trajectory dataset Q1 and Q2 and generators
P . For topology trajectory information, the visualization tools will try to go through every
single data point in all the datasets to perform a classiﬁcation in relation to the HOI. For each
single data point, if they have the same HOI, then they are clustered into the same group.
The runtime of this approach is O(n). This approach is faster compared to other data mining
approaches. Some examples of visualizations of topological trajectory HOI are shown in next
section.

4

Applications

Emergency management is composed of four basic phases: mitigation, preparedness, response,
and recovery [6]. This section demonstrates how the topological visual analytics of trajectory
HOI can be used for each stage of emergency management. We explain this with a study using
geo-tagged photos from Flickr in Queensland, Australia, in the years of 2010-2011 and tourism
686

Visual Analytics of Topological Higher Order Information

Wang, Lee and Lee

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

(e)

(f)

Figure 1: OkVD: (a) O7VD; (b) OO7VD; (c) 7NVD with trajectory dataset Q and generators
P ; (d) O1VD; (e) O2VD; (f) O3VD with two trajectory datasets Q1 and Q2 and generators P .
trajectory datasets. For the Flickr dataset, there are 17,066 records preprocessed to produce
the dataset used in this study. Figure 2(a) shows the distribution of the dataset using Google
Earth 6.0 (earth.google.com). Most of these records appear along the coastline of the country
where the major cities are located. This application will take a subset of the dataset with data
points from Cairns, a regional city in Queensland, Australia to demonstrate the usefulness and
applicability of our approaches. Figure 2(b) shows a subset Q of clusters within the central
business district of Cairns. These locations can be set up as information centers.

(a)

(b)

Figure 2: Dataset: (a) Geo-tagged photos from Flickr; (b) Distribution of clusters in CBD of
Cairns (|Q|=14).

687

Visual Analytics of Topological Higher Order Information

4.1

Wang, Lee and Lee

Mitigation

(a)

(b)

(c)

Figure 3: Various HOVDs with diﬀernt visual analytical approaches: (a)O7VD; (b) OO7VD;
(c) 7NVD.
Mitigation is a realization that eliminates or decreases the causes of risk/disaster, and is a
factor that provides prevention of (removing, eliminating, reducing) the eﬀects of inescapable
disaster. Figure 3 demonstrates higher order families of locations of 14 clusters. Figure 3(a)
shows O7VD, Figure 3(b) displays OO7VD, and Figure 3(c) depicts 7NVD. These clusters can
be used to represent Points of Interest (POIs) related to emergency management.

4.2

Preparedness

(a)

(b)

(c)

Figure 4: Preparedness: (a)O1VD; (b) O5VD; (c) O7VD with two trajectory datasets Q1 and
Q2 .
In the preparedness phase, governments, organizations, and emergency centers involve making plans to save lives and minimizes disaster damage such as having emergency personnel on
standby or determining the nearest evacuation places with dynamic (moving/changing over
time) data. In other words, preparedness also explores ways to improve damage response operations. Figure 4 shows the O1VD, O5VD and O7VD of the two trajectory datasets collected
every 10 seconds for half an hour from two diﬀerent tourist groups walked in the CBD of Cairns.
The data collected from tourist Q1 (Group 1) is represented in green and Q2 (Group 2) is shown
in blue in Figure 4. If we assume that P represents information centers then people moving
around regions will have diﬀerent nearest information center as time progresses. Thus, people
688

Visual Analytics of Topological Higher Order Information

Wang, Lee and Lee

staying in diﬀerent regions will have a clear understanding of which area has the same higher
order information when they move.

4.3

Response

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

(e)

(f)

(g)

(h)

(i)

Figure 5: Response: (a)O1VD; (b) O2VD; (c) O3VD; (d) O5VD; (e) O9VD; (f) O13VD with
two new trajectories; (g) O1VD; (g) O2VD; (i) O3VD highlighting area with two new trajectories.
Response consists of activities following emergency assistance for victims. It also explores
how to stabilize the situation and to prevent the probability of secondary disaster and to give
suggestions for recovery. Typically, the nearest neighbor emergency unit is required to respond
to emergencies quickly. Here we use order-k Voronoi diagrams as an example. Figure 5 shows a
series of HOVD of the topological HOI of the two trajectories resulting from the visual analytic
tool. The data collected points from tourist Q1 is represented in green and Q2 is represented
in blue in Figure 5(a)-(f). The data collected regions from tourist Q1 is represented in red and
Q2 is represented in green in Figure 5(g)-(i). When emergencies occur, the nearest neighbor
emergency units are required to cooperate and collaborate in order to decrease the disaster. Q1
and Q2 can ﬁnd the closest information center to ask more information. Figure 5(a)−(f) show
diﬀerent values of k with Order-k Voronoi diagrams. The information center also can make
689

Visual Analytics of Topological Higher Order Information

Wang, Lee and Lee

decisions about the best location for setting up emergency tables for tourist. For the regions,
the nearest neighbor emergency units give suggestions about areas which have more activities.
When red and green colors are mixed, it means two diﬀerent trajectories are in the same higher
order region. The government can give orders to focus on these top priority regions (orange
regions) for emergency center. When topology visual analytic trajectory and regions cooperate
and collaborate, it will make more informed decision for the government to reduce the disaster.

4.4

Recovery

Figure 6: Class numbers of Trajectory-1 and Trajectory-2 from topological visual tool analysis.
Recovery happened when the disaster is over. It is a set of activities that returns all
systems back to normal and also prevents secondary damage. These include two phases, short
term and long term. From Figure 6, we can see although Trajectory-1 (Q1 ) and Trajectory-2
(Q2 ) are diﬀerent, for the higher order information, they are very similar. Both trajectories
have an increasing number of classes when k is less than 6, and then a number of classes which
generally decreases with k > 6. In emergency recovery situation of short term, we can choose
recovery plans as soon as possible when the value of k is greater than 6. It also quickly prevents
secondary disaster. For long term, recovery plans can be introduced based on k < 6 of high
order information.

5

Conclusion

Disasters and emergencies can lead to various forms of ﬁnancial, structural, and environmental
damage. Even though it is almost impossible to avoid occurrences of disasters, eﬀective prediction and preparedness along with a post-emergency management program can mitigate the
risk and damage. Trajectory analysis has emerged in the last decade as very active research
domain with many potential applications for emergency management. While pervious research
mainly focused on processing the raw data received from GPS devices and sensors, this research
focuses more on enriching the trajectory analysis with trajectory HOI.
This paper proposes a visual analytical approach for topological HOI of trajectory datasets.
This approach enables a user to analyze large volume of trajectories, related the trajectories
with POIs and trajectory HOI. The visual analytics tools implemented for this study used the
690

Visual Analytics of Topological Higher Order Information

Wang, Lee and Lee

uniﬁed data structure and relevant algorithms to support the visualization of HOI and topology
trajectory information. We show how this approach can be applied to emergency management.

References
[1] G. Andrienko, N. Andrienko, U. Demsar, D. Dransch, J. Dykes, S. Fabrikant, and C. Tominski.
Space, time, and visual analytics. International Journal of Geographical Information Science,
pages 1577–1600, 2010.
[2] P. Ball. Data visualization: Picture this. Nature, pages 11–13, 2002.
[3] Guochen Cai, Chihiro Hio, Luke Bermingham, Kyungmi Lee, and Ickjai Lee. Mining Frequent Trajectory Patterns and Regions-of-Interest from Flickr Photos. 47th Hawaii International Conference
on System Sciences, pages 1454–1463, January 6-9 2014.
[4] Guochen Cai, Chihiro Hio, Luke Bermingham, Kyungmi Lee, and Ickjai Lee. Sequential pattern
mining of geo-tagged photos with an arbitrary regions-of-interest detection method. Expert Systems
with Applications, 41:3514–3526, 2014.
[5] R. H. G¨
uting, T. Behr, and J. Xu. Eﬃcient k-nearest neighbor search on moving object trajectories.
he International Journal on Very Large Data Bases, 19(5):687–714, 2010.
[6] G. Haddow, J. Bullock, and D. P. Coppola. Introduction to emergency management. ButterworthHeinemann, 2010.
[7] Chihiro Hio, Guochen Cai, Luke Bermingham, Kyungmi Lee, and Ickjai Lee. A Hybrid Grid-based
Method for Mining Arbitrary Regions-of-Interest from Trajectories. In Proceedings of Workshop
on Machine Learning for Sensory Data Analysis, pages 5–12. ACM Press, 2014.
[8] J. Kohlhammer, D. Keim, M. Pohl, G. Santucci, and G. Andrienko. Solving problems with visual
analytics. In Proceedings of the 2nd European Future Technologies Conference and Exhibition 2011
(FET 11), volume 7, pages 117–120, 2011.
[9] I. Lee and K. Lee. A generic triangle-based data structure of the complete set of higher order voronoi diagrams for emergency management. Computers, Environment and Urban Systems,
33(2):90–99, 2009.
[10] D. Liu, E-P. Lim, and W-K. Ng. Eﬃcient k nearest neighbor queries on remote spatial databases
using range estimation. In Proceedings of the 14th International Conference on Scientiﬁc and
Statistical Database Management, pages 121–130, 2002.
[11] J. D. Palmer. Using line and texture to visualize higher-order voronoi diagram. In Proceedings of
the 3rd International Symposium on Voronoi Diagrams in Science and Engineering, pages 166–172.
IEEE Computer Society, 2006.
[12] J. Sander, M. Ester, H-P. Kriegel, and X. Xu. Density-based clustering in spatial databases: The
algorithm gbdscan and its applications. Data Mining and Knowledge Discovery, 2(2):169–194,
1998.
[13] B. Shneiderman. The eyes have it: a task by data type taxonomy for information visualizations.
In Proceeding of IEEE Symposium on Visual Languages, pages 336–343, 1996.
[14] A. Telea and J. J. van Wijk. Visualization of generalized voronoi diagrams. In Proceedings of the
3rd Joint Eurographics - IEEE TCVG conference on Visualization, pages 165–174. Springer, 2001.
[15] Y. Wang and I. Lee. Visual analytics of higher order information for trajectory datasets. In
International Conference on Computer Science and Information Engineering, pages 1005–1010,
2013.
[16] Y. Wang, K. Lee, and I. Lee. Representing ordered order-k voronoi diagrams. In Proceedings of
the 7th International Conference on Advanced Information Management and Service, pages 71–75.
IEEE Computer Society, 2012.

691

