Procedia Computer Science
Volume 29, 2014, Pages 1791–1800
ICCS 2014. 14th International Conference on Computational Science

Historical Claims Data Based
Hybrid Predictive Models for Hospitalization
Chengcheng Liu1 and Yong Shi2
1

2

School of Computer and Control Engineering, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing,
China
pekinlcc@gmail.com
Research Center on Fictitious Economy and Data Science, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing,
China
yshi@ucas.ac.cn

Abstract
Over $30 billion are wasted on unnecessary hospitalization each year, therefore it is needed to
ﬁnd a better quantitative way to identify patients who are mostly likely to be hospitalized and
then provide them utmost care. As a good starting point, the objective of this paper was to
develop a predictive model to predict how many days patients may spend in the hospital next
year based on patients’ historical claims dataset, which is provided by the Heritage Health Prize
Competition. The proposed predictive model applied the ensemble of binary classiﬁcation and
regression techniques. The model is evaluated on testing dataset in terms of the Root-MeanSquare-Error (RMSE). The best RMSE score was 0.474, and the corresponding prediction
accuracy 81.9% was reasonably high. Therefore it is convincing to conclude that predictive
models have the potentials to predict hospitalization and improve patients’ quality of life.
Keywords:

1

Introduction

Although the quality of health care is improving every year, the expenditure in healthcare is
growing at a much faster speed. This arises the serious concern from both policy makers and
healthcare providers for the reducing the costs in healthcare. It is shown that more than 71
million individuals in the United States are admitted to hospitals each year, according to the
latest survey from the American Hospital Association. Studies have concluded that in 2006
well over $30 billion was spent on unnecessary hospital admissions.
In order to reduce the number of avoidable hospitalizations, it is necessary to identify individuals who are most likely to experience an avoidable hospitalization in the future. Such
individuals can then be provided with utmost care and monitored such that appropriate ambulatory care is availed to them when required. Therefore, speciﬁc characteristics are required
Selection and peer-review under responsibility of the Scientiﬁc Programme Committee of ICCS 2014
c The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V.
doi:10.1016/j.procs.2014.05.164

1791

Historical Claims Data Based Hybrid Predictive Model for Hospitalization Chengcheng Liu, Yong Shi

to be identiﬁed that can be associated with the likelihood of having an avoidable hospitalization. In this study, we aim at developing predictive models that can estimate likelihood of an
individual experiencing an avoidable hospitalization in near future [3].
The rest of the paper is organized as follow: Part II is a description of the dataset with
testing sets to be applied, with their features and preprocessing; The hybrid predictive model
with their implementation will be illustrated in Part III. Then the paper will provide the results
in Part IV and conclusions in Part V. Future work will be further explained in Part VI.

2

Dataset Description

The dataset is provided by Heritage Provider Network (HPN) [1] , which sponsors the Heritage
Health Prize Competition for encouraging research on human health. Since the whole dataset
is combined by several datasets, it will be illustrated one by one with detailed information.

2.1

Training Data: Three-Year Claims Data

The main training dataset is a Three-Year Claims Data, which contains more than 2.6 million
rows with 14 columns in each row. Each row represents the information of a claim in a certain
year, i.e. Y1, Y2 or Y3. The size of data in each year is listed below (Note that since Y4 data
is not provided, Y3 data cannot be used to predict Y4 outcome, so that it can be ignored in
the paper):
• Y1: 865689 Claims, 76038 Patients
• Y2: 898872 Claims, 71435 Patients
• Y3: 904429 Claims (Discarded: missing Y4 outcome)
In order to make clear illustration, the 14 variables in the Three-Year Claims Data [2] with
their meaning listed in Table 1.
Table 1: Dictionary of Three-Year Claims Dataset
Variable
Explanation
MemberID
Member pseudonym
ProviderID
Provider pseudonym.
Vendor
Vendor pseudonym.
PCP
Primary care physician pseudonym.
Year
Year when claim was made: eg,Y1.
Specialty
Generalized specialty.
PlaceSvc
Generalized place of service.
PayDelay
Number of days delay
LengthOfStay
Length of stay
DSFS
Days since ﬁrst claim
PrimaryConditionGroup
primary diagnosis codes
CharlsonIndex
The overall aﬀect of disease
ProcedureGroup
Broad categories of procedures
SupLOS
Value of 1 indicates suppression

1792

Historical Claims Data Based Hybrid Predictive Model for Hospitalization Chengcheng Liu, Yong Shi

2.2

Testing Data

This dataset is the outcome of the Y1 and Y2, with corresponding to DaysInHospital Y2 and
DaysInHospital Y3 illustrated, since all patients who have claims in the current year have
entries in the next year’s DaysInHospital. Data is illustrated in Table 2. Since the objective
Table 2: Dictionary of Testing Dataset
DaysInHospital Y2 Days in hospital, for members with claims in Y1.
DaysInHospital Y3 Days in hospital, for members with claims in Y2.
of the project is to develop a predictive model to estimate next year’s DaysInHospital (DIH)
(i.e., claims Y1 to predict DIH Y2, claims Y2 to predict DIH Y3), so that the training data
and testing data can be clearly found out in Table 3
Table 3: Training Data and Testing Data in Project
Training set
Testing set
Claims Y1: 865689 Claims
Claims Y2: 898872 Claims
DaysInHospital Y2: 76038 Patients DaysInHospital Y3: 71435 Patients

2.3

Evaluation

The predict results will be evaluated in the system with the given metric shown as below, which
is used as high degree of accuracy of prediction of DIH in terms of a low RMSE:
=

1 n
Σ [log(pi + 1) − log(ai + 1)]2
n i

(1)

where i is a member, n is the total number of members, p is the predicted number of days spent
in hospital for member i in the test period, a is the actual number of days spent in hospital for
member i in the test period.

3
3.1

Predictive Models and Implementation
Binary Classiﬁcation

In this section, we present the classiﬁcation algorithm we use. For algorithm selection, we
consider both accuracy and time consumption. In practice, we basically used three algorithms:
Gradient Boosting Decision Tree, Neural Network, Alpha Tree.
3.1.1

Gradient Boosting Decision Tree

Gradient boosting is a famous machine learning technique for classiﬁcation and regression problems, which produces a prediction model in the form of an ensemble of weak prediction models,
typically decision trees. It builds the model in a stage-wise fashion like other boosting methods
do, and it generalizes them by allowing optimization of an arbitrary diﬀerentiable loss function.
1793

Historical Claims Data Based Hybrid Predictive Model for Hospitalization Chengcheng Liu, Yong Shi

More details about Gradient boosting technique can be found in Jerome H. Friedman’s original
paper [4] in 1999.
A well-known implementation of GBDT is the gbm [5]. We used this package in our work
for implementation.
Although one of the motivations for building binary classiﬁcation model is to deal with
imbalanced data issue. However, in practice, we found that for classiﬁcation models,they also
suﬀered from the same problem. Note that 90% patients were in negative class. In other words,
the positive negative ratio was only 1/9. In order to increase this ratio, for gbm, we sub-sampled
the entries in Class0. Finally, we chose this ratio to be 1/4.
Other important factors for implementation are shown in Table 4.
Table 4: Partial implementation factors for gbm
Factor
Value
n.tree
100
shrinkage
0.001
bag.fraction
1
n.minobsinnode
10

3.1.2

Neural Network

Neural network is usually used as a nonlinear model for prediction. It usually consists of a
large number of simple computing elements. The typical multilayer perceptron (MLP) has two
layers(including one hidden layer). Figure 1 shows the structure. Basically, tanh/sigmoid are
applied in the hidden layer. The output layer is linear or softmax. We have the following model
description:
M

yk (x, w) =
j=1

(2)

wkj tanh(

(1)

i

(1)

(2)

wji xi + wj0 ) + wk0

(2)

In our case, we used neural network to do classiﬁcation. Hence, we need to do thresholding
on the output. How to choose the best threshold value was based on the output ROC curve.
In R, we used package neuralnet [6] for implementation. The parameters in the function is
shown in Table 5
Table 5: Partial implementation factors for neural network
Factor
Value
hidden
1
threshold (for stopping criteria)
0.01
stopmax
1e+5
linear.output
TRUE

3.1.3

Alpha Tree

The reason we chose to use alpha tree is because of its power to deal with imbalanced data.
The basic idea for alpha tree is to use α divergence as splitting criteria in nodes. α divergence
1794

Historical Claims Data Based Hybrid Predictive Model for Hospitalization Chengcheng Liu, Yong Shi

Figure 1: Neural Network with two layers
can be deﬁned as:
Dα (p q) =

1−

x

p(x)α q(x)1−α dx
α(1 − α)

(3)

Thus the splitting criterion function of alpha tree can be written as:
Dα (p(x, y) p(x)p(y))

(4)

Note that when α = 1, α divergence is K-L divergence. In this case, α tree is exactly the
classical decision tree.
Next, we introduce the eﬀect of varying α. The main result and analysis are cited from
paper [7]. Suppose we have a binary classiﬁcation problem whose positive class ratio is θc
where 0 < θc ≤ 1/2. After a split, the training data is divided into two subsets: one with
higher (> θc ) and the other with lower (< θc ) positive class ratio. Let us call the subset with
higher positive class ratio as positive subset, and the other as negative subset. Without loss of
generality, suppose we have binary features X1 , X2 , ..., Xn and p(y = 1|xi = 0) < p(y = 1) <
p(y = 1|xi = 1) and p(xi ) p(xj ) for any i, j. The α-divergence criterion becomes:
Dα (p(xi , y) p(xi )p(y)) =
p(xi = 1)Dα (p(y|xi = 1) p(y)) + p(xi = 0)Dα (p(y|xi = 0) p(y))

(5)

So basically, increasing α shifts our focus to high p(y = 1|xi = 1). In other words, increasing
α results in the splitting feature having higher positive prediction value.
As for implementation, we used the existing R function RTree.R provided by the author
of paper [7]. The output value of α-tree is also continuous. Thresholding is also necessary to
process the raw output value. For the selection of α, we empirically tried various values and
pick one with the highest training RMSE.
3.1.4

Ensembles

We combined the results of the three classiﬁcation models to get a better result. The ensemble
rule was: For the three models gbm,nn,α − tree, if more than one of the three results is positive,
we predict it to be positive. This strategy was aggressive on predicting entries to be positive.
The reasons came from the 2 folds:
• For the ﬁrst stage (binary classiﬁcation), if one entries in positive class is classiﬁed to be
negative, this mistake would not be corrected in stage two(regression). However, in the
1795

Historical Claims Data Based Hybrid Predictive Model for Hospitalization Chengcheng Liu, Yong Shi

opposite case, since the output range of regression includes 0, we would still have chance
to ﬁx the mistake caused by binary classiﬁcation model.
• Empirically, we tried multiple ways to do results aggregation. But the method we described here achieved the lowest training RMSE(i.e., the best result).

3.2
3.2.1

Regression
Individual Regression Models

We use 5 regressions model to predict accurate DIH : linear regression, logistic regression, partial
least squares regression, principle component regression and canonical powered partial least
squares. Based on the these ﬁve models, we also do ensembles. R packages we use for each
regression is shown in Table 6.
Table 6: Regression R Packages
algorithm
package
Linear Regression
lm
Logistic Regression
glmnet
pls
Partial Least Squares Regression
Principal Component Regression
pls
Canonical Powered Partial Least Squares
pls

3.2.2

Ensembles

We consider multiple ways to aggregate the results of ﬁve regression models.Suppose the result
of multiple models are X1 , X2 , ..., Xn .
• Max: X = max{X1 , ..., Xn }; Median: X = median{X1 , ..., Xn }; Average: X =

1
n

i

Xi

• Majority Vote: Convert X1 , X2 , ..., Xn into integers Xˆ1 , Xˆ2 , ..., Xˆn . Pick one with maximum appear times.
• Model weights ∝ Pr(Closest to the truth of training data): Assign weight wi to each
result Xi . wi is computed based on the training data. Speciﬁcally, wi is proportional to
the empirical probability that model i is the closest to the truth.
• Model weights ∝ Pr(Correct prediction of Training Data): Compared to the previous
method, here we compute wi using Xˆi
• Model weights ∝ 1/Train RMSE: wi is chosen being proportional to the inverse of training
error of model i.
• Model weights from linear regression: We assume X = i wi Xi . Compute wi to minimize
the least square between X and the corresponding true value of training data.
1796

Historical Claims Data Based Hybrid Predictive Model for Hospitalization Chengcheng Liu, Yong Shi

AUC

GBDT

α-Tree

NN

0.712

0.762

0.732

Table 7: AUCs for GBM,α-Tree and Neural Netwrok(NN)

4

Results

4.1

Individual Classiﬁcation Models

The results of binary classiﬁcations were shown as three Receiver Operating Characteristic(ROC) curves in Figure 2. As we can see from the ROCs, classiﬁcation with α-Tree outperformed the other two models by a small margin. However, all the three models did poorly as
binary classiﬁcation methods since they were only able to achieve the Area Under Curve (AUC)
around 0.7 (shown in Table 7 ). From Table 8 that shows the confusion matrices of the three
classiﬁcation models, the GBDT model had the lowest FPR at 0.186 while the α-Tree had the
highest TPR at 0.666. The GBDT model was the best at predicting the cases of DIH = 0 and
the α-Tree was the best at avoiding mistakenly predict DIH = 0 for those cases of DIH > 0.
The Neural Network was neutral among the three in terms of FPR and TPR we cared the
most.

Figure 2: ROC curves of Gradient Boosting Decision Tree, Neural Network and α-Tree

4.2

Ensemble Classiﬁcation Models

The confusion matrix of the ensembled classiﬁcation model is shown in Table 8. We can see
from the table that the TPR increased and the FPR decreased when compared to the best
individual classiﬁcation model α-Tree.
1797

Historical Claims Data Based Hybrid Predictive Model for Hospitalization Chengcheng Liu, Yong Shi
(b) α-Tree

(a) GBDT

prediction

actual

0
1

0
0.814
0.588

prediction

1
0.186
0.412

actual

0
1

0
0.686
0.334

1
0.314
0.666

(c) Neural Network

prediction

actual

0
1

0
0.674
0.396

1
0.326
0.604

Table 8: Confusion matrices for GBDT,α-Tree and Neural Network

4.3

Individual Regression Models

The performances of the six regression models in predicting the testing dataset DIH Y3 are
shown in Table 9. As we can see from the table, all the six models performed well with RMSE
around 0.48 and the principal component regression was the best individual model with RMSE
0.478.
Regression Models
Logistic Regression (lasso)
Logistic Regression (ridge)
Linear Regression
principal component regression (PCR)
partial least squares regression (PLSR)
canonical powered partial least squares (CPPLS)

Testing RMSE
0.482
0.482
0.482
0.478
0.48
0.479

Table 9: Testing RMSEs of regression models

4.4

Ensembled Regression Models

The performances of the eight ensemble methods in predicting the testing dataset DIH Y3 are
shown in Table 10. The ﬁrst four ensemble strategies were based on the predicted DIH Y3 for
the testing dataset, while the other four strategies were based on the performances of the models
on the training dataset. From the table, we could see that the ﬁrst four strategies performed
better than the last four as their gained lower RMSE scores. Among all the eight strategies,
taking the Max of the six predicted DIH Y3 s was the best with 0.474RMSE.

4.5

Final Result

The best RMSE we have achieved for predicting DIH Y3 was 0.474, using the ensemble of
classiﬁcation models and the ensemble of regression models. The accuracy of prediction is
shown in Table 11. The ﬁnal model was able to predict 81.9% of the cases exactly the same
as the true DIH as given in the outcome dataset, 92.9% of the cases within a day oﬀ the true
1798

Historical Claims Data Based Hybrid Predictive Model for Hospitalization Chengcheng Liu, Yong Shi

Ensemble Methods
Max of (predicted DIH)
Median of (predicted DIH)
Average of (predicted DIH)
Majority Vote (predicted DIH)
Model Weight ∝ Pr(Closest to the truth of Training Data)
Model Weights ∝ 1/ Training RMSE
Model Weights ∝ Pr(Correct prediction of Training Data)
Model Weights from linear regression

Testing RMSE
0.474
0.478
0.478
0.481
0.482
0.483
0.482
0.518

Table 10: Testing RMSEs of diﬀerent ensemble methods

DIH and 95.9% of the cases with two days oﬀ the true DIH .

Criteria
P rediction = T ruth
| P rediction − T ruth |≤ 1
| P rediction − T ruth |≤ 2

Accuracy
0.819
0.929
0.959

Table 11: Prediction accuracy for DIH Y3

5

Conclusion

In this paper, we considered the dataset from the Heritage Health Prize Competition to develop
a predictive model for estimating the number of days a patient may be hospitalized next year.
We used three diﬀerent existing classiﬁcation models and six regression models and their ensembles for building the model, then evaluate their performance in terms of RMSE. Ensemble
of classiﬁcation models followed by ensemble of regression models worked the best, giving a
0.474 RMSE and a corresponding 81.9% accuracy in predicting DaysInHospital . Out of single classiﬁcation models, Alpha Tree gave the best ROC curve and the corresponding AUC at
0.762.Please note that although we report the confusion matrices obtained from the predictions
of the classiﬁcation model, more emphasis is towards obtaining as high sensitivity as possible.
The reason is that the purpose of classiﬁcation is to identify the likelihood of a given individual
to experience hospitalization next year. On the other hand, out of single regression models,
Principal Component Regression gave the lowest RMSE at 0.478 on the testing dataset. However, comparisons between the histograms of predicted DaysInHospital and true DaysInHospital
show that all the regression models tend to underestimate DaysInHospital .
In conclusion, we have demonstrated a predictive model built upon patients’ historical claims
has the potential to predict how much time a given individual may spend in hospitals. Then
individuals with high estimates of DaysInHospital can then be monitored closely by their personal doctors or insurance companies such that the appropriate outpatient care is provided to
the patient when required. This would help in reducing the unnecessary hospitalizations saving
millions of dollars.
1799

Historical Claims Data Based Hybrid Predictive Model for Hospitalization Chengcheng Liu, Yong Shi

6

Future Work

Based on the hybrid predictive models illustrated above, we obtained a precised guessing on how
many days people might be in hospital in the next year. The dataset is in million-level, which
is really ’Big-Data’ in hospitalization issues. However, many techniques in data-preprocessing
should be applied due to some unexpected properties of the given dataset. In future, if we
can obtain more historical data in hospital claims, the features can be smoothed better and
performance of hybrid models can be improved. In the initial stage of this project, we also
tried many other famous algorithms such as random forest and SVM. For linear kernal SVM,
it will classiﬁcate all entries to be negative. For random forest and nonlinear kernel SVM, the
time consumption was very high. We will leave the improvement of these algorithms to future
work.

References
[1] https://www.heritagehealthprize.com/c/hhp
[2] https://www.heritagehealthprize.com/c/hhp/data Data Dictionary.pdf
[3] Minyard, Karen J., et al. ’Transforming the delivery of rural health care in Georgia: state partnership strategy for developing rural health networks.’ The Journal of Rural Health 19.S5 (2003):
361-371.
[4] Friedman, Jerome H. ”Greedy function approximation: a gradient boosting machine.(English
summary).” Ann. Statist 29.5 (2001): 1189-1232.
[5] http://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/gbm/index.html
[6] http://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/neuralnet/neuralnet.pdf
[7] Park, Yubin, and Joydeep Ghosh. ”Ensembles of alpha-Trees for Imbalanced Classiﬁcation Problems.” (2012): 1-1.

1800

