Procedia Computer Science
Volume 29, 2014, Pages 1621–1630
ICCS 2014. 14th International Conference on Computational Science

A method to ascertain rapid transit systems’ throughput
distribution using network analysis
Muhamad Azfar Ramli, Christopher Pineda Monterola∗, Gary Lee Kee Khoon,
and Terence Hung Gih Guang
Institute of High Performance Computing,
Agency for Science, Technology and Research,
Fusionopolis, 1 Fusionopolis Way, #16-16 Connexis, Singapore 138632
{ramlimab,monterolac,leekk,terence}@ihpc.a-star.edu.sg

Abstract
We present a method of predicting the distribution of passenger throughput across stations
and lines of a city rapid transit system by calculating the normalized betweenness centrality
of the nodes (stations) and edges of the rail network. The method is evaluated by correlating
the distribution of betweenness centrality against throughput distribution which is calculated
using actual passenger ridership data. Our ticketing data is from the rail transport system of
Singapore that comprises more than 14 million journeys over a span of one week. We demonstrate that removal of outliers representing about 10% of the stations produces a statistically
signiﬁcant correlation above 0.7. Interestingly, these outliers coincide with stations that opened
six months before the time the ridership data was collected, hinting that travel routines along
these stations have not yet settled to its equilibrium. The correlation is improved signiﬁcantly
when the data points are split according to their separate lines, illustrating diﬀerences in the
intrinsic characteristics of each line. The simple procedure established here shows that static
network analysis of the structure of a transport network can allow transport planners to predict with suﬃcient accuracy the passenger ridership, without requiring dynamic and complex
simulation methods.
Keywords: rapid transit, passenger ridership, betweenness centrality, throughput, correlation.

1

Introduction

The burden of an increasing population and the severe limitations of available land continue
to challenge transport planners all around the world. While mass rapid transit systems are
generally successful in reducing commuter reliance on road networks, the prediction of the
distribution of passenger throughput across stations is a diﬃcult task to accomplish. The task
∗ Corresponding

Author

Selection and peer-review under responsibility of the Scientiﬁc Programme Committee of ICCS 2014
c The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V.
doi:10.1016/j.procs.2014.05.147

1621

Ascertaining Rapid Transit Throughput using Network Analysis

Ramli, Monterola, Lee and Hung

Figure 1: A map of the rail transport system of Singapore used to validate our methodology.
The network consists of four distinct lines which are marked here using four diﬀerent colours;
i.e, red, green, purple and yellow, while stations marked in black indicate interchanges between
the lines.
is further complicated by the need for constant expansion of the transit system to accommodate
a growing population. The addition of new lines, stations and interchanges cause various
complex changes to the ridership thus modifying the utility of all stations within the system.
It is therefore diﬃcult to predict the impact of these changes on the robustness and economic
viability of the system. Transport planners would therefore have to design based on an excess
ﬂow model instead of optimal ﬂow model in order to accommodate these changes within the
transport system. In this paper, we oﬀer a simple procedure that uses network analysis to
extract relevant structural information from a rail network and predicting to within a reasonable
accuracy, the distribution of passenger throughput. Although this methodology assumes that
the pattern of passenger travel would in fact conform to the capacity of the network, we show
that for our purpose, this is suﬃcient. It is therefore hoped that by using this prediction,
transport planners can have a basic understanding of the eﬀect of structural changes to the
network and adjust the capacity of the network accordingly so as to maximise the utility of the
transport system.

2

The Singapore Rail Transport System Network

We validate the accuracy of our methodology by using the example of the rail transport system
(RTS) network of Singapore which consists of 90 train stations connected by four distinct
lines. Figure 1 shows a snapshot of the current Singapore rail transport network. In the latest
Land Transport Masterplan 2013 [11], the Land Transport Authority of Singapore has also
announced that by 2020, an additional ﬁve more lines will be added to the existing rail system;
eﬀectively doubling the number of interchanges in the network, thus increasing tremendously
the complexity of the network.
The public bus transportation and the taxi system form the other two components of the
public transportation system in Singapore; these utilize the road network infrastructure to move
passengers to and from their required origins and destinations. Together, these three systems
provide an economical alternative to private modes of transportation in the crowded city-state
of Singapore. This is especially important since the entry cost of owning private vehicles in
Singapore is possibly one of the highest in the world today, due to the tight government policy
1622

Ascertaining Rapid Transit Throughput using Network Analysis

Ramli, Monterola, Lee and Hung

that aims to eﬀectively reduce road traﬃc congestion.
Several articles in the literature have conducted prior analysis on various features of the
RTS network of Singapore. Derrible et al compared the Singapore rapid transit network with
various other subway or rapid transit systems in the world by analyzing the various network
properties. [5, 7] However they only considered the interchanges as the nodes within the network
and considered all the stations in between as being part of a single edge. This helped to unify
the various features of diﬀerent networks and made it easier for comparison between networks
of diﬀerent cities[6], however this is not suitable if the analysis requires us to discern the ﬂow
patterns through diﬀerent stations within the lines. Soh et al [13] conducted a comprehensive
analysis of the properties of both the rail and public bus transport network, however this
analysis does not take into consideration the actual physical structure of the network. Instead,
they used a weighted network approach that connects various stations together by the frequency
of passengers traveling between the two stations. Notably, both analyses were also carried out
prior to the addition of the most recently added line (Line 4 marked in yellow in Figure 1) to
the network. Our work therefore aims to extend the work conducted here by validating the use
of network centrality measures to characterize ﬂow through the transport network and ensure
that a consistent methodology can be applied regardless of changes made to the network.

3

Methodology

In this section, we introduce how the calculations of the key variables required to analyze the
network; namely betweenness centrality and passenger throughput, were conducted. We use
generic graph theory notation to characterize the network G = (V, E) with vertices v ∈ V and
edges e = (vi , vj ) ∈ E. We consider each of the 90 train stations as the nodes in our network
while a single edge is added to the network for every portion of the network which connects
two adjacent stations via a rail line.
We denote the simple path joining the nodes s and t by the vector p˜(s → t) =
[s, (s, v1), v1 , (v1 , v2 ), .., (vi , t), t], which consists of the set of nodes and edges through which
the path traverses. For unweighted networks, the cost of a path is typically deﬁned by the
length of the path |˜
p(s, t)| (i.e, the number of nodes and edges traversed) while for a weighted
network, the cost is taken to be the total sum of the cost incurred for each node and edge while
weight(i). As there may be multiple possible paths between the
traversing the path: i∈p(s→t)
˜
nodes s and t, the path which incurs minimum cost is known as the shortest path and this path
can be obtained through various diﬀerent algorithms, most notable in the literature include
Dijsktra’s algorithm and the A* algorithm [1].

3.1

Computing the Betweenness Centrality of the Network

Betweenness centrality was ﬁrst introduced by Freeman [8] to measure node importance in large
social networks which were not fully connected. Its use in predicting traﬃc ﬂow has also been
previously published, with various authors [2, 3] debating its accuracy and usability. Diﬀerent
scenarios were also studied ranging from information traﬃc in communication networks [10] and
road traﬃc networks. [9] What is agreed upon is that betweenness is a topological property
of the network and any eﬀort in predicting traﬃc ﬂow would therefore assume that the ﬂow
through the network is directly aﬀected by the structural property of the transport network.
Betweenness centrality has also been used to analyze the resilience of a network.[14] By
removing key nodes or edges with high betweenness in the network, it can be observed that the
1623

Ascertaining Rapid Transit Throughput using Network Analysis

Ramli, Monterola, Lee and Hung

ﬂow patterns through diﬀerent paths will be highly aﬀected. This simulates the eﬀect of disruption in real physical transportation networks where traﬃc jams or train breakdowns frequently
occur and helps transport planners identify whether their system incorporates suﬃcient design
robustness or if it requires further upgrades to its overall resilience.
For the purpose of modeling betweenness centrality for our rail transport network, we deﬁne
the shortest path as the path which incurs the least amount of travel time between two stations.
To do this, we add up the overall travel time cost of all the edges within the path. The travel
time between each edge ranges between 2-5 minutes depending on the distance between each
station and these values are determined by using the information on the travel time between
stations in the network as indicated by the transport operator on their website [4]. In addition,
we use the assumption that for every transfer at an interchange, a transfer cost of 4 minutes is
incurred. This reﬂects the average walking time needed to move from one platform to another
within the interchange. A modiﬁed calculation of weighted shortest path is therefore required to
identify the path of least cost between two stations. This is because the cost of 4 minutes when
passing through an interchange node is only incurred when the route changes to a diﬀerent line.
No other cost is incurred when traveling through all other nodes on the path. It is also noted
that for a single origin-destination pair, there may still be multiple routes through the network
which incurs the same cost. When calculating betweenness centrality, all possible routes of
equally minimal cost are taken into equal consideration.
The betweenness centrality bc (v) of a node in a network is deﬁned as follows:
bc (v) =
s,t∈V,s=t

σ(s → t|v)
σ(s → t)

(1)

where σ(s → t) is the sum of shortest paths between the stations s and t while σ(s → t|v)
is the sum of shortest paths between s and t that pass through the node v.
Since a single path passes through multiple edges and stations, it is trivial to realize that
by adding up the counts for multiple stations, the total sum of bc for all stations will typically
not add up to 1. We therefore normalize the betweenness value by dividing by the total sum
of betweenness for all stations so that the distribution of values can then be easily compared
against the distribution of throughput.
bc (v)

ˆbc (v) =

bc (v)

(2)

v∈V

By replacing the terms v ∈ V with e ∈ E in equations (1) and (2), we can also obtain the
same deﬁnition for edge betweenness, and these values are also similarly normalized.

3.2

Computing the Distribution of Passenger Throughput from Ridership Data

Given that np represents the total number of passenger journeys traveling through a network
for a speciﬁed amount of time and np (v) as the number of passengers which visit the station v
during their respective journeys, we deﬁne the passenger throughput pt (v) through the station
v as the fraction of passengers that visit a speciﬁc station v:
pt (v) =
1624

np (v)
np

(3)

Ascertaining Rapid Transit Throughput using Network Analysis

Ramli, Monterola, Lee and Hung

Our deﬁnition of whether a passenger has visited a station is through two distinct ways;
either they have passed through the station during their journey while being on board a train
without entering or leaving the station, or they may have started or ended their journey at
that speciﬁed station. Either way, the value of throughput obtained provides us with a simple
measure for the average crowdedness and utility of a station. Notably, the quantity pt is a
dynamic variable that varies with diﬀerent timings (the throughput of a station on a weekday
may diﬀer greatly from that during the weekend). In this paper, we measure the average total
ridership using data obtained for a typical week from Monday to Sunday. This helps us to deﬁne
a static characteristic of the average throughput that the station experiences during the week
and we can now compare this measure against betweenness centrality, which is intrinsically a
static structural measure.
Whenever a passenger uses the mass rapid transit in Singapore, the smart card ticketing
system captures the origin time and station where he begins his journey as well as the time and
station where he taps out at his destination station. Using an anonymized dataset that captures
this activity for a week long period between Monday to Sunday provided by the Land Transport
Authority of Singapore, we are therefore able to estimate the actual passenger throughput. The
data consists of a total of 14 million journeys moving between all 90 stations thus giving us an
adequate amount of samples of throughput occurring between all the stations. This gives us
an accurate measure of the average throughput occurring within the stations. Unfortunately,
we cannot exactly determine which route each passenger took in order to reach his or her
respective destination as the data only tracks the start and end points of their individual
journeys. However, in a previous study, we have shown that by analyzing the variation and
distribution of travel times occurring for a speciﬁc origin-destination pair, we can obtain an
accurate estimate of the fraction of passengers who travel using speciﬁc routes between a speciﬁc
origin-destination pair [12].
We are therefore are able to glean the following two quantities from the data,
1. the fraction of travel that occur between a speciﬁc origin-destination pair out of all possible
travels, and
2. the approximate fraction of passenger who travel through a speciﬁc station given a origindestination pair.
The passenger throughput can therefore be calculated by using the following formula:

pt (v) =
s,t∈V,s=t

=
s,t∈V,s=t

=

np (s → t|v)
np

(4)

np (s → t) np (s → t|v)
×
np
np (s → t)

(5)

f (s → t) × f (s → t|v)

(6)

s,t∈V,s=t

where f (s → t) =

np (s→t)
np

is the fraction of journeys traveling between the stations s and t
n (s→t|v)

out of all the passenger travels and f (s → t|v) = npp (s→t) , the fraction of passengers traveling
between stations s and t that pass through the station v.
1625

Ascertaining Rapid Transit Throughput using Network Analysis

(a) Original

Ramli, Monterola, Lee and Hung

(b) After removal of 10 (total 90) outlier datapoints

Figure 2: Comparison of Passenger Throughput(Nodes). Signiﬁcant improvement in the correlation is obtained by removing 10 nodes from the dataset. However, all the outlier nodes
correspond exactly to the northern portion of Line 4 (see Figure 4a).
Again, we consider the normalized form of pt given by:
pˆt (v) =

pt (v)
pt (v)

(7)

v∈V

By replacing v ∈ V with e ∈ E in equations (4-7), we can also consider passenger throughput
through an edge and compare this to edge betweenness.

4

Correlating the Distribution of Passenger Throughput
against Betweenness Centrality

In order to investigate the dependence of passenger throughput against betweenness centrality,
we calculate the Pearson’s correlation coeﬃcient ρpt ,bc between the two variables calculated for
all the stations and edges and analyze the ﬁt of the data using linear regression. Figures 2 and
3 illustrate the results of the regression done for the full set of stations and edges respectively.
We ﬁnd that the values of betweenness centrality and the passenger throughput for stations
give rise to a correlation coeﬃcient of 0.5345. (see Figure 2) However, most of the signiﬁcant
outlier nodes and edges belong to the northern portion of only one of the lines, namely Line 4
(see Figure 4a), a line that we noted was added only about 6 months prior to the collection of the
ridership data. In comparison, the other next to newest line, Line 3 was added ten years prior to
the data collection period. By removing these data points from the collection and repeating the
correlation analysis, we found that the correlation coeﬃcient obtained improved signiﬁcantly to
about 0.74076 although only 10 out of 90 (11.1%) of the data points were removed. A similar
trend was observed for the correlation when considering the edges of the network. Originally,
a poor correlation of only 0.3379 was obtained, however this improved tremendously to 0.7074
when 12 out of 97 (12.4%) outlier edges were removed. (see Figure 3 and Figure 4b)
We then correlated the betweenness and passenger throughput distributions separately for
stations within the same line and considered interchanges as a separate classiﬁcation. We now
1626

Ascertaining Rapid Transit Throughput using Network Analysis

(a) Original

Ramli, Monterola, Lee and Hung

(b) After removal of 12 (total 97) outlier datapoints

Figure 3: Comparison of Passenger Throughput(Edges). Signiﬁcant improvement in the correlation is obtained by removing 12 edges from the dataset. The outlier edges correspond exactly
to the northern portion of Line 4. (See Figure 4b).

(a) Outlier stations

(b) Outlier Edges

Figure 4: Outlier data points removed to signiﬁcantly improve correlation between throughput
and betweenness distribution. The stations and lines correspond exactly to the northern portion
of the most recently added line, Line 4 in the rail network.
ﬁnd a signiﬁcant improvement in the individual correlations when they are considered separately
without outlier removal, as the values of now range between 0.6 to 0.9713 (see Figure 5). The
results also reveal that the values for the interchanges featured poorer correlation as compared
to the other classiﬁcations.
Interestingly, the Line 4 group of stations showed a division between the northern portion of
the line as compared to the southern portion, thus creating the group of outlier nodes. However,
the correlation obtained as a single line was the higher than that obtained from any other line.
The gradient obtained from the line of ﬁt for the Line 4 group of stations was also signiﬁcantly
higher (3.4715) as compared to the gradients obtained for the other lines (0.621 - 1.116) which
caused the combined correlation to be poor. This shows a diﬀerence in relationship between
passenger throughput and betweenness centrality for this new line which may suggest that the
passenger throughput through this line is characterized diﬀerently as compared to the other
1627

Ascertaining Rapid Transit Throughput using Network Analysis

(a) All stations

(d) Line 3

(b) Line 1

(e) Line 4

Ramli, Monterola, Lee and Hung

(c) Line 2

(f) Interchanges

Figure 5: Correlation between Passenger Throughput and Betweenness Centrality for Nodes
split into the diﬀerent lines. Interestingly, the Line 4 stations c) are separated into two portions,
the high centrality stations correspond to the northern stations while the remaining stations
have low centrality. Also notably, the interchanges f) display poor correlation and spread of
values, in particularly those with high centrality and throughput.
lines.
We believe there are several possible reasons that could have contributed to this eﬀect,
ﬁrstly, the trains on this speciﬁc line have half the capacity as compared to the other trains
and this could contribute to a diﬀerence in throughput. Secondly, there may be some dynamic
characteristics of passenger ridership which require more time for maturity before the passenger
throughput can begin to match the structural capability of the network itself in conveying
passengers. This is shown by relatively common correlation displayed by the remaining lines.
Finally, there is a signiﬁcant structural diﬀerence between Line 4 which forms a longitudinal loop
connecting several lines, as compared to the remaining lines which are mostly radially shaped
connecting the central portion of Singapore to the outer regions. This structural diﬀerence
could possibly cause this diﬀerence in observation of the relationship between throughput and
centrality for their stations.

5

Conclusion

Despite the fact that not all the passengers use shortest paths to travel between stations and
that the distribution of passengers traveling between various origin-destination pairs is not uniformly distributed, we demonstrate that betweenness centrality can still predict to a reasonable
accuracy, the level of utilization between diﬀerent portions of the network. This is shown by
the high level correlation between betweenness centrality and passenger throughput when most
1628

Ascertaining Rapid Transit Throughput using Network Analysis

Ramli, Monterola, Lee and Hung

of the stations and edges of the network are being considered.
In addition, we found that the outliers of the correlation correspond exactly to the stations
and edges of a new section of the network. This suggests that although the passengers generally
conform to the structure of the network when utilizing the transportation system, this conformity is reduced when dynamic changes are made to the structure. There may therefore exist
some lag time before passengers adapt to the new structure and adopt more eﬃcient routes
which did not exist previously. Conﬁrmation of this hypothesis would however, require a comparative analysis with the current data against a diﬀerent set of ridership data which include
periods before and after the addition of these lines.
We have also shown that correlation improves signiﬁcantly when distinct lines are correlated
separately. The diﬀerent lines exhibit variation in slopes, indicating that the unique structural
characteristics of lines impacts the pattern of ridership within the network. This is expected
since the distribution of passenger ridership gradually evolves with the structure by adjusting to
the availability of routes and convenience to individual passengers. With increasing complexity
planned to be added in the network in the future, we hope that this work will serve as a
standard methodology in capturing some base line information on the expected utility of a
speciﬁc segment of the rapid transit system.

5.1

Acknowledgements

We acknowledge Erika Fille Legara and Vicknesh Selvam for useful discussions and for processing of the datasets used for validation in the paper. We would also like to thank the Land
Transport Authority of Singapore for providing passenger ridership data that helped us validate
our method. This research is supported by the Science and Engineering Research Council of
the Agency for Science, Technology and Research (A*STAR) of Singapore. (Complex Systems
Programme grant number 122 45 04056).

References
[1] Ravindra K Ahuja, Thomas L Magnanti, and James B Orlin. Network ﬂows: theory, algorithms,
and applications. 1993.
[2] Yaniv Altshuler, R Puzis, Y Elovici, S Bekhor, and AS Pentland. Augmented betweenness centrality for mobility prediction in transportation networks. In International Workshop on Finding
Patterns of Human Behaviors in NEtworks and MObility Data, NEMO11, 2011.
[3] Stephen P Borgatti. Centrality and network ﬂow. Social networks, 27(1):55–71, 2005.
[4] SMRT Corp. Smrt network map. Accessed [online] on:, January 2014. http://www.smrt.com.sg/
Trains/NetworkMap.aspx.
[5] Sybil Derrible. Network centrality of metro systems. PloS one, 7(7):e40575, 2012.
[6] Sybil Derrible and Christopher Kennedy. Characterizing metro networks: state, form, and structure. Transportation, 37(2):275–297, 2010.
[7] Sybil Derrible and Christopher Kennedy. The complexity and robustness of metro networks.
Physica A: Statistical Mechanics and its Applications, 389(17):3678–3691, 2010.
[8] Linton C Freeman. A set of measures of centrality based on betweenness. Sociometry, pages 35–41,
1977.
[9] Song Gao, Yaoli Wang, Yong Gao, and Yu Liu. Understanding urban traﬃc-ﬂow characteristics: a rethinking of betweenness centrality. Environment and Planning B: Planning and Design,
40(1):135–153, 2013.

1629

Ascertaining Rapid Transit Throughput using Network Analysis

Ramli, Monterola, Lee and Hung

[10] Petter Holme. Congestion and centrality in traﬃc ﬂow on complex networks. Advances in Complex
Systems, 6(02):163–176, 2003.
[11] Singapore Land Transport Authority. Land transport master plan 2013. Accessed [online] on:,
January 2014. http://www.lta.gov.sg/content/ltaweb/en/about-lta/what-we-do/ltmp2013.
html.
[12] Christopher Monterola, Erika Fille Legara, Pan Di, Gary Kee Khoon Lee, and Terence Gih Guang
Hung. Non-invasive procedure to probe the route choices of commuters in rail transit systems.
September 2013. In: 2013 European Conference on Complex Systems Book of Abstracts; 1620 September 2013; World Trade Center Barcelona. Published by Complex Systems Society and
complexitat.CAT.
[13] Harold Soh, Sonja Lim, Tianyou Zhang, Xiuju Fu, Gary Kee Khoon Lee, Terence Gih Guang
Hung, Pan Di, Silvester Prakasam, and Limsoon Wong. Weighted complex network analysis of
travel routes on the singapore public transportation system. Physica A: Statistical Mechanics and
its Applications, 389(24):5852–5863, 2010.
[14] Junjie Wang, Yishuai Li, Jingyu Liu, Kun He, and Pu Wang. Vulnerability analysis and passenger
source prediction in urban rail transit networks. PloS one, 8(11), 2013.

1630

