Procedia Computer Science
Volume 29, 2014, Pages 1644–1645
ICCS 2014. 14th International Conference on Computational Science

High Performance Computations for Decision Support
in Critical Situations: Introduction to the Third
Workshop on Urgent Computing
1

Alexander Boukhanovsky1, Marian Bubak2
ITMO University, Saint-Petersburg, Russia, NIAS, Wassenaar, The Netherlands
boukhanovsky@mail.ifmo.ru
2
AGH University of Science and Technology, Krakow, Poland
bubak@agh.edu.pl

Abstract
This paper is the preface to the Third Workshop on Urgent Co mputing . The Urgent Co mputing
workshops have been traditionally embedded in frame of International Conference of Co mputational
Science (ICCS) since 2012. They are aimed to develop a dialogue on the present and future of research
and applications associated with the large-scale co mputations for decision support in crit ical situations.
The key workshop topics in 2014 are: methods and principles of urgent computing, middleware,
platforms and infrastructures, simu lation-based decision support for co mp lex systems control,
interactive visualization and virtual reality for decision support in emergency situations, domain-area
applications to emergency situations, including natural and man-made d isasters, e.g. transportation
problems, epidemics, criminal acts, etc.
Keywords: urgent computing, early warning system, emergency computations, decision support, large-scale
computations

Co mplex, large-scale, collaborative simulat ions are becoming mo re and more crucial for decision
making in critical situations like floods, earthquakes, wildfires, terroristic attacks, ep idemics,
pandemics, instabilities in financial markets and similar. At the same time recent advances in
experimental techniques such as detectors, sensors, and scanners have opened up new vistas for realtime initial data collection and aggregation in many levels of details. The comp lete cascade from the
individual co mponents to the fully integrated multi-science systems crosses many orders of magnitude
in temporal and spatial scales. These principles change the approach to decision support into datadriven simulations, explorat ion and the selection of the appropriate scenarios. The ultimate challenge
is to not only make the simu lation processes in different scales, but also provide their mutual coupling
across scales in the overall system together with the real-t ime data assimilation into computational
models [1]. Thus, it leads to four types of inho mogeneity in decision s upport computation problems
due to:
 diversity of co mputational scenarios used for the exp loration and decision support in critical
situation, in respect to the features of its evolution;

1644

Selection and peer-review under responsibility of the Scientiﬁc Programme Committee of ICCS 2014
c The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V.
doi:10.1016/j.procs.2014.05.149

Introduction to the Third Workshop on Urgent Computing

A. Boukhanovsky and M. Bubak

 composition of the various simu lation models and the software for different computational
platforms and resources;
 irregularity, uncertainties and incompleteness of the input data;
Additionally, the amount of co mputations which is required for the early recognition of the critical
situations and for the decision support while expect ing the critical situation is rather different. Jo intly,
it gave birth to Urgent Co mputing (UC) – a new area of co mputer science addressing algorithms,
methods and tools enabling prioritized, immediate and effective access to large compute and storage
systems (computers, grids, clouds) for such emergency computations which require clever decision
making. UC is being considered as computational services (or resources) since data services work
together in distributed computational environment to help decision makers create an optimal behavior
scenario within a strict time limit.
UC is the basic technology for the Early Warning Systems (EWS) which are tradit ionally targeted
for the disaster prediction and prevention in a lot of areas (e.g. environmental science, epidemiology,
telecommun ications, etc.). Generally the UC-solutions were mainly do main-specified [2]. Ho wever
the development of domain-neutral middleware [3] demands deeper studies in several co mputer
science areas such as the methods and algorithms of providing immediate access to large scale
compute and storage facilit ies , data placement, resource management and optimizat ion for urgent
computing, solutions enabling collaboration, SLA and policies [4]. Inspired by these researches, the
recent UC is the general technology to design EWS for decision support in crit ical situations
comprising co mplex technical, environ mental and social systems . It provides wider consideration of
UC as the body of the system bases (including middleware for UC and EWS), scalable methods,
algorith ms and domain-specific software fo r the forecast and explorat ion of critical situations,
techniques for decision support of the user-end in case of emergency (including visualization and
virtual reality), and the applications stipulated by real-world customers.
The Urgent Co mputing workshop has become an integral part of International Conference of
Co mputational Science (ICCS) s tarting 2012. It aims to develop a dialogue on the present and future
of research and applications associated with the large-scale co mputations for decision support in
critical situations. The key workshop topics in 2014 are : methods and the principles of UC, UC
middleware: p latforms and infrastructures , simulation-based decision support for co mplex systems ,
interactive visualization for decision support in emergency situations , domain-area applications to
emergency situations, including natural and man-made disasters. This workshop combines several
papers devoted to infrastructural aspects of UC, including resource scheduling and the use of mobile
devices, since the papers are about possible applicat ions of UC in a wide set of domain areas . These
applications include: marine rescue operations, flood prevention, transportation problems (including
evacuation) and the shipping in severe weather conditions.
The management of workshop was partially financially supported by the Govern ment of the
Russian Federation, Grant 074-U01.

References
[1]
[2]
[3]
[4]

P.M.A. Sloot. “The cross-disciplinary road to true co mputational science”, Journal of Comput.
Sci. – vol. 1, issue 3, p. 131, 2010
A.V. Boukhanovsky, S.V. Ivanov. “Urgent Co mputing for Operational Storm Surge Forecasting
in Saint-Petersburg”, Procedia Comput. Sci., vol. 9, p. 1704–1712, 2012
P. Beckman, S. Nadella, N. Trebon, and I. Beschastnikh. “SPRUCE: A System for Supporting
Urgent High-Performance Co mputing”, Grid-Based Problem Solving Environments, vol. 239,
pp. 295-311, 2007
S.H. Leong, A.Frank, D. Kran zlmüller. “Leverag ing e-Infrastructures for Urgent Co mputing” //
Procedia Comput. Sci., vol. 18, p. 2177-2186, 2013

1645

