Procedia Computer Science
Volume 29, 2014, Pages 299–309
ICCS 2014. 14th International Conference on Computational Science

Computing, a powerful tool for improving the parameters
simulation quality in ﬂood prediction
Adriana Gaudiani1,3 , Emilio Luque2 , Pablo Garc´ıa4 , Mariano Re4 Marcelo
Naiouf3 , and Armando Di Giusti3
1

4

Instituto de Ciencias, Universidad Nacional de General Sarmiento, Buenos Aires, Argentina
agaudi@ungs.edu.ar
2
Dept. de Arquitectura de Computadores y Sistemas Operativos, Universitat Aut`
onoma de
Barcelona, 08193 Bellaterra(Barcelona)Espa˜
na
3
Instituto de Investigaci´
on en Inform´
atica LIDI (III-LIDI), Universidad Nacional de La Plata,
Buenos Aires, Argentina
Programa de Hidr´
aulica Computacional, Laboratorio de Hidr´
aulica, Instituto Nacional del Agua,
Argentina

Abstract
Floods have caused widespread damage throughout the world. Modelling and simulation provide solutions and tools which enable us to forecast and make necessary steps toward prevention.
One problem that must be handled by physical systems simulators is the parameters uncertainty and their impact on output results, causing prediction errors. In this paper, we address
input parameter uncertainty toward providing a methodology to tune a ﬂood simulator and
achieve lower error between simulated and observed results. The tuning methodology, through
a parametric simulation technique, implements a ﬁrst stage to ﬁnd an adjusted set of critical
parameters which will be used to validate the predictive capability of the simulator in order
to reduce the disagreement between observed data and simulated results. We concentrate our
experiments in three signiﬁcant monitoring stations, located at the lower basin of the Paran´a
River in Argentina, and the percentage of improvement over the original simulator values ranges
from 33 to 60%.
Keywords: Parametric simulation, tuning simulation, ﬂood prediction, ﬂood simulation improvement,
high performance computing in ﬂood simulation

1

Introduction

In recent decades, computational ﬂuid simulation has emerged as an area of intense work with
an increasing demand for higher precision. Developments of hydraulic simulation models to
perform ﬂood routing evolved from manual systems in the middle of the 20th century to current
computer-based systems. Predictions of ﬂood inundation extent have been made possible by
advances in numerical modelling techniques and increases in computer power [8] [2].
Selection and peer-review under responsibility of the Scientiﬁc Programme Committee of ICCS 2014
c The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V.
doi:10.1016/j.procs.2014.05.027

299

Computing, a powerful tool in ﬂood prediction

Gaudiani, Luque, Garc´ıa, Re, Naiouf and Di Giusti

The decision making to reduce the injuries and deaths can be improved if it is assisted by
technical measures and evaluation methodologies that enhance the understanding of ﬂood risk or
vulnerability [1]. Computational models are used to estimate ﬂood depth and inundation extent.
These models are being increasingly used to make predictions, despite there being a series of
limitations which cause a lack of accuracy in forecasting [7]. The sources of uncertainty are
those derived from uncertainties stemming from the mathematical models, from approximations
in numerical solutions and from the diﬃculty of providing the model with accurate input values.
Imprecision in the values of input parameters is the most common source of this problem [17]
[13].
The study of hydrodynamic processes in surface waters, such as rivers, has played a pioneering role in the development of numerical models for use in hydraulic engineering. This has led
to the production of relatively sophisticated software in accounting for a large amount of runoﬀ
details: watercourse levels, associated ﬂows and ﬂoodplains occupation [18]. Hydrodynamic
modelling of a ﬂuvial channel involves deﬁning certain parameters as input variables which,
for various reasons, may incorporate uncertainties in the results. Firstly, these parameters are
measured or estimated at speciﬁc sectors, which is necessary to interpolate values in the whole
domain. Secondly, the parameters’ measurement is not direct, as it involves an estimation error
associated with the estimation methodology [2].
The main idea of this work is to minimize the diﬀerences that exists between real and simulated results. The purpose of this goal is to alert as early as possible and certainly on the
occurrence of ﬂoods and very low river water at the river basin in study. To overcome this
problem, we use a computational tuning methodology to enhance a ﬂood simulation program,
thus minimizing the eﬀect of parameter uncertainty on the simulated results. We use a parametric simulation in order to ﬁnd the best set of parameters, or adjusted set, which will be
used as the input set for the underlying ﬂood simulator emulating an ”ideal” ﬂood simulator
as much as possible. The parametric simulation results in a large number of scenarios carrying
out the search for the optimal set of input parameters. This process requires a huge amount of
computation and it is on possible with resources in parallel programming and high performance
computing.
This paper is organized as follows: After the introduction in Section 2 we present the
computational system EZEIZA V and the main features of the river model whose ﬂood routing
is simulated using Ezeiza. In Section 3 we introduce the tuning methodology to reduce output
errors overcoming the input-parameter uncertainty problem. In Section 4, the experimentation
implemented is described. Finally, a discussion on results obtained and a ﬁnal conclusion is
drawn in Section 5.

2

The ﬂood wave propagation simulator: EZEIZA V

Our work starts using a computer model of a real system such as ﬂood events. The computational model is the conceptual model implemented on a computer, and the conceptual model is
the mathematical representation of the physical system to be modeled [15]. We represent the
idea in Fig. 1
To perform this work we selected the software EZEIZA V(Ezeiza), currently used as one of
the tools of the Sistema de Informaci´
on y Alerta Hidrol´ogico (SIyAH) of the Instituto Nacional
del Agua (INA) at Buenos Aires, Argentina, in order to alert as early as possible on the
occurrence of extreme water level events at La Plata Basin in South America [9].
Flood routing models approaches are hydrologic and hydraulic. Hydrologic routing uses
the conservation of mass equation, but makes simplifying assumptions. On the other hand,
300

Computing, a powerful tool in ﬂood prediction

Gaudiani, Luque, Garc´ıa, Re, Naiouf and Di Giusti

Figure 1: The real system Paran´a Basin and the simulation process.
hydraulic routing uses both the conservation of mass and the conservation of momentum equations, but requires much more topographic and ﬂow information. Because of the complicated
numerical methods used, hydraulic routing equations can only be solved by using computer
software. Ezeiza is based on a hydraulic approach. Ezeiza simulator software and Paran´
a River
model are deﬁned in the next section.

2.1

The computational system Ezeiza

Ezeiza is a computational implementation of a one-dimensional hydrodynamic model based on
the Saint Venant equations, which were developed by Laboratorio de Hidr´
aulica Computacional
of INA [11]. Ezeiza software family started to be developed in the ´70s. This simulator was chosen
because:
• It exports results to ﬁles that may be processed by statistical and/or mathematical software.
• It makes possible parametric simulations by changing the parameters values in the input
ﬁles. This is essential to address the tuning process.
Computational model validation is introduced in [9] and it was performed with the Paran´a
River model we use in this work. An exhaustive performance study was carried out later
by Ing. Latessa [10] at INA, who stated the need to improve Ezeiza simulated results. The
study of Latessa was aimed to improve the modelling of the Paran´
a River and provided more
certainty to the input data, because the input parameters were measured decades ago. As shown
in the report, the accuracy of the model was quite improved. However, diﬀerences between
the measured values and the output data of the simulator in monitoring stations can still be
301

Computing, a powerful tool in ﬂood prediction

W atercourse
Paran´a
Paraguay

Length(Km)
1083
376

Gaudiani, Luque, Garc´ıa, Re, Naiouf and Di Giusti

Sections
76
77

Boundary
U pstream
Flow Q
Height H

Boundary
Downstream
Height H
−−−−−

Table 1: Data of Rivers System: Paran´
a-Paraguay Model

detected. These diﬀerences are those that we attempt to minimize in this paper, conducting a
study of the errors in the predicted results.

2.2

The Paran´
a River model

La Plata basin is one of the most important rivers systems in the world. The Paran´a River
is one of the main rivers that form the basin. This is the second longest of South American
rivers and it has a length of 4000 km alongside its major tributary, the Paraguay River (2550
km), which occupies a region with a benign climate, fertile lands, easy access and few pollution
problems. The Paran´
a River boasts an extensive ﬂoodplain, which in some sections exceeds 50
km [3].
The stretch of the Paran´
a River simulated by Ezeiza extends between the Yacyret´
a dam
(Corrientes) to Villa Constituci´
on (Santa Fe), both in Argentina. The Paraguay River runs
from Puerto Pilcomayo (Formosa) to its conﬂuence with the Paran´a. Both river basins were
divided into a number of sections, to measure rivers ﬂow and height in each of them. This data
were used to model development, and these are shown in Table 1.
The calibration parameters, and those of major impact on the results, are the rugosity coefﬁcient, or Manning values, and the levees height. Manning values for ﬂood plains can be quite
diﬀerent from values for channels; therefore, Manning values for ﬂood plains are determined
independently from channel values. The friction coeﬃcient represents a quantiﬁcation of the
hydraulic resistance and is determined by the roughness of the riverbed [12]. The most important factors that aﬀect the selection of Manning values for riverbeds are the type and size of
the materials that compose the bed and banks of the channel and the shape of the channel.
The model requires specifying the roughness parameters for all river sections [13] [14]. There
is a need for extensive data to describe the model domain, as we describe in Section 3.
Daily average ﬂows (in Paran´
a River, Yacyret´
a dam) and daily average water levels (in
Paraguay River, Puerto Pilcomayo) are the boundary conditions upstream. Downstream boundary conditions are represented by daily hydrometric heights registered in Villa Constituci´
on.
The model’s output is a time series whose points correspond to level values, which are calculated
over the system domain.

3

Tuning Methodology

Flood propagation on channels is done by numerically solving the Saint Venant equations, either
with one-dimensional or two-dimensional approximations. Ezeiza is a computer simulator based
upon a one-dimensional approach. These models, in comparison to higher dimensional models,
require a minimal amount of input data to deﬁne the system behavior, are simpler to use and
demand less computer power [6] [14]. However, this results in less accurate ﬂood propagation
data, although as we explained before, the uncertainty of input parameters is the main source
302

Computing, a powerful tool in ﬂood prediction

Gaudiani, Luque, Garc´ıa, Re, Naiouf and Di Giusti

of output errors [2].
The tuning methodology implements a ﬁrst stage to ﬁnding an adjusted set of model parameters which will be used in a next stage to validate the predictive capability of the simulator. In
this paper we are focused on achieving the ﬁrst objective, which is key carrying out the second
stage. Here we present the tuning method to ﬁnd a set of adjusted parameters, in order to
handle the disagreement between observed data and simulated results.

3.1

The Parametric Simulation

The process of parametric simulation consists of changing the values of the internal input
parameters of the simulator and launching as many simulation as diﬀerent combinations of
parameters values are possible. This technique reduces the search space ﬁxing the less sensitive
parameters, as the parameters values used in the current model of Paran´
a River by INA, in order
to ﬁnd the best simulation scenario. That is, the scenario which allows us to reach the shortest
distance between observed data and simulated results [5] [4]. For this purpose, we combined
the Manning values for each section along river model domain, by measuring a similarity index
at every scenario. This similarity index and an improvement rate measure allow us to identify
the best scenario and consequently the adjusted parameters used for simulator tuning.
Ezeiza is used as a black box regardless of how realistic the simulator is. To carry on the
tuning phase we need to run the simulator loading the full system input data into the simulator,
which represents the real extent of river system. The data required to deﬁne the modeled river
system is as follows:
• Initial conditions: levels and ﬂow at every point of the river’s domain.
• Boundary conditions: time series of rivers levels and ﬂow at upstream and downstream
points.
• Geometry data: data on the topography of the system.
• Input Parameters: Manning values and levees height, at every river sections.
• Observed data: water heights of Paran´
a River measured at each monitoring station.
This information was provided by INA, including the model improvements we mentioned
before [11]. The observed data include an extended period of time (1994-2011), whose values
are daily heights measured at 20 monitoring stations placed along the Paran´
a River basin.

3.2

Scenarios Generation

We can easily change the Manning values in every section along the riverbed. This is possible
thanks to the set of input ﬁles used to launch each simulation with Ezeiza, which makes it easier
to implement the parametric simulation. A particular setting of the set of parameters deﬁnes
an individual scenario.
The number of possible scenarios is determined by the cardinality, Ci , for each of the N
parameters considered. For each parameter i we deﬁne an associated interval and an increment
value, which are used to move throughout the interval. For example, given the parameter i we
deﬁne the associated domain and step values with the tuple:
< [Limitinf , Limitsup ], Stepi >

(1)
303

Computing, a powerful tool in ﬂood prediction

Gaudiani, Luque, Garc´ıa, Re, Naiouf and Di Giusti

where the interval is bounded by Limitinf i and Limitsup i and the values are scanned in
Stepi steps.
N

#Scenarios =

Ci

(2)

i=1

Ci = ((Limitsup − Limitinf ) + Stepi )/Stepi

(3)

We show in Eq.3 the cardinality expression for parameter i where #Scenarios is the calculation of the total number of scenarios that we obtain after performing all the possible combinations of parameters values. As we perform an exhaustive parametric simulation in this phase,
by simulation we will modify a single parameter, leaving the other ﬁxed. In this way, we create
each scenario.

3.3

Tuning Implementation

Paran´a River model divides the river domain into 76 sections. Each section has a Manning
value for the ﬂoodplain, a Manning value for the riverbed and the levees’ height:
• Manning values for ﬂoodplain are within the [0.1, 0.2] range, with an ideal step of 0.01.
• Manning values for riverbed are within the [0.01, 0.04] range, with an ideal step of 0.005.
• Levees height is within the 5m to 50m range with a step of 5m. (The step value is set
according to the local geography)
The large size of the search space doesn’t allow small steps to cover the intervals. The
implementation of the method necessitates reducing the search space taking a greater step, as
we shall see later.
We used the root mean square error (RMSE) to calculate the similarity index to evaluate
the simulator response for each simulation scenario launched with Ezeiza. The observed data is
a time series of daily heights at each monitoring station. We use 15 monitoring stations located
along the Paran´
a river basin.
The use of RMSE turns out to be an adequate indicator of overall agreement between the
shape of the graphs of simulated and observed levels through time. A greater value of RMSE
is related to a higher bias between the simulated and the observed values. Its range starts at
0, this is the ideal case [16]. The RMSE expression, for a determined monitoring station after
launching a determined scenario, is the following:
n

RM SEj =

1/n

(Qisim − Qiobs )2j

(4)

i=1

where Qisim and Qiobs are the simulated and observed heights values at station j for each n
days of simulation.
Our similarity index was calculated using the RMSE average by averaging RMSE values of
15 monitoring stations after the simulation time. To calculate the similarity index for scenario
k, Indexk , we used the next expression:
Indexk =
304

15
j=1

RM SEj
15

(5)

Computing, a powerful tool in ﬂood prediction

Gaudiani, Luque, Garc´ıa, Re, Naiouf and Di Giusti

Scen represent the best index value resulting from tuning process:
Scen = M ink (Indexk )

(6)

INA provided us with the Ezeiza simulator and the scenario data, which are currently operational to provide their daily forecasts. We call it the INA’s scenario. To estimate our prediction
reliability, we compared our error results, when running our experimentation scenarios, to those
errors obtained when running INA’s scenario.
To carry on the parametric simulation, we created a set of scenarios, as we explained in
Section 3. Each one of the generated scenarios was fed into Ezeiza simulator, as well as the
Paran´a model input data. We calculated each similarity index value, with the aim of ﬁnding
an adjusted set of input parameters to improve the simulator prediction.
It’s not possible to improve the prediction for every monitoring station but it is decisive
to choose those stations that are signiﬁcant for each simulation. The impact of changing a
parameter value occurs at stations located in the amended section’s surroundings. Sometimes
this seems to be a task subject to the skill of looking at hydrographs, but ﬁnding the way to
do this automatically is one of this paper’s goals. The parametric simulation oﬀered a huge
number of scenarios. These results’ (simulated data) misalignment in relation to the observed
data were compared to the misalignment of simulated data provided by the INA’s scenario, in
order to measure the improvement achieved with each of our experiences launched.
At the same time, the process ﬁnds the stations with minimum RMSE in a speciﬁc scenario.
Then we measure the adjustment ratio between simulated results and observed data along the
complete time series in each selected station, then we repeat this method for INA simulated
data to compare both ratios and to calculate the percentage improvement.
ErrorScenario,Station is the station error for a selected scenario:
dias

abs(Qisim − Qiobs )

ErrorScenario,Station = 1/dias

(7)

i=1

ImprovementStation is the improvement achieved at a selected station in regard to INA
results:
ImprovementStation = abs(ErrorIN A,Station − ErrorScenario,Station )/ErrorIN A,station

4

(8)

Experimental Results

The parametric experimentation is characterized by a huge search space. In this work we
combine only the Manning values, leaving aside levees heights for now. On this basis, if we
implement an exhaustive search of the adjusted parameters we must launch 11276 simulations,
this means that Ezeiza must be executed 10E155 times. We had to reduce the search space
taking into account the following considerations.
We implemented a test parametric simulation in the lower section of the Paran´a River,
combining the possible Manning values in sections 70−72−74 and 76. The Manning cardinality
is shown in Table 2.
The number of scenarios arising from the previous analysis in Table 2 is:
#Scenarios = (2 ∗ 4)4 = 4096

(9)

The simulation was implemented in the 1/01/1999 - 31/12/1999 period. We selected this
period because it covers both high and low streamﬂow measurements over Paran´
a basin.
305

Computing, a powerful tool in ﬂood prediction

Manning
Floodplain
Riverbed

Interval
< [0.1, 0.2], 0.1 >
< [0.010, 0.035], 0.005 >

Gaudiani, Luque, Garc´ıa, Re, Naiouf and Di Giusti

Cardinality
((0.2 − 0.1) + 0.1)/0.1
((0.04 − 0.01) + 0.01)/0.01

C value
2
4

Table 2: Domain cardinality for Manning values.

Figure 2: RMSE for three stations selected from the best scenarios resulting from the parametric
simulation.

After performing the parametric simulation, we can detect the best scenarios using Eq. 1
and Eq. 3. Once the best scenarios were selected, we carry out the tuning simulator process.
The tuning methodology analyzes the prediction accuracy achieved in each case.
We inspected the calculated RMSE for each monitoring station and for a determined scenario. This analysis is built on the results obtained when running INA’s scenario. We enhanced
INA’s simulated results looking for those stations whose RMSE were less than the RSME
reached with INA’s scenario. We chose 5 scenarios under these conditions, in other words, with
the minimum similarity index and the greater number of monitoring stations whose RMSE were
lower than the RMSE achieved with INA’s scenario. This selection is shown in Fig. 2
Ezeiza run was carried out on a CPU Intel 8 Core i7-2600 - 3.4 GHz. Running a full simulation under the conditions set lasted 2 minutes. When we run 4096 scenarios, the execution
time is 8192 minutes or 137 hours. We used parallel processing resources to reduce the processing time. A master-worker architecture is suitable to parallelize the process because a main
processor can calculate each combination of parameters and send them to a set of workers.
Simulations are distributed among the nodes in a collaborative way, on the other hand, the
execution time in the master is negligible. This system has been developed on a PC LINUX
cluster (16 nodes) using MPI as a message passing library. The parallel implementation in a
16-workers system lasted 512 minutes.
As mentioned, improving the prediction for every monitoring station is unlikely. We selected
5 sections located in the lower Paran´
a basin to combine their Manning values. The improvement
was evident in those stations close to the modiﬁed, we mean those sections located in the lower
reaches of Paran´
a too. The stations we present in this work, are Goya, Rosario and San Mart´ın,
306

Computing, a powerful tool in ﬂood prediction

Gaudiani, Luque, Garc´ıa, Re, Naiouf and Di Giusti

Figure 3: Goya, Rosario and San Mart´ın time series heights related to observed data along simulation
period.

Monitoring
station
GOYA
ROSARIO
SAN MARTIN

Average diﬀerence
Observed - Simulated
0.472
0.327
0.274

Average diﬀerence
Observed - INA
0.782
0.485
0.686

Percentage improvement
regarding INA
40%
33%
60%

Table 3: Improvement rate - Goya, Rosario and San Mart´ın with the best adjustment results.

located in the lower Paran´
a. These stations have achieved a signiﬁcant improvement, as we can
see in Fig. 3
Fig. 3 compares the observed and simulated data for the three monitoring stations. We can
see in these graphs (hydrograph) the adjustment achieved in the levels values (in meters) along
the 365 simulation days. Our process calculates this adjustment rate to compare ﬁt between
observed and calculated data, both for the best scenario resulting from our tuning process as
for the scenario currently used by INA. We used Eq. 7 and Eq. 8 to calculate the average
distance and improvement rate. These results are in the Table 3

5

Conclusions and Future Work

In this paper we described every step of the tuning process to enhance the prediction performed
by the runoﬀ simulator Ezeiza. We have described in detail the parametric simulation technique
and we have presented the results obtained in this ﬁrst stage of our work.
The simulator is a black box, which is executed as a tool into the software package developed
307

Computing, a powerful tool in ﬂood prediction

Gaudiani, Luque, Garc´ıa, Re, Naiouf and Di Giusti

to carry out this experimentation. We focused our eﬀorts on the tuning method to get a better
prediction. The search for the best set of parameters was carried out through an exhaustive
search technique, which implies a lot of search time. Even though we limited the number of
simulations bounding the parameter’s domain, we were able to ﬁnd encouraging results.
The implementation of the parametric simulation technique, along with parallel computing,
allowed us ﬁnd the best simulating scenarios to improve outcomes and reduce the diﬀerences
between simulated and observed values. The improvement percentage of our simulation experiences, regarding simulated results come from INA’s scenario, ranges from 33 to 60% in the
best predicted stations. They are Goya, Rosario and San Mart´ın. These stations were chosen
as a result of a better similarity index and the improvement rates achieved.
The time series obtained at these stations shows a disarrangement in respect to observed
data precisely in those time periods when a sudden level change takes place, which happens
when water level raises or falls more rapidly than the rest of the period. This reﬂects the
underlying model, but it’s not our goal to change the simulator kernel, for this reason we
are seeking to handle this situation by improving the tuning method. Furthermore, since the
parametric simulation needs a large amount of computation time, we have used the parallel
scheme in a master-worker programming paradigm to improve the computation time. We take
advantage of this scheme because our processes can be distributed among processors, without
signiﬁcant communications overhead.
Our future work is focused on considering longer periods of simulation to tune the system
for successive periods of ﬂood and downspout. Consequently, we will seek to establish validity
ranges for the tuning method, when the simulator performs prediction in the future. We are
working toward applying heuristics that minimize the tuning time and make it possible to handle
the huge search space, and so to develop a ﬁtness function to evaluate the system’s response
automatically. We will certainly continue resorting to the techniques of parallel computing to
implement this phase.

Acknowledgements
This research has been supported by the MICINN Spain under contract TIN2007-64974, the
MINECO (MICINN) Spain under contract TIN2011-24384 and it was partially supported by
the research program of Informatics Research Institute III-LIDI, Faculty of Computer Science,
Universidad Nacional de La Plata. We are very grateful for the data provided by INA and we
appreciate the guidance received from researchers at INA Hydraulic Laboratory. The authors
wish to extend their gratitude to the anonymous reviewer whose thorough review, and valuable
comments, helped them to clarify some concepts in this paper.

References
[1] S.F. Balica, I. Popescu, L. Beevers, and N.G. Wright. Parametric and physically based modelling
techniques for ﬂood risk and vulnerability assessment: A comparison. Environmental Modelling
& Software, 41(0):84 – 92, 2013.
[2] A. B´
ardossy and SK. Singh. Robust estimation of hydrological model parameters. Hydrology and
Earth System Sciences Discussions, 5(3):1641–1675, 2008.
[3] E. Berbery and V. Barros. The hydrologic cycle of the La Plata Basin in South America. Journal
of Hydrometeorology, 3(6):630–645, December 2002.
[4] G. Bianchini, A. Cort´es, T. Margalef, and E. Luque. S2 F2 M statistical system for forest ﬁre
management. In Vaidy S. Sunderam, Geert Dick Albada, Peter M.A. Sloot, and Jack J. Dongarra,

308

Computing, a powerful tool in ﬂood prediction

[5]

[6]
[7]
[8]

[9]
[10]

[11]
[12]

[13]

[14]

[15]
[16]
[17]

[18]

Gaudiani, Luque, Garc´ıa, Re, Naiouf and Di Giusti

editors, Computational Science ICCS 2005, volume 3514 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science,
pages 427–434. Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2005.
E. Cabrera, E. Luque, M. Taboada, F. Epelde, and M.L. Iglesias. Optimization of emergency
departments by agent-based modeling and simulation. In Information Reuse and Integration (IRI),
2012 IEEE 13th International Conference on, pages 423–430, 2012.
P. Finaud-Guyot, C. Delenne, V. Guinot, and C. Llovel. 1D-2D coupling for river ﬂow modeling.
Comptes Rendus M´ecanique, 339(4):226 – 234, 2011.
K. Hansson, M. Danielson, and L. Ekenberg. A framework for evaluation of ﬂood management
strategies. Journal of Environmental Management, 86(3):465 – 480, 2008.
L. Hluchy, V.D. Tran, J. Astalos, M. Dobrucky, G.T. Nguyen, and D. Froehlich. Parallel ﬂood
modeling systems. In PeterM.A. Sloot, AlfonsG. Hoekstra, C.J.Kenneth Tan, and JackJ. Dongarra,
editors, Computational Science ICCS 2002, volume 2329 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science,
pages 543–551. Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2002.
P. Jaime and A. Men´endez. Modelo hidrodin´
amico del r´ıo Paran´
a desde Yacyret´
a hasta la ciudad
de Paran´
a. Report LHA-INA, pages 165–01, 1997.
Gast´
on Latessa. Modelo hidrodin´
amico del r´ıo Paran´
a para pron´
ostico hidrol´
ogico: Evaluaci´
on del
performance y una propuesta de redeﬁnici´
on geom´etrica. Technical report, Facultad de Ingenier´ıa.
UBA-INA, Argentina, 2011. http://laboratorios.ﬁ.uba.ar/lmm/tesis/tesis latessa 2011.pdf.
A. Men´endez. Ezeiza V: un programa computacional para redes de canales. In V Congreso
Argentino de Mec´
anica Computacional, volume 16, pages 63–72, 1996.
F. Pappenberger, K. Beven, M. Horritt, and S. Blazkova. Uncertainty in the calibration of eﬀective
roughness parameters in HEC-RAS using inundation and downstream level observations. Journal
of Hydrology, 302(1-4):46 – 69, 2005.
F. Pappenberger, P. Matgen, K. Beven, J. B. Henry, L. Pﬁster, and P. Fraipont de. Inﬂuence of
uncertain boundary conditions and model structure on ﬂood inundation predictions. Advances in
Water Resources, 29(10):1430 – 1449, 2006.
F. Saleh, A. Ducharne, N. Flipo, L. Oudin, and E. Ledoux. Impact of river bed morphology
on discharge and water levels simulated by a 1D Saint-Venant hydraulic model at regional scale.
Journal of Hydrology, 476(0):169 – 177, 2013.
R. G. Sargent. Veriﬁcation and validation of simulation models. In Winter Simulation Conference,
pages 183–198, 2011.
R. Shrestha and Nestmann F. Physically based and data-driven models and propagation of input
uncertainties in river ﬂood prediction. Journal of Hydrologic Engineering, 14(12):1309–1319, 2009.
J.J. Warmink, J.A. Janssen, M.J. Booij, and M.S. Krol. Identiﬁcation and classiﬁcation of uncertainties in the application of environmental models. Environmental Modelling & Software,
25(12):1518 – 1527, 2010.
Ji Zhen-Gang. Hydrodynamics and Water Quality. Modeling Rivers, Lakes and Estuaries. Wiley,
New Jersey, April 2008. ISBN: 978-0470241059.

309

