Procedia Computer Science
Volume 29, 2014, Pages 379–389
ICCS 2014. 14th International Conference on Computational Science

Spatio-temporal Sequential Pattern Mining for Tourism
Sciences
Luke Bermingham and Ickjai Lee
School of Business (IT), James Cook University, Cairns, Queensland, Australia
luke.bermingham@my.jcu.edu.au, Ickjai.Lee@jcu.edu.au

Abstract
Flickr presents an abundance of geotagged photos for data mining. Particularly, we propose the
concept of extracting spatio-temporal meta data from Flickr photos, combining a collection of
such photos together results in a spatio-temporal entity movement trail, a trajectory describing
an individual’s movements. Using these spatio-temporal Flickr photographer trajectories we
aim to extract valuable tourist information about where people are going, what time they are
going there, and where they are likely to go next. In order to achieve this goal we present
our novel spatio-temporal trajectory regions-of-interest mining and sequential pattern mining
framework. It is diﬀerent from previous work since it forms regions-of-interest taking into
consideration both space and time simultaneously, and thus produces higher-quality sequential
patterns. We test our framework’s ability to uncover interesting patterns for the tourism sciences
industry by performing experiments using a large dataset of Queensland photo taker movements
for the year 2012. Experimental results validate the usefulness of our approach at ﬁnding new,
information rich spatio-temporal tourist patterns from this dataset, especially in comparison
with the 2D approaches shown in the literature.
Keywords: Sequential pattern mining, Spatio-temporal, Tourism science, Movement pattern

1

Introduction

Data mining is the extraction of interesting, previously unknown knowledge from potentially
large and noisy datasets. We reason that data mining could be especially valuable to the ﬁeld of
tourism science where abundant amounts of information regarding people’s movements and activities is available, yet untapped. Speciﬁcally, we refer to advances in camera and mobile phone
technology, these devices are now able to record spatial and temporal (spatio-temporal) meta
data every time a photograph is taken. Combining a collection of photographs together we can
formulate the approximate movement trails of an individual, we call this a trajectory. Coupling
this eﬀect with the advent and popularity of photo sharing sites such as Flickr we propose that
there now exists a unique opportunity to extract previously unknown, valuable patterns from
a massive amount of spatio-temporal photo-taker trajectories. Furthermore, when we consider
Selection and peer-review under responsibility of the Scientiﬁc Programme Committee of ICCS 2014
c The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V.
doi:10.1016/j.procs.2014.05.034

379

Spatio-temporal Sequential Pattern Mining for Tourism Sciences

Bermingham and Lee

that many photos are being taken in known tourist locations and the fact that they are being
shared through social media we can infer that some of these photo-takers are tourists, thus
leading to the valuable conclusion: we can know where tourists are moving and at what times
they going there. This information is clearly valuable to the tourism sciences industry and as
such is a strong motivation for our study.
Previous research in this area, notably [3], introduces the notion of extracting Regions-ofInterest (RoIs) from trajectory data and then performing Sequential Pattern Mining (SPM) to
ﬁnd popular movement paths between these RoIs. However, no previous work focuses especially
on tourism information and additionally no approach can ﬂuidly discover and visualise results
in three dimensions. For example in [2] only the spatial dimension is considered during RoI
extraction and visualisation. Hence current approaches cannot extract valuable spatio-temporal
patterns like which months tourist locations are popular to visit. Therefore, in this research
we introduce our truly spatio-temporal trajectory RoI and SPM framework (see Section 3), in
order to validate our framework we attempt to ﬁnd new patterns using the same Flickr data
that was used in [1] (see Section 4), from our tests we summarise our ﬁndings, draw our conclusions about the validity and eﬀectiveness of our approach, and ﬁnally introduce some future
directions (see Section 5).

2
2.1

Literature Review
RoI Mining

Trajectory RoI mining was ﬁrst introduced by Giannotti et al [3]. The notion Giannotti et al
propose is that areas of density in the study region are interesting. They propose partitioning
the study region into rectangular grid cells and then calculating that number of trajectories
that pass through each cell. This grid of dense cells is traversed in order of highest density
cells ﬁrst. Dense cells are expanded rectangularly to form RoIs. Cai et al [4] argue that
rectangular expansion produces RoIs that contain uninteresting low-density cells, and therefore
they present and validate their novel arbitrary RoI formulation methods: “Slope” and “Hybrid”.
Additionally, Cai et al [1, 2] test the original Giannotti approach and their approaches on Flickr
datasets, showing that the extraction of interesting spatial patterns is merited. Clearly, RoI
mining is of interest in extracting knowledge from trajectory datasets. However none of the
methods in the literature considers the temporal dimension while mining and thus cannot
uncover the valuable spatio-temporal regions that are characteristic of trajectory datasets, thus
Flickr photo-taker movements require the additional dimensional partitioning to uncover more
meaningful patterns.

2.2

Trajectory SPM

The notion of trajectory SPM, similar to trajectory RoI mining, is also ﬁrst introduced by
Giannotti et al [3]. They take the RoIs extracted from the data, label them, translate the
trajectory dataset into a sequence of RoI visitations and then perform the generic SPM algorithm PreﬁxSpan [8] to discover frequent visitation sequences between RoIs. Due to the
fact that the RoI mining [3] only considers the spatial dimension in an attempt to uncover
temporal information regarding its sequential patterns it makes the inclusion of a temporal
parameter that determines whether patterns are occurring within some speciﬁed time range.
The problem with this approach is that the results do not necessarily discover RoIs that grow
380

Spatio-temporal Sequential Pattern Mining for Tourism Sciences

Bermingham and Lee

in the temporal dimension. Performing SPM in such a way does not equate to discovering true
spatio-temporal movements between RoIs in space-time, rather it discovers spatial movements
that fall into an acceptable time tolerance of each other. The goal of SPM is simply to extract
frequent sequences, thus for both computation sake and pattern quality consideration of the
temporal dimension should occur before the SPM phase, not during. Further research also
performs trajectory SPM using the same spatial and then temporal approach [1, 2, 4], however
we reason that spatio-temporal RoI mining and then SPM will produce more comprehensible,
high-quality, and previously unobtainable results.

2.3

Spatio-temporal Tourist Patterns

Discovering tourist patterns from Flickr or movement datasets is not a new pursuit. Previously
research has been conducted on detecting popular landmarks and travel sequences [5, 6, 7,
9]. However, no approach considers ﬁnding true spatio-temporal tourist patterns from Flickr
trajectory data. Spatio-temporal tourist patterns are arguably far more valuable than the trip
planning or tourist hot-spot detection of other research because it not only describes where the
tourist are but also what time they will be there, and then where they are likely to go next.
Such information is highly valuable to the industry of tourism science in terms of marketing,
pricing, and packaging. Therefore, our concept is to perform spatio-temporal RoI mining on
speciﬁc Flickr datasets to discover insightful regions that tourists visit at a particular time and
then perform SPM to determine if there is a relation between popular spatio-temporal RoIs, i.e
people going from one place to another at a particular time of the year.

3

Spatio-temporal RoI and SPM Framework

Our spatio-temporal framework is an extension of that introduced by Giannotti et al [3] and
includes the modiﬁed RoI mining methods by Cai et al [4]. The SPM mining phase is completely the same except for the omission of the temporal time range criteria which is no longer
necessary, meaning sequential patterns are still extracted using PreﬁxSpan [8]. The details of
our framework for discovering spatio-temporal tourist patterns from Flickr data is outlined in
more detail in Figure 1 and the accompanying explanation of each component.
1. Flickr Geotagged Photos. A huge source of geotagged photos exist online in the form
of the photo-sharing website Flickr.
2. Extract and Preprocess ST Data. A large collection of geotagged photos are collected
using the Flickr API 1 , all within our particular study region and time range, for example
Queensland in the year of 2012. The speciﬁcs of photo information collection process we
use are the same as those presented in the methodology by [1]. The preprocessing we
apply is simply to remove erroneous entries.
3. ST Trajectory DB. Once we have extracted the geotagged photos from Flickr we store
them in a spatio-temporal database for fast retrieval and querying. Speciﬁcally we ensure
each photo-taker has their own trajectory movement trail in the database, and that it is
ordered chronologically.
4. RoI Mining. We divide the study region into spatio-temporal grid cells, then due to its
eﬀectiveness we apply the same “Hybrid” RoI expansion method as in [2]. The only extra
1 http://www.ﬂickr.com/services/api/

381

Spatio-temporal Sequential Pattern Mining for Tourism Sciences

Bermingham and Lee

Figure 1: Spatio-temporal RoI mining and SPM framework.
modiﬁcation we have to make is that spatio-temporal grid cell expansion has to occur in
two extra directions now, speciﬁcally we expand RoIs {left, right, up, down, front, back}.
5. Sequential Pattern Mining. We translate trajectories into RoI visitation sequences
and then apply the original implementation of PreﬁxSpan as our SPM method.
6. Visualise Patterns. The visualisation can occur either for RoI mining, because RoIs
alone describe interesting spatio-temporal patterns themselves or it can occur for the
sequential patterns mined. Due to the visualisation being in 3D the results are more
comprehensible than the ﬂat approaches shown in the literature and it is simple to understand where and when patterns are occurring. The actual visualisation is implemented in
WorldWind SDK 2 .

4

Application to Flickr Data

In this section we present our experimentation on Flickr photo taker data. We attempt to ﬁnd
novel spatio-temporal RoIs and sequential patterns from the dataset and then oﬀer a comparison
to the traditional 2D approaches in terms of both eﬀectiveness and eﬃciency.

2 http://worldwind.arc.nasa.gov/java/

382

Spatio-temporal Sequential Pattern Mining for Tourism Sciences

4.1

Bermingham and Lee

Queensland Flickr Dataset

The dataset we choose to use for experimentation is a collection of geotagged photos over the
whole of Queensland for the year 2012. The dataset contains 2,445 trajectories in total, made
up of 63,290 of photo taker spatio-temporal entries. A visual overview of the dataset is shown
in Figure 2. This dataset is highly busy, photo-takers can go from one place to another not
necessarily in a straight line, there is no rules governing recording times, and in general there is
no underlying structure. In general the data falls along the populated areas of Queensland, the
east coast in particular, which is desirable because known tourist locations lie in these regions.
In terms of the temporal aspect there exists no human identiﬁable trend for the whole datasets
that describes at what time of the year photos are being taken. Overall, we reason that this a
good candidate to test our framework to see if it can uncover underlying patterns in diﬃcult
circumstances. The other contributing factor for choosing this dataset is that it is used in [1],
and thus a comparison between 2D and 3D RoIs and sequential patterns can be made.

Figure 2: Queensland 2012 Flickr photo taker trajectories.

4.2

Spatio-temporal RoIs

Applying our approach to the Queensland data we are able to identify a number of spatiotemporal RoIs along the east coast. These spatio-temporal RoIs are shown in Figure 3. Figure
3 uncovers interesting patterns emerging in the Queensland data in speciﬁc temporal windows.
In this experiment the temporal cell size was a fortnight and the spatial cell size 10km. This
results shown that towards the end of the year Cairns, Townsville, and Sunchine Coast become
popular photo taker destinations, clearly reﬂecting the seasonal nature of tourism in these
cities. Whereas in contrast the framework reports that Brisbane and Gold Coast experience
strong photo taker ﬂow all year round, which if we consider this in terms of tourist data makes
sense, as they are major hubs in Queensland and have many more year round attractions. For
comparison sake, in Figure 4 we include the RoIs discovered by a spatial only query run with
383

Spatio-temporal Sequential Pattern Mining for Tourism Sciences

Bermingham and Lee

looser parameters. The results shown more RoIs, though the major RoIs found in our spatiotemporal approach remain, thus validating our approach is at least as eﬀective as traditional
approaches. Furthermore, through visualisation is it clear to see our spatio-temporal RoIs are
more meaningful, they easily display not only where interesting places are, but when people
generally visit them too. Using traditional approaches it would be impossible to ﬁnd seasonal
visitation patterns such that we have found, thus validating the merit of our approach for
tourism science.

Figure 3: Queensland east coast spatio-temporal RoIs.

Figure 4: Queensland east coast 2D RoIs, source from [1].
Investigation into the dense seasonal patterns in Brisbane reveals further valuable spatiotemporal knowledge. In Figure 5 we present our ﬁndings using cell density parameters that
are one standard deviation away from the average cell density. Speciﬁcally in a) we show the
384

Spatio-temporal Sequential Pattern Mining for Tourism Sciences

Bermingham and Lee

monthly dense regions of Brisbane and surrounding area, noting that areas such as Brisbane
CBD, SouthBank, and GoldCoast form RoIs all year round whilst other area such as Sunshine
Coast only garner attention from the middle of the year onwards. We propose areas that show
clear seasonal patterns will correlate strongly with popular tourist visiting times. Furthermore,
in b) we show the daily RoIs over the whole of Brisbane and wider regional study space. The
daily dense candidate cells compound on top of each other to reveal peak weeks when Brisbane
and surrounding regions are all together most popular for photo-takers. It is reasoned that
these patterns describe popular general times that tourist and holiday activity is peaked in
these areas. For example, in b) the RoIs precisely match up with Christmas and June/July
holidays. This kind of result is a strong validation for the usefulness and accuracy of our
spatio-temporal mining approach.

Figure 5: Seasonal patterns in Brisbane: a) 30 day temporal cell size, 5km spatial cell size; b)
24 hour temporal cell size, 300km spatial cell size.

4.3

SPM with Spatio-temporal RoIs

Once spatio-temporal RoIs have been extracted we apply SPM to discover interesting linkages
between spatio-temporal hotspots. In Figure 6 we show the results of SPM mining having
used spatio-temporal RoI mining and traditional 2D mining. The mining parameters we use
for our spatio-temporal mining are a 5km spatial cell size, 30 day temporal cell size, a 1%
pattern support, and a cell density of 0.003% (8 trajectories). The ﬁrst observation we make
is that there is a clear division between regions visited when spatio-temporal RoI mining is
applied, highlighting its ability to extract more detailed sequential patterns. Overall, we can
say the results contain travel sequences from roughly the same regions in the Brisbane area,
this validates that our approach still ﬁnds major patterns. The main diﬀerence is of course
the extra information available by including the temporal dimension. We can now see at what
times these patterns are occurring. In this case we apply mining with one month temporal
window, we can see a linkage: Raby Bay to South Bank to Botanic Garden and Bramble Bay
to South Brisbane. We could ﬁnd these patterns before, but now we can make the interesting
observation that there is months of gap between these visits. If we consider this in terms of
tourists we can say that tourists who visit the botanic Raby Bay at the start of the year are
385

Spatio-temporal Sequential Pattern Mining for Tourism Sciences

Bermingham and Lee

likely to visit the botanic gardens later on in the year when the scenery is better. For example
we can say that tourists visiting one scenic area have a strong likelihood of visiting another
scenic area later on in the season. This is the kind of linkage that could not be observed when
only considering the spatial dimension, it is highly relevant to tourism science and thus shows
the usefulness of our approach.

Figure 6: Comparison of SPM 3D and 2D.
Further experimentation into the dense regions surrounding Brisbane reveal more spatiotemporal patterns. We perform 2D and 3D RoI mining in Brisbane and its surrounding area
again using cell density that is one standard deviation beyond the average for the study region.
The results of the RoI mining are shown in Figure 7. In Figure 7 both a) and b) identify
that photo taker movement path from Gold Coast to Brisbane. However in a) we are able to
highlight at exactly what time of the year the this transit occurs, namely at the start of the
year in summer. Whereas in b) we can detect the pattern but are unable to get such speciﬁc
and valuable information regarding when it occurs. This opportunity to extract higher quality
information sequential patterns by using our 3D RoI mining approach strongly highlights its
usefulness and advantage over traditional two dimensional approaches.

4.4

Eﬃciency of Our Approach

To maintain the usefulness of RoI mining to Flickr trajectory data mining we tested our approach’s running time with the following parameters: static temporal cell size of 30 days, a
1% cell density support (which for the Queensland Flickr data equates to a cell density of 24
386

Spatio-temporal Sequential Pattern Mining for Tourism Sciences

Bermingham and Lee

Figure 7: Gold Coast to Brisbane SPM with 10km spatial cell size, 30 days temporal window:
a) Spatio-temporal; b) Spatial then Temporal SPM.
trajectories), and a range of spatial cell sizes from coarse to granular. The temporal cell size
and the cell density remain the same so that the number of candidate grid cells scales linearly
with the spatial cell size. The results of this experiment are illustrated in Figure 8. Figure
8 shows the eﬃciency of our spatio-temporal RoI mining approach, even with the inclusion of
extra dimensionality, density-based RoI mining is performed in milliseconds. However, we do
note that by increasing the number of grid cells for mining machine memory is quickly ﬁlled,
once the memory is full application performance degrades signiﬁcantly. Speciﬁcally in this experiment a spatial cell size of 1km produced such a large number of candidate grid cells that
RoI mining was not possible on the 6Gb test machine.

Figure 8: Spatio-temporal running time.
The dual function of our approach is SPM so we must test that it remains aﬀordable too.
Figure 9 illustrates the running time of our approach and the 2D SPM methods in the literature.
The results show both have an exponential running time, this severely limits the usefulness of
mining huge Flickr datasets for tourist information because it will exponentially increase as the
387

Spatio-temporal Sequential Pattern Mining for Tourism Sciences

Bermingham and Lee

data increases or as the parameters becomes more granular.

Figure 9: SPM running time.

5

Conclusion

In conclusion we have shown the merit in our spatio-temporal mining approach. We expected
spatio-temporal mining to provide higher quality more useful patterns over traditional approaches. Results of our Queensland Flickr dataset have shown this is the case. The spatiotemporal approach uncovered interesting seasonal patterns along the east coast, and local yearly
patterns in Brisbane. Such patterns are highly valuable to the tourism sciences industry, and
thus this validates the usefulness of our approach. Overall, we acknowledge the eﬀectiveness of
our approach on Flickr data and suggest that our approach is generic enough to be applicable
and useful to any ﬁeld where moving entity trajectory data is abundant and collectable.

References
[1] Guochen Cai, Chihiro Hio, Luke Bermingham, Kyungmi Lee, and Ickjai Lee. Mining Frequent Trajectory Patterns and Regions-of-Interest from Flickr Photos. 47th Hawaii International Conference
on System Sciences, pages 1454–1463, January 6-9 2014.
[2] Guochen Cai, Chihiro Hio, Luke Bermingham, Kyungmi Lee, and Ickjai Lee. Sequential pattern
mining of geo-tagged photos with an arbitrary regions-of-interest detection method. Expert Systems
with Applications, 41:3514–3526, 2014.
[3] Fosca Giannotti, Mirco Nanni, Fabio Pinelli, and Dino Pedreschi. Trajectory pattern mining. In
Proceedings of the 13th ACM SIGKDD international conference on Knowledge discovery and data
mining, KDD ’07, pages 330–339, New York, NY, USA, 2007. ACM.
[4] Chihiro Hio, Guochen Cai, Luke Bermingham, Kyungmi Lee, and Ickjai Lee. A Hybrid Grid-based
Method for Mining Arbitrary Regions-of-Interest from Trajectories. In Proceedings of Workshop on
Machine Learning for Sensory Data Analysis, pages 5–12. ACM Press, 2014.
[5] Takeshi Kurashima, Tomoharu Iwata, Go Irie, and Ko Fujimura. Travel route recommendation
using geotags in photo sharing sites. In Proceedings of the 19th ACM International Conference on
Information and Knowledge Management, CIKM ’10, pages 579–588, New York, NY, USA, 2010.
ACM.
[6] Xin Lu, Changhu Wang, Jiang-Ming Yang, Yanwei Pang, and Lei Zhang 0001. Photo2trip: generating travel routes from geo-tagged photos for trip planning. In Alberto Del Bimbo, Shih-Fu Chang,
and Arnold W. M. Smeulders, editors, ACM Multimedia, pages 143–152. ACM, 2010.

388

Spatio-temporal Sequential Pattern Mining for Tourism Sciences

Bermingham and Lee

[7] Kohya Okuyama and Keiji Yanai. A travel planning system based on travel trajectories extracted
from a large number of geotagged photos on the web. In The Era of Interactive Media, pages
657–670. Springer New York, 2013.
[8] Jian Pei, Jiawei Han, Behzad Mortazavi-Asl, Helen Pinto, Qiming Chen, Umeshwar Dayal, and
Meichun Hsu. Preﬁxspan: Mining sequential patterns by preﬁx-projected growth. In Proceedings
of the 17th International Conference on Data Engineering, pages 215–224, Washington, DC, USA,
2001. IEEE Computer Society.
[9] Yue Shi, Pavel Serdyukov, Alan Hanjalic, and Martha Larson. Personalized landmark recommendation based on geotags from photo sharing sites. In Lada A. Adamic, Ricardo A. Baeza-Yates,
and Scott Counts, editors, ICWSM. The AAAI Press, 2011.

389

