Procedia Computer Science
Volume 29, 2014, Pages 1667–1676
ICCS 2014. 14th International Conference on Computational Science

Problem solving environment for development and
maintenance of St. Petersburg’s Flood Warning System
Sergey S. Kosukhin1* , Anna V. Kalyuzhnaya1, Denis Nasonov1
1

ITMO University, Saint-Petersburg, Russia
skosukhin@gmail.com, kalyuzhnaya.ann@gmail.com, denis.nasonov@gmail.com

Abstract
Saint-Petersburg Flood Warning System (FWS) is a life-critical system that requires permanent
maintenance and development. Tasks that arise during thes e processes could be much more resourceintensive than an operational loop of the system and may involve complex problems for research.
Thereby it is essential to have a special software tool to handle a collection of different models, data
sources and auxiliary software that they could be combined in different ways according to a particular
research problem to be solved. This paper aims to share the idea of Saint -Petersburg FWS evolution
with help of problem-solving environment based on the cloud platform CLAVIRE.
Keywords: problem solving environment, composite application, flood warning system, flood simulation,
ensemble forecasting

1 Introduction
Storm surge floods have always been and still remain a serious threat for many coastal regions
worldwide. This type of floods causes colossal damage because they affect major port cities which are
usually important economic centers and can't be fenced from the sea by levee. Saint -Petersburg is
common example of such centers. This city has suffered from more than 300 hundreds of floods (i.e.
water level in estuary of the Neva River has exceeded 160 cm) since the moment it was founded in
1703.Some of them were really savage disasters, taking away many lives and leaving severe damage
behind.
Floods in Saint-Petersburg are result of superposition of storm surge in eastern part of the Gulf of
Finland, seiche and meteorologically induced water level disturbances that originate in the western and
central Baltic Sea. The main reason of this process is a cyclone activity ove r the Baltic Sea. Cyclones,
which cross the Baltic Sea along its center line from south-west to north-east, are a real danger. When
a cyclone moves over the sea it causes water level rising in its center with low pressure. As the result,
a long progressive wave propagates from the center of the cyclone. Its height reaches 30-50 cm in the
*

Corresponding author. T el.: +7-921-639-76-68.

Selection and peer-review under responsibility of the Scientiﬁc Programme Committee of ICCS 2014
c The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V.
doi:10.1016/j.procs.2014.05.152

1667

Flood Warning System

S. Kosukhin, A. Kalyuzhnaya and D. Nasonov

open sea. As long wave propagates in the Gulf of Finland its height increases due to shallowness of
the eastern narrow part of the Gulf. The wind also intensifies the flood wave leading to fast level rising
in Saint-Petersburg.
Nowadays, special complexes are developed to protect high populated nearshore cities (London,
Amsterdam, Venice, Saint-Petersburg etc.) from economic and cultural losses caused by floods. Saint Petersburg Flood Protection Barrier (FPB) is one of them. It separates the Neva Bay from the Gulf of
Finland and consists of series of dams which are equipped with floodgates for ship passage and water
exchange [1]. As surge floods are irregular events and depen d on large set of factors it’s impossible to
make the best decision on the floodgates handling in advance. Therefore Flood Warning Systems
(FWS) was developed to support the management of barrier system in cases of flood danger. Its main
objective is a prediction of water level rising in the Gulf of Finland and calculation of possible
scenarios for flood prevention to help the Decision Making Group to make a decision about barrier
gates maneuvering plan [2].
FWS in St. Petersburg is a life-critical system with rigidly fixed time limits and tasks. Its work
should comply with the requirements of quality and reliability. Such systems are widely spread in the
regions that are vulnerable for natural disasters, primarily for water-related disasters, because
generally this type of hazards has a more significant time for prediction, prevention and alert
dissemination than, for example, earthquakes. Nevertheless, such hazards as flash floods and surface
flooding, which induced by heavy rains, have an extremely short lead time (for about several hours).
For these conditions, multi-stage early warning system (EWS) was created. It consists of two parts:
detection of the most vulnerable regions and probabilistic warnings based on observed and now casted
rainfall event [3]. River floods caused by long rains take places not only within affected region but
also in up-stream regions. Therefore, warning lead time for this kind of disasters varies from hours to
weeks. For increasing the preparedness for floods in trans -national European river basins the European
Flood Alert System runs pre-operationally [4]. Venice operational warning system (Centre for Sea
Level Forecasting and Warning) should be mentioned as an example of storm surge EWS. It runs Fast
Artificial Neural Network as a post-processor to a hydrodynamic finite element model [5]. Another
storm surge EWS is The Storm Surge Warning Service [6] in the Netherlands that processes input
from ECMWF's Ensemble Prediction System to obtain sea level probability forecasts. The s ystem runs
in experimental real-time mode.
Maintenance and development of any EWS (FWS) should involve regular analysis of the quality
and correctness of its parts (mathematical models, data sources, etc.) that implies the necessity to
perform simulation experiments to process and analyze various operating scenarios of EWS. Due to
the fact that the functionality of EWS is provided by complex simulation software, the maintenance
process of EWS is characterized by the following properties:
1.
2.

3.

Resource-intensity. Research tasks connected with meteorological numerical model usually
demand significant computational power and large volumes of data to store and process.
Heterogeneity and complexity. Simulation of various processes of complex physical
phenomena requires coordinated work of different pieces of applied and auxiliary software
(including third-party and legacy). Thus they may have fundamentally different system
requirements.
Irregularity. On the one hand, FWS requires non-stop problem-oriented control and
improvement; on the other hand it's usually hard to predict time of the next iteration of the
development process. As a matter of fact a significant amount of data (e.g. measurements,
operational forecasts) needs to be collected for the series of experiment to be performed. Not
always the collected data contains prerequisites for the software changes.

Therefore, special software is necessary to provide EWS research teams with tools allowing them
to conduct various computational scenarios with remote data (sensors, databases) access using
heterogeneous computational environment deployable on demand. Workflow management systems

1668

Flood Warning System

S. Kosukhin, A. Kalyuzhnaya and D. Nasonov

(e.g. [7-10]) are common tools to perform complex sequences of scientific computational tasks and
can be used as platforms for problem-solving environments. This paper aims to share an
experience in development of problem solving environment (PSE) for numerical experiment in the
domain of the storm surges prediction. Cloud platform CLAVIRE [11, 12] is used as a platform for
the PSE. It implements Application as a Service concept and provides integration of significantly
heterogeneous hardware and software resources. This platform supports the high -level abstract
description of computational scenarios in terms of composite applications with in the serviceoriented distributed computational environment. CLAVIRE composite applications are described
as abstract workflows which are scheduled on available computational resources automatically.

2 Architecture
General architecture of the PSE is shown in Figure 1. Functional subsystems provide integration
and interaction of all other parts of the system. User front end of the PSE includes interfaces for
experiment composition and conduction with various levels of abstraction. Commonly user is
provided with the tools for low-level scripting of computational scenarios using dedicated language
EasyFlow implemented in CLAVIRE platform. Another option is to describe compu tational
experiment in domain-specific terms using either high-level problem-oriented interface (POI) or
automatic task generation module based on Virtual Simulation Object concept [13]. CLAVIRE
kernel’s services are responsible for workflow interpretation, scheduling and further performing in
heterogeneous distributed computational environment, including Big data infrastructure.
An essential part of the PSE is determined by problem-oriented objects. These objects are mainly
represented by computing services which are based on various applied software (Table 1) and
auxiliary data processing packages (data converters, tools for interactive visualization etc.). In order t o
support studies of special (non-general) scenarios of flood situations and to allow user to implement
his own calculation algorithms, the solvers (e.g. COMSOL Multiphysics) are also included in the PSE.
A separate group of the PSE services are software blocks which reproduce the basic units of the FWS.
Their purpose is to emulate the operational mode of the FWS in order to measure its performance, to
analyze its possible failures and to evaluate its various upgrade scenarios. The services are provided
with the use of the description in a domain-specific language EasyPackage, which allows to specify an
abstract package invocation and to generate a web -based user interface automatically. All these
services can be used ether independently or as components of composite applications which
implement different scenarios of computational experiments performed in the PSE. To resolve
problem-oriented complex issues a collection of computational scenarios for common domain -specific
tasks (e.g. operational water level forecasting, basic model coupling, gathering of remote expert
estimates of floodgate maneuvering plan) is included in the PSE.
User objects term implies content generated by the user of the PSE: own experiment scenarios
which usually are the combination of basic scenarios and user’s experiment results that can be stored
for future needs.
Technical facilities include high-performance computational hardware; data sources such as
sensors and databases which provide water level measurements, external atmospheric model results,
reanalysis data sets etc.; special hardware, such as touch table and mobile devices which can be
helpful for group decision making.

1669

Flood Warning System

Applications
Weather Research and
Forecasting Model
(WRF) [14]

Baltic Sea Model
(BSM ) [15]

BALT-P model

Simulating Waves
Neashore (SWAN)

Dynamic Rapid Flood
Spreading Model
(DRFSM ) [16]

S. Kosukhin, A. Kalyuzhnaya and D. Nasonov

Description
Atmospheric model
Numerical weather prediction system designed both for forecasting and
atmospheric research. In particular, it allows the prediction of pressure and wind
fields in the given area across scales ranging from meters to thousands of
kilometers.
Sea dynamics models
Numerical model BSM , which is based on shallow water equations, was designed
especially for flood predictions in St. Petersburg. Due to this it has number of
simplifications connected with need for short time of operational forecasting and
local hydro meteorological features.
Numerical three dimensional baroclinic model designed for simulation of sea level
and currents in the Baltic Sea. A great advantage of BALT-P is possibility to
calculate a three dimensional currents structure, what can’t be achieved by twodimensional models (such as BSM ).
Sea waves model
A third-generation wave model, developed at Delft University of Technology,that
computes random, short-crested wind-generated waves in coastal regions and
inland waters.
Inundation model
A model, developed by the HR Wallingford team and utilized for surface flow
simulation during city inundation.

Solvers
Commercial finite element solver, used in particular for underground flow
simulation.
Scilab
An open source software for numerical computation, used for data analysis and 2D
visualization.
Data processors
Global Forecast System Global numerical weather prediction system, which is run by NOAA four times
(GFS) forecasts
per day. GFS produces forecast with lead times of up to 16 days and resolution up
convertor
to And up to 0.5°×0.5°.
StatControl application
This application is designed to detect and fix various errors in water level
measurement series, e.g. explicit and implicit gaps, statistical outliers etc. It is
based on dynamic regression model.
Data assimilation
This is an external extension for sea dynamics models which aims to reduce errors
application
on the first hours of forecast by correcting an initial state of the model with the use
of Kalman filtration technique.
Table 1: Applied software integrated in the PSE
COMSOL Multiphysics

1670

Flood Warning System

S. Kosukhin, A. Kalyuzhnaya and D. Nasonov

Front end
Intelligent and
information support

Automatic task
generation

Scenario composition
interfaces

POI

Download/
upload

New
tasks

Common tasks

Visualisation tools

Visualisation

Workflow

Data sets

Basic workflows

Basic data sets

User data sets

Operational forecasting

Observations archive

Ensemble forecasting
Basic model coupling

User workflows

Operational forecasts
Model initial projects

Expert estimates

Basic data
sets update

Report generation

Workflow
interpretation

Download/
upload

Data
management

CLAVIRE kernel

Data
distribution

Distributed data storage

Service
invocation

BigData
requests

Processing
configuration

Service description
Package
descriptions

Flood database

Agent
distribution

BigData

Resource
descriptions

Invocation and
configuration

Data processing
Flood database search
Comparative forecast

Distributed processing launch,
data transfer

Cloud services
Applications
Tools

Interaction

Atmosphere

Level and currents

Waves

Water exchange

Land inundation

Data quality control

Maneuvering plans

Statistics

Plotting
Interactive visualization
Data conversion

Local
invocation

Storage agents

Local data
management
Visualisation,
control
Specific hardware

Operational
processing

Calculations

Data sources

Computational resources

Measurements (buoys, weather stations)

Clusters

Touch table

External models output

GRIDs and clouds

Mobile devices

Reanalysis data

Desktops

- problem-oriented objects

- user objects

- functional subsystems

- invocations

- utilization

- hardware

Figure 1: Architecture of the problem-solving environment

3 Computational scenarios
The collection of applications integrated in the PSE is defined by the problems which arise during
the FWS maintenance process. Most of the problems are connected to the necessity to perform many
concurrent calculations which involve heterogeneous numerical models and data sources. Several
research tasks which arose during the development of the FWS are presented below as composite
applications in cloud environment.

1671

Flood Warning System

S. Kosukhin, A. Kalyuzhnaya and D. Nasonov

3.1 Uncertainty analysis of water level forecasts
Uncertainty analysis is an essential problem of modeling in flood prediction systems, because
flood forecasts are based on incomplete input data. It leads to necessity of making an interval
estimations and assessments of risks, connected with uncertainty of decision making. Ensemble
techniques, based on Monte-Carlo method, allow simulating composition of synoptic situations. Sea
waves and water level forecasts are provided for each situation. The main advantage of this approach
is a possibility to investigate how uncertainty of input data influences on the water level forecast
accuracy. For this purpose, atmospheric field V 0 can be disturbed by artificial input of stochastic
variability:

V ( x, y, t ) V 0 ( x, y, t )  ¦i ai (t ))i ( x, y) ,
where ) i ( x, y) – basis functions (e.g. natural orthogonal functions of wind speed field over the Baltic
Sea), a i – independent Gauss random processes.
Such analysis usually means the necessity to run forecasting system a number of times with varied
initial conditions. CLAVIRE platform provides a convenient solution to the concurrent calculations
and subsequent result collection. Structure of an algorithm and a work flow for uncertainty analysis of
water level forecasting model is shown in Figure 2. A computational scenario provides the following
operations:
1.
2.
3.

Simulation of HIRLAM ensemble forecast, represented as initial field with stochastic part.
Simulation of SWAN ensemble forecast, provided by applying HIRLAM ensemble forecast
results.
Simulation of water level ensemble forecasts (by BSM), provided by applying both HIRLAM
and SWAN ensembles results.

Meteorological forecast and other input data are downloaded on the first step of scenario. After
that the variation of initial parameters is performed by applying a set of normally distributed masks to
the downloaded meteorological fields. Taking into account the importance of sea waves
approximation for estimation a wind pressure on sea surface, sea waves are simulated with SWAN
model using modified HIRLAM fields. Further calculations generate ensembles of water level
forecasts which are analyzed at certain stages of the composite application by using different statistical
methods (such as box & whiskers plotting, approximation of ensemble distribution, confidence
interval estimation, errors, etc.).
One of the results of composite application (level forecast with box & whiskers plots) is
represented in Figure 3(a). Distribution of peak height caused by local wind speed variability could be
in a wide range from 10-20 cm to 200 cm. Sensitivity of the model in a period of level rising is low,
maximal deviation tends to appear around the peak time and after it. Thus, this scenario could be used
not only for uncertainty analysis owing to imperfect input data, but also for sensitivity analysis of
forecasting system reaction for normal fluctuations in input data.

1672

Flood Warning System

S. Kosukhin, A. Kalyuzhnaya and D. Nasonov

Meteorological forecast

Noise generation
Perturbation of the
initial wind field

SWAN
Wind-wave
forecast

SWAN (ۭ N)
Wind-wave
forecast ensemble

BSM
Water level & currents
forecast

BSM (ۭ N)
Water level & currents
forecast ensemble

Analyzer
Uncertainty analysis

Visualization

Figure 2: Workflow and computational scenario for uncertainty analysis of water level forecasts

3.2 Other examples of computational scenarios
Weighted Multi-model Ensemble Forecast. Solution of this task mean water level forecast
produced on the basis of combination of different atmospheric and hydrodynamic models. The main
problem PSE deals with, in this case, is necessity of organizing computational infrastructure, taking
into account the characteristic of each model. Due to the fact that the models may have fundamentally
different computing requirements and calculation times, PSE provides a possibility to integrate
heterogeneous resources and optimize workload distribution among th em. For example, Balt-P model
requires Linux-cluster with MPP-architecture but BSM runs on computational server under Windows
OS. Moreover, PSE offers a plan of concurrent model runs on demanded resources and organization of
an automatic data exchange among computational nods. It helps to synchronize simulation of level
fields h i (produced by different models) for their further usage as members of ensemble:

h* (t0 ,W )

Wi

¦i 1 ¦t 0 ³0
n

T

Ait (W i  s)hi (t0  t , s)ds ,

where Ait (∙) is a matrix transfer functions defining connection between value of ensemble forecast h * in
moment of time t0 (with τ lead time) and values of n different forecasts.
All details that are crucial for executing a package, allocating necessary computational resources
and distributing workloads are hidden from users. For example, calculation cycle of the threedimensional model Balt-P takes almost twice less time than the cycle of the two-dimensional model
BSM. But it is essential to wait for results of slowest one to combine both of them within an ens emble
forecast. So it is acceptable to run BSM on less powerful computer without total execution time
increasing.

1673

Flood Warning System

S. Kosukhin, A. Kalyuzhnaya and D. Nasonov

The procedure for collaborative decision making on floodgate maneuvering can be developed
through an interactive computational scenario performed in the PSE as composite application. The
purpose of this application is to produce floodgate maneuvering plans within the range of uncertainty
and to send them to mobile devices of the Decision Makin Group members whose task is to esteem the
proposed options. Thereafter the estimates are gathered in order to select the best plan. To account the
estimates of the independent experts a concept of plan quality is formalized as a combination of
separate properties, each of which is calculated separately: reliability, safety and economic efficiency.
CLAVIRE platform implements UC concept and ensures that all calculations are completed till the
given time.
City inundation simulation. Analysis of the possible consequences of floods in St. Petersburg is
also implemented as a separate composite application [17]. The first steps of the application perform
calculations of initial conditions based on water level forecast provided by the sea dynamics model.
Further steps are based on the alternate iterative work of two models coupled via boundary conditions.
The first one is DRSFM for surface flow simulation. The other one is implemented as a script for
COMSOL Multiphysics solver to calculate underground flow. Since the map of the underground
utility system of the city doesn't exist the calculations are performed using porous medium model. The
result of this application is the map of the area with the most likely zones of flooding marked.

4 Case study: St. Jude Storm flood in Saint-Petersburg
In October 2013 a savage storm named St. Jude hit the northwest Europe and Great Britain. The
cyclone came to Russia on the 29th of October causing blackouts and transport collapses in Leningrad
region. Moreover a St. Petersburg authorities had to activate flood protection system to prevent a sever
flood induced by the cyclone. Forecasted peak height was up to 250 cm.
Respecting the problem of uncertainty of hydrodynamic forecast it’s reasonable to make an
interval estimation of water level as it was shown in previous chapter this task was solved using
CLAVIRE platform. Such ensemble forecasting approach provides us set of forecast realizations with
different peak heights and other parameters. Sometimes variability of forecasted levels is very
significant, small (10%) disturbance in meteorological field could provoke catastrophic flood up to
500 cm instead of 290 cm predicted by ordinary dynamical forecast. The peak height in Figure 3(a)
represents a flood that is possible 1 time per 100 years with upper boundary of interval conformed to
recurrence interval 10000 years. St. Jude Storm flood forecast has not so significant width of
uncertainty interval due to the local weather conditions.
Such difference in uncertainty intervals of floods illustrates the thought that an interval analysis of
forecasted event is very important. It helps to estimate range of potential damage cost, connec ted with
possibility of not prevented flood or partly prevented due to insufficient structural safety. So, it is
essential to estimate damage risks associated with upcoming floods.
For example, economists quantify the cost of damage by inundation in case o f St. Jude Storm (if
the flood wasn’t prevented in time) approximately as $600 million.
Risk can be defined as probability of certain cost of damage:
R = P(H) ∙ W,
where P(H) is a probability of flood with peak height H and W is a cost of the damage. Cost of the
damage can be roughly represented as a function of height and duration of flood.
General risk function represented in Figure 3(b). It has a maximum for floods with peak heights
about 220 cm because of their high probability and significant damage. By using this function we can
find risk values for each forecast in ensemble (Figure 3(c)). But obtained risk value also connects with
probability of realization of certain forecast. Therefore, estimating a probability density, we can fetch
out a domain of the most probable forecasts with maximal risks. This domain characterizes the danger
of the flood.

1674

Flood Warning System

S. Kosukhin, A. Kalyuzhnaya and D. Nasonov

So, this approach, based on ensemble flood predictions, provide interval assessment of risk, which
is more reliable than point estimation only available in case of ordinary dynamical forec ast.

(a)

Figure 3: (a) Interval estimations of water level forecast; (b) General risk function, (c) Flood heights and risk
distribution

5 Conclusions
Outlined in this work problem solving environment for computational experiment provides
possibility for integrating computational models and data sources for storm surges forecasting tasks.
Several algorithms for problems in area of flood forecasting and its further prevention were
implemented as computational scenarios in PSE:
x
x
x
x

uncertainty analysis of water level forecasting system;
weighted multi-model ensemble forecast;
city inundation dynamics;
collaborative decision support for gates maneuvering.

1675

Flood Warning System

S. Kosukhin, A. Kalyuzhnaya and D. Nasonov

Operational forecast analysis within PSE helps to extend bounds of standard methods of
forecasting and forecast confidence estimation and, and achieve a more reliable result. St. Jude Storm
case study illustrates a range of possibilities provided by corresponding technology and importance of
the last one for such field as risk assessment.
Summarizing all that was said above it is clearly seen that such flexible distribut ed environment
give us a wide range of possible methods and approaches to solve complex tasks for maintains the
operational cycle or produce new generation of existing FWS.
This work was financially supported by the Government of the Russian Federati pon, Grants 074U01 and 11.G34.31.0019.

References
[1] Saint Petersburg Flood Prevention Facility Complex. http://dambaspb.ru (in Russian).
[2] Boukhanovsky, A.V., Ivanov, S.V. Urgent Computing for Operational Storm Surge Forecasting in Saint Petersburg // Procedia Computer Science. – 2012. – Vol. 9. – pp. 1704-1712.
[3] Alfieri, L., Velasco, D., and Thielen, J.: Flash flood detection through a multi-stage probabilistic warning
system for heavy precipitation events // Adv. Geosci. – 2011. – Vol. 29. – pp. 69-75.
[4] Thielen, J. et al. The European flood alert system – part 1: concept and development // Hydrol. Earth Syst.
Sci. – 2009. – Vol. 13. – pp. 125-140.
[5] Bajo, M ., Umgiesser, G. Storm surge forecast through a combination of dynamic and neural network models
// Ocean M odelling. – 2010. – Vol. 33. – pp. 1-9.
[6] de Vries, H. Probability forecasts for water levels at the coast of The Netherlands // M arine geodesy. – 2009.
– Vol. 32(2). – pp. 100-107.
[7] Ludäscher, B. et al. Scientific workflow management and the Kepler system // Concurrency and
Computation: Practice and Experience. – 2006. – Vol. 18(10). – pp. 1039-1065.
[8] Hull, D. et al. Taverna: a tool for building and running workflows of services // Nucleic Acids Research. –
2006. – Vol. 34. – pp. 729-732.
[9] Deelman, E. et al. Pegasus: a framework for mapping complex scientific workflows onto distributed systems
// Scientific Programming Journal. – 2005. – Vol. 13(3). – pp. 219-237.
[10] Barga, R.S. et al. Trident: Scientific workflow workbench for oceanography // Services – Part I, 2008. IEEE
Congress on. – 2008. – pp. 465-466.
[11] Knyazkov, K.V. et al. CLAVIRE: e-Science infrastructure for data-driven computing // Journal of
Computational Science. – 2012. – Vol. 3(6). – pp. 504-510.
[12] Ivanov, S.V. et al. Simulation-based collaborative decision support for surge floods prevention in St.
Petersburg // Journal of Computational Science. – 2012. – Vol. 3(6). – pp. 450-455.
[13] Kovalchuk, S.V. et al. Virtual Simulation Objects concept as a framework for syst em-level simulation //
Proceedings of the 8th IEEE International Conference on eScience (eScience 2012). – 2012. – pp. 1-8.
[14] M ichalakes, J. et al. The Weather Research and Forecasting M odel: software architecture and performance.
In 11th ECM WF Workshop on the use of High Performance Computing in M eteorology, edited by George
M ozdzynski. Reading, U.K.
[15] Klevanny, K.A., M atveyev, G.V., Voltzinger, N.E. Integrated modelling system for coastal area dynamics //
International Journal for Numerical M ethods in Fluids. – 1994. – Vol. 19(3). – pp. 181-206.
[16] Jamieson, S.R. et al. A highly efficient 2D flood model with sub-element topography // Proceedings of the
Institution of Civil Engineers. Water M anagement. – 2012. – Vol. 165(10). – pp. 581-595.
[17] Krzhizhanovskaya, V.V. et al. Distributed simulation of city inundation by coupled surface and subsurface
porous flow for urban flood decision support system // Procedia Computer Science. – 2013. – Vol. 18. – pp.
1046-1056.

1676

