Procedia Computer Science
Volume 29, 2014, Pages 1610–1620
ICCS 2014. 14th International Conference on Computational Science

Simulating Congestion Dynamics of Train
Rapid Transit using Smart Card Data
Nasri Bin Othman, Erika Fille Legara, Vicknesh Selvam, and
Christopher Monterola∗
Complex Systems Programme, Institute of High Performance Computing,
Agency for Science, Technology and Research,
1 Fusionpolis Way, #16-16, Connexis North, Singapore 138632
{othmannb, legaraeft, selvamv, monterolac}@ihpc.a-star.edu.sg

Abstract
Investigating congestion in train rapid transit systems (RTS) in today’s urban cities is a challenge compounded by limited data availability and diﬃculties in model validation. Here, we
integrate information from travel smart card data, a mathematical model of route choice, and
a full-scale agent-based model of the Singapore RTS to provide a more comprehensive understanding of the congestion dynamics than can be obtained through analytical modelling alone.
Our model is empirically validated, and allows for close inspection of the dynamics including
station crowdedness, average travel duration, and frequency of missed trains—all highly pertinent factors in service quality. Using current data, the crowdedness in all 121 stations appears
to be distributed log-normally. In our preliminary scenarios, we investigate the eﬀect of population growth on service quality. We ﬁnd that the current population (2 million) lies below a
critical point; and increasing it beyond a factor of approximately 10% leads to an exponential
deterioration in service quality. We also predict that incentivizing commuters to avoid the most
congested hours can bring modest improvements to the service quality provided the population
remains under the critical point. Finally, our model can be used to generate simulated data for
statistical analysis when such data are not empirically available, as is often the case.
Keywords: agent-based modelling, data-driven simulations, urban complexity, transportation dynamics

1

Introduction

To tackle rising population density in urban cities, transportation planners often construct train
rapid transit systems (RTS) as a ﬁrst step. Yet continued population growth forces the RTS to
evolve towards increased complexity with more train lines added to satisfy demand. With the
increased complexity, planners are confronted with the diﬃculty of predicting commuter ridership, route choices, and also the various outcomes of the system during disruptions. Moreover,
∗ Corresponding

1610

author

Selection and peer-review under responsibility of the Scientiﬁc Programme Committee of ICCS 2014
c The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V.
doi:10.1016/j.procs.2014.05.146

Simulating Congestion Dynamics of Train Rapid Transit using Smart Card Data

Nasri et al.

increased station and train crowdedness in RTS lead to congestion, commuter discomfort, trip
delays, and lowered overall service quality standards. It is therefore imperative that modern
transportation models be capable of investigating not just the issues of eﬃcient, robust and
scalable transportation, but also of commuter comfort and satisfaction.
The introduction of smart card ticketing in RTS has serendipitously enabled large-scale
data analytics into commuter travel behaviour [1, 15]. Analytical and regression models have
been developed to estimate commuters’ spatio-temporal density [16], identiﬁcation of boarded
trains [10], travel patterns [4], and transit use variability [13]. Yet, it is noted that the information captured by smart cards has limitations [15]; for example, most datasets do not contain
routing information as they capture information only at the entry and egress points of journeys.
In contrast to analytical and regression models, agent-based models (ABM) strive to model
each individual agent in a manner most natural to the system at hand [3]. Essentially, an
agent is autonomous and formulates decisions and interacts with other agents directly. By
directly replicating the mechanics of the system, an ABM permits the observation of emergent
phenomena that arise from the interactions of the agents with each other [3]—provided the
mechanics are correctly characterised and the model is well-calibrated.
ABM has seen recent success in modelling large-scale transportation [7, 14, 17]. However,
there are not many studies which incorporate smart card data to drive RTS demand for better
calibration. In our previous work [11], we had leveraged upon anonymized travel smart card
transactional data to synthesise travel demand for a smaller-scale agent-based model of the
Singapore transit system involving only one of the operational train lines, and achieved a very
close match between the simulated and empirical travel duration distributions. In that work,
we also investigated the dynamics of the smaller-scale system with regard to population growth.
Here, we extend our previous work [11] by: 1) expanding the model to cover all seven operational lines; 2) adding a route-choice mechanism inferred statistically from empirical travel
duration distributions [12]; 3) incorporating station-speciﬁc walk-times; 4) investigating dynamics that were not directly measurable in our dataset, such as station crowdedness; and 5) running
further population growth scenarios. We validate our model by ensuring the travel duration
distributions generated from our simulations are well-calibrated to the empirical dataset. This
would lend strength to any inferences derived from our scenarios. Apart from these goals, ultimately, we strive to construct a simulation platform that can be used to evaluate the eﬃcacy
of proposed strategies in tackling current and future urban transportation issues.

2

Data

Our model is dependent on data for the following purposes: 1) to construct the transit infrastructure, 2) to instantiate the commuter agents corresponding to the actual travel demand,
3) to calibrate the travel time components of the network, and 4) to accurately model the
commuters’ decision making (e.g., route choice).
Our main data source is the anonymized travel smart card dataset for public transport users
in Singapore, obtained from the Land Transport Agency (LTA) of Singapore. This amounts to
over 14 million train journey records for 2 million unique card IDs taken across a full week. A
trip begins with a tap in of the smart card at the origin station, and terminates with a tap out at
the destination station. Here, we use the following ﬁelds for each record: origin (tap-in station),
destination (tap-out station), tap-in time, and trip duration. From the origin, destination, and
tap-in time ﬁelds, we can reconstruct the travel demand for any given origin-destination (O-D)
pair and time. The trip duration ﬁeld is used for validating the simulation.
To construct the train network in our model, we consulted publicly-available resources,
1611

Simulating Congestion Dynamics of Train Rapid Transit using Smart Card Data

Nasri et al.

RTS Simulation Architecture

Core components

Simulation input

Random number generator
Discrete event scheduler
Message service

Virtual RTS network

Execution
parameters

RTS
network

Agents

Train dispatch
schedule

Smart card
data

Simulation processes

Train line

Station

Train agent

Train generator

Line edge

Platform

Commuter agent

Commuter generator

Figure 1: RTS simulation architecture. Components are grouped under ﬁve major categories.
The dashed arrows indicate the inﬂuence/interaction of components to other components. The
solid diamonds under the Virtual RTS network group indicate composition.
including the LTA website1 . This yields the set of all train stations, their connectivity, and
travel time between two adjacent stations. Information regarding the ﬁrst and last trains at
each station are also publicly available, and is used to estimate the train dispatch schedule.
Lastly, we estimated the walking times along the stations in order to account for commuter
locomotion. This is done via several physical tours of the stations. The measurements made
are coarse and not empirically veriﬁed; however, they are suﬃcient since walking is usually the
smallest component of travel—typically less than 2 minutes.

3

Methodology

Figure 1 shows the architecture of our agent-based model. As with many computational agentbased models, it is powered by a discrete event scheduler to schedule agents and processes;
a random number generator to introduce stochasticity; and a message service to enable agent
communication and interaction. Simulation scheduling utilises a combination of time-based and
event-based processes. Simulation input includes execution parameters, the RTS network, an
estimated train dispatch schedule, and the smart card data comprising the journeys for the day
being simulated. Two types of agents are modelled: trains and commuters.
The input RTS network—comprising 121 stations, 412 directed edges connecting adjacent
stations, and 7 train lines—is used to construct a virtual network consisting of station entities
connected via the given edges and lines. For each line connecting to a station, two platforms
are created—one for each direction—where train agents may park and commuter agents may
wait, board and alight trains. Stations connected to multiple lines are termed interchanges.
Commuter agents are inserted into the station when they tap-in or alight from a train, and are
removed when they tap-out or board a train. The number of commuters at a station at any
time determines its crowdedness, a useful measure of RTS congestion.
1 http://www.publictransport.sg/content/publictransport/en/homepage/trainmap.html
Last accessed: January 2014

1612

Simulating Congestion Dynamics of Train Rapid Transit using Smart Card Data

Nasri et al.

Our network data include estimations of walking time for all tapping gate-to-platform and
platform-to-platform (for transfers) combinations. Commuter agents will have to walk from
point to point in the station; for instance, they cannot immediately board trains upon tapping
in but must ﬁrst walk to the target platform. Walking time is determined by sampling from
a normal distribution centered around the estimated walking time. It is not necessary to ﬁnetune the walking time distribution beyond calibrating the mean as other sources of randomness
(e.g., arrival of trains) will dominate the travel duration instead. Currently, walking time is
unaﬀected by station crowdedness as pedestrian dynamics are not simulated.
We estimated the train dispatch schedule from information obtained in the LTA website.
This schedule is used by the train generator process to construct and insert train agents into the
simulation. The inter-event time between the insertion of trains on the same track is governed
by the train dispatch frequency. Currently this is set to: 1.5–4.5 minutes for peak hours (7:30–
9:30am and 5:30–7:30pm) and 4.5–7.5 minutes for oﬀ-peak hours—normally distributed (with
truncation). Due to stochasticity, the total number of trains dispatched in a day is not ﬁxed.
Train agents are inserted into their initial platforms, and will travel the span of the line
until they have reached the ﬁnal platforms. A train agent waits for a random amount of time in
each platform (55–65 seconds if on an interchange; 30–40 seconds otherwise) before proceeding
to the next platform. Commuter agents may only board and alight during the time the train
agent waits on a platform. A train will be removed shortly after it reaches the ﬁnal platform.
A train has a limited commuter capacity (1920 for mass-rapid transit lines, 105 for light-rapid
transit lines), and commuters who are unable to board a train will have to wait for the next
train and are considered to have missed the train.
We utilise the anonymized smart card data from LTA to construct the commuter agents.
From each relevant record, the commuter generator process constructs a commuter agent based
on its tap-in time, origin station and destination station. The commuter agent is inserted
into the origin at the speciﬁed tap-in time and will have to navigate the RTS to reach the
destination, where it can be removed by tapping-out. In order to reach the destination, the
commuter agent may undertake the following sequence of actions: 1) walking from tap-in gate
to platform; 2) waiting for a train; 3) boarding a train; 4) alighting a train; 5) walking to
transfer to a diﬀerent platform; and 6) walking to tap-out gate and tapping-out. The total time
a commuter takes from tapping in to tapping out determines its travel duration. This simulated
travel duration can be compared with the empirical travel duration for validation.
As our full-scale model incorporates multiple RTS lines, there may be multiple routes for
a commuter to take from origin (O) to destination (D). This is empirically evidenced by the
multi-modality of the travel duration distributions for certain O-D pairs. We use the approach
in [12] to determine the routes for a given O-D as follows. First, the set of candidate routes are
computed under certain constraints (e.g., cannot be much longer than shortest path or involve
too many transfers). Then, the empirical probability density function is ﬁtted using one or more
Gumbel distribution components. Each component is matched against a candidate route by
comparing the mean duration and the path distance of the route. The integral of the component
determines the probability that the route is chosen. From the set of route-probability pairs, we
can then probabilistically assign a route for each commuter agent.
Since we lack reliable empirical data on certain necessary aspects of the model (e.g., walking
time, train arrivals), we had to assume their statistical distributions in a parsimonious manner.
If a central tendency is expected, the normal distribution is used. The simulation is calibrated
manually by adjusting the travel parameters and checking if an improvement is achieved. Even
with these assumptions and manual calibration, we ﬁnd that our model is still fairly accurate
in capturing the travel duration statistics.
1613

Simulating Congestion Dynamics of Train Rapid Transit using Smart Card Data

Metric

Symbol

Bhattacharyya’s coeﬃcient [2, 5]

BC

Probability plot correlation coeﬃcient [8]

P P CC

Linfoot’s criteria [9]

Fidelity

F

Structural Content

C

q(t)2 dt
p(t)2 dt

Correlation Quantity

Q

p(t)q(t)dt
p(t)2 dt

Nasri et al.

Computation
p(t)q(t)dt
¯
¯
(Xi −X)(Y
i −Y )
σX σY

1−

(q(t)−p(t))2 dt
p(t)2 dt

p(t)–Empirical duration density; q(t)–Simulation duration density;
X–Sorted empirical duration observations; Y –Sorted simulation duration observations
Table 1: Goodness-of-ﬁt metrics

4
4.1

Evaluation of agent-based model
Validation

We validate our model by comparing the distributions of travel duration derived from our
simulations against the empirical data, for each day in our dataset. To reduce standard error,
only origin-destination (O-D) pairs with a demand of at least 2000 are compared. For each pair,
we collected the travel duration observations from 30 simulation runs and the empirical sample
(for that day), and computed the trip duration density functions via kernel density estimation.
Goodness-of-ﬁt is computed via these metrics: 1) Bhattacharyya’s coeﬃcient [2, 5] (BC);
2) probability plot correlation coeﬃcient [8] (P P CC); and 3) Linfoot’s criteria [9], comprising
of Fidelity (F ), Structural Content (C), and Correlation Quantity (Q). BC approximates the
overlap between two probability distributions and is more lenient towards outliers than other
metrics. P P CC is invariant to linear transformations and ignores shifts of the curves. Linfoot’s
criteria is a set of metrics which compare the peak alignment, general similarity and ﬁdelity of
the empirical and simulated curves. The metric formulations are listed in Table 1.
The goodness-of ﬁt results, averaged over 30 runs, are shown in Table 2. See also Figure 2
for goodness of ﬁt for two selected O-D pairs. With BC above 0.9, our results are in good
agreement with the empirical data across the entire week. The P P CC and F metrics are lower
(0.7-0.8). This is possibly due to their formulations which are highly sensitive to noise in the
simulation and empirical samples. Note that the observed empirical durations compose a single
sample for the demand in a given O-D and day; the true distribution is unknown.

4.2

Observed dynamics

From our model, we can measure phenomena not directly available from the empirical data. In
Figure 3, we show the computed measurements of maximum station crowdedness and missed
trains. Most stations do not experience signiﬁcant missed train events even when crowded,
leading to a weak positive correlation. Maximum crowdedness and missed train events are
typically highest in the interchanges and surrounding stations (not depicted). Interestingly,
maximum crowdedness appears to be log-normally distributed according to this equation:
X = exp(5.513 + 1.319Z),
1614

Simulating Congestion Dynamics of Train Rapid Transit using Smart Card Data

Day
Monday
Tuesday
Wednesday
Thursday
Friday
Saturday
Sunday
Overall

O-D pairs
89
97
102
100
121
92
52
653

BC
0.940
0.934
0.932
0.934
0.941
0.940
0.926
0.936

P P CC
0.819
0.823
0.841
0.841
0.821
0.763
0.737
0.812

Nasri et al.

Linfoot’s criteria
F
C
Q
0.813 1.138 0.975
0.767 1.167 0.967
0.780 1.223 1.001
0.781 1.245 1.013
0.818 1.139 0.978
0.840 1.086 0.963
0.813 1.310 1.061
0.801 1.178 0.990

Table 2: Simulation goodness-of-ﬁt for all O-D pairs above 2000 demand, averaged over 30 runs

STN#2 to STN#1

STN#2 to STN#14

empirical
simulated
= 4556
= 0.973
= 0.720
= 0.945
= 1.075

N
BC
P P CC
F
C

Density

Density

N
BC
P P CC
F
C

empirical
simulated

Q = 1.010
0

5
10
15
20
Duration of travel (minutes)

(a) Most frequented O-D

= 3006
= 0.840
= 0.930
= 0.444
= 2.247

Q = 1.346
25

20

25

30
35
40
45
50
Duration of travel (minutes)

55

(b) Penultimate station eﬀect

Figure 2: Trip duration density for simulation (dashed) and empirical (solid). Yellow band
indicates the inter-quartile range from 30 simulation samples. (b) shows the penultimate station
eﬀect, manifested as a secondary peak in the empirical curve but not the simulated curve.

where X is maximum crowdedness of a station and Z is a standard-normal variable, with a
probability plot correlation coeﬃcient (P P CC) [8] of 0.976 for the 121 stations. We have not
yet hypothesized why the log-normal ﬁt for crowdedness holds. No such ﬁt holds for missed
train events. These measurements are highly sensitive to the input train dispatch schedule, and
further calibration is required before these results can be meaningfully interpreted.
Chakirov [4] inferred that commuters boarding from penultimate (second-to-last) stations
tend to travel backwards to the last station and re-board in order to attain a seat for longer
journeys even at the cost of additional travelling time. The empirical distribution in Figure 2b
shows this penultimate station eﬀect on the travel duration, manifesting as a secondary peak.
As our model does not account for this eﬀect, the secondary peak does not appear in our results.
Yet, since our model captures the supply-side (i.e., train) dynamics accurately, we may conclude
that this eﬀect is indeed caused solely by the commuters’ behaviour rather than overcrowding
or missed trains. This is reinforced by the observation that our simulation still matches well
for trips starting from the same station but to nearer destinations, whereby the eﬀect is less
pronounced. An extension of our model is required to account for this eﬀect.
1615

Simulating Congestion Dynamics of Train Rapid Transit using Smart Card Data

20000

N

=

121

ρ

=

0.736

15000
10000
5000

6000
Simulated maximum
station crowdedness

Total missed train events

25000

N

=

X

=

e5.513+1.319Z

P P CC

=

0.976

Nasri et al.

121

4000

2000

0

0
0
2000
4000
6000
Maximum station crowdedness

(a) Correlation

0

2000
4000
Log-normal ﬁt

6000

(b) Quantile-quantile plot

Figure 3: Simulated maximum station crowdedness and total missed train events experienced
in 121 RTS stations throughout Monday. (a) Correlation between each station’s maximum
crowdedness and missed trains. Most stations, even with high crowdedness, do not experience
signiﬁcant missed trains. A weak positive correlation is seen (ρ = 0.736). (b) Quantile-quantile
plot comparing the simulated maximum crowdedness and a log-normal ﬁt. (b) Quantile-quantile
plot comparing the simulated maximum crowdedness and a log-normal ﬁt. The most crowded
stations appear to be overestimated by the ﬁt.

5
5.1

Preliminary scenarios
Scenario descriptions

A major concern to urban planners is the scalability of their transit systems with regard to
commuter population growth. In our preliminary scenarios, we adjust the transit demand in
our model to predict how population growth may aﬀect commuter experiences with respect
to travel duration and number of trains missed. Monte Carlo sampling is performed on the
2,078,010 journeys in the Monday dataset to generate the desired transit demand. In addition
to population scaling, we introduce a station crowdedness limit, Ψ, which when exceeded will
reject commuters from tapping in. This limit is tripled for interchanges (3Ψ). This limit is used
to prevent impossible crowdedness levels and to measure scalability by counting the rejected
commuters. Additionally, we expanded the peak hour train dispatch timings to 6–11am and
4–9pm, as it is the least that operators can do to alleviate peak congestion. Two scenarios are
investigated: (A) adjusting the crowdedness limit; and (B) re-shaping of commuter demand.
In our previous work [11], a smaller scale model revealed the existence of a critical point whereby scaling the commuter population further causes exponential increases
in travel duration. Here, in Scenario A, we scale the commuter population from 78,010
to 6,078,010 in steps of 100,000, using the following values for station crowdedness limit,
Ψ ∈ {∞, 9000, 7000, 5000, 3000}. This scenario aims to replicate our previous results [11] and to
determine if the station crowdedness limit (previously unaccounted) would aﬀect the dynamics
observed. We examine an extreme range for the commuter population (78K to 6M) to allow
us to discern the general trend in congestion dynamics when scaling the population. Diﬀerent
values of Ψ allow us to measure the dynamics of rejecting commuters.
Currie [6] highlighted that a program in Australia to incentivize commuters to complete
their morning journeys earlier resulted in 23% participation causing reduced travel demand
during the morning peak. In Scenario B, we scale the commuter population from 2,078,010
1616

Simulating Congestion Dynamics of Train Rapid Transit using Smart Card Data

Nasri et al.

Figure 4: Population scaling results for scenario A showing the relationship between scaling
population (in steps of 100K) and: (a) average travel duration, (b) number of commuters who
missed trains, and (c) number of missed train events—with respect to the station crowdedness
limit, Ψ. Markers are plotted every 500K population. (a) and (c) are not linear transformations
of each other. This is so even if we divide (c) by the current population to get an average.

(original) to 6,078,010 in steps of 100,000, ﬁx Ψ = 3000, and temporally reshape the commuter
demand during the most congested hours to investigate whether the reshaped demand will
bring improvements. A participation ratio, Φ ∈ {0.00, 0.05, 0.10, 0.20, 0.30}, determines the
proportion of commuters originally tapping-in at the most congested hours who will adjust
their tap-in times. Participating commuters who would have tapped-in at 7–9am would instead
tap-in at 6–7am; and those who tapped in at 6–8pm would instead tap-in at 8–9pm. 40.2% of
journeys in the empirical data have tap-ins within those original ranges.

5.2

Scenario results

Figure 4 shows the results for Scenario A, averaged over 30 simulation runs. Below 2M population, missed trains are hardly encountered and the travel duration is lower bounded by the
travel time of the trains, which are unaﬀected by the commuter population in our model. A
critical point is seen around the 2–3M population range, whereby all three measures exhibit
exponential growth. The location of the point appears invariant with respect to Ψ, but is different for each indicator. Decreasing Ψ leads to signiﬁcant reduction in all indicators. Yet even
with Ψ = 3000, the critical point still exists. At 6M population and Ψ = 3000, over 10% of
commuters (652K) were rejected and did not manage to tap-in due to station overcrowdedness.
If these commuters were not rejected (6M population and Ψ = ∞), all three measures would
be signiﬁcantly worse. This scenario shows that commuters who tap-in at overcrowded stations
will unduly impact service quality and should be rejected and provided with alternative means
of transportation.
Figure 5 shows the results for Scenario B, averaged over 30 simulation runs. Noting the
diﬀerences are much smaller in magnitude compared to the original curves in Figure 4, reshaping
clearly yields only a modest improvement. Nonetheless, in almost all cases, it is advantageous
for commuters to avoid the most congested hours. 20% participation of commuters provides
1617

Simulating Congestion Dynamics of Train Rapid Transit using Smart Card Data

Nasri et al.

Figure 5: Population scaling (with reshaping) results for scenario B showing the diﬀerences
between reshaping (Φ > 0) and no reshaping (Φ = 0.00, horizontal line). For reference, the
actual values for the Φ = 0.00 case are shown in Figure 4 with Ψ = 3000. Reshaping yields
improvement in almost all cases, with Φ = 0.20 displaying the best improvements.
the best improvement to service quality. This is coincidentally similar to the 23% participation
reported by Currie [6]. Beyond 20% participation, the reshaped timings form new demand
peaks that create their own congestion problems. Thus, 20% participation represents a sweet
spot for our experiments.
All in all, these results show that the current RTS infrastructure in Singapore is running
close to its critical capacity. A proportional increase in commuter population by approximately
10% can likely be endured, but the frequency of missed trains will be nearly tripled (22K to
62K). Beyond the critical point, even measures such as expanding peak hours and reshaping
demand temporally still prove insuﬃcient, suggesting that more comprehensive strategies must
be used to tackle congestion (e.g., increasing train frequency; adding new lines; reshaping
demand spatio-temporally and not just temporally).

6

Conclusion

In this work, we had incorporated empirically-derived travel demand data into a full-scale
agent-based model of the train rapid transit system in Singapore. Our approach granted us
a more comprehensive view of congestion dynamics than aﬀorded by analysing the dataset
directly. We were able to synthesise highly detailed measurements, including crowdedness and
number of trains missed. With these measurements, transport operators can accurately estimate
the comfort and satisfaction of commuters, allowing them to construct strategies to maximise
comfort and satisfaction, in addition to the traditional objectives of eﬃcient transport.
The usefulness of an agent-based transport simulation goes beyond accurately estimating
current dynamics. In our preliminary scenarios, our model was used to predict the eﬃcacy of
various strategies under population growth. Such predictions are highly invaluable to planners,
but would be diﬃcult to achieve using analytical and regression models alone. Since agentbased models require good calibration to make reliable predictions, it is critical that calibration
be performed against more empirical data, including when the RTS experiences exceptional
1618

Simulating Congestion Dynamics of Train Rapid Transit using Smart Card Data

Nasri et al.

conditions such as disruptions and special occasions (e.g., New Year’s Eve).
One implication of our work is that it should be possible to apply this approach to RTS
deployments in other countries, so long as demand (empirical or synthetic), train dispatch schedules, walk times, and network structure are available. Indeed, our results matched well with the
empirical travel durations using input largely derived from publicly available information—with
the exception of the anonymized smart card dataset and estimated walk times.
Finally, train rapid transit represents only one travel mode for commuters, albeit often it
metaphorically represents the backbone of transport in an urban city. Other modes available
in Singapore include public buses, taxis, private vehicles, and walking. It is common for one
person in a week to utilise several modes depending on circumstances. Indeed, these modes
are inter-dependent, and in the future, we will look into integrating several transport models
to capture a holistic multi-modal view of transportation.

7

Acknowledgements

We thank the Land Transport Authority of Singapore for providing the anonymized smart card
data. We thank Dr. Gary Lee Kee Khoon and Dr. Terence Hung Gih Guang for discussions.
This research is supported by the Science and Engineering Research Council of the Agency
for Science, Technology and Research (A*STAR) of Singapore (Complex Systems Programme
grant number 122 45 04056); and by the A*STAR Computational Resource Centre through the
use of its high performance computing facilities.

References
[1] M. Bagchi and P.R. White. The potential of public transport smart card data. Transport Policy,
12(5):464 – 474, 2005.
[2] Anil Bhattacharyya. On a measure of divergence between two statistical populations deﬁned by
their probability distributions. Bull. Calcutta Math. Soc, 35(99-109):4, 1943.
[3] Eric Bonabeau. Agent-based modeling: Methods and techniques for simulating human systems.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 99(suppl 3):7280–7287, 2002.
[4] Artem Chakirov and Alexander Erath. Use of public transport smart card fare payment data for
travel behaviour analysis in Singapore. In 16th International Conference of Hong Kong Society
for Transportation Studies, December 2011.
[5] J.K. Chung, P.L. Kannappan, C.T. Ng, and P.K. Sahoo. Measures of distance between probability
distributions. Journal of Mathematical Analysis and Applications, 138(1):280 – 292, 1989.
[6] Graham Currie. Quick and eﬀective solution to rail overcrowding. Transportation Research Record:
Journal of the Transportation Research Board, 2146(1):35–42, 2010.
[7] A. Erath, P. Fourie, M. Eggermond, S. Ordez, A. Chakirov, and K. Axhausen. Large-scale agentbased transport demand model for Singapore. In 13th International Conference on Travel Behaviour Research (IATBR), July 2012.
[8] James J. Filliben. The probability plot correlation coeﬃcient test for normality. Technometrics,
17(1):111–117, 1975.
[9] F.O. Huck, C.L. Fales, N. Halyo, R.W. Samms, and K. Stacy. Image gathering and processing:
information and ﬁdelity. J. Opt. Soc. Am. A, 2(10):1644–1666, October 1985.
[10] Takahiko Kusakabe, Takamasa Iryo, and Yasuo Asakura. Estimation method for railway passengers
train choice behavior with smart card transaction data. Transportation, 37(5):731–749, 2010.

1619

Simulating Congestion Dynamics of Train Rapid Transit using Smart Card Data

Nasri et al.

[11] E.F. Legara, C. Monterola, T. Hung, and G. Lee. Cascade of travel duration delays in a rapid
transport system [abstract]. In European Conference on Complex Systems Book of Abstracts, pages
94–95. Complex Systems Society and complexitat.CAT, September 2013.
[12] C. Monterola, E.F. Legara, P. Di, G. Lee, and T. Hung. Non-invasive procedure to probe the
route choices of commuters in rail transit systems [abstract]. In European Conference on Complex
Systems Book of Abstracts. Complex Systems Society and complexitat.CAT, September 2013.
[13] Catherine Morency, Martin Trpanier, and Bruno Agard. Measuring transit use variability with
smart-card data. Transport Policy, 14(3):193 – 203, 2007.
[14] A. Neumann and M. Balmer. Micro meets macro: A combined approach for a large-scale, agentbased, multi-modal and dynamic transport model for Berlin. Technical report, VSP Working
Paper 11-14, TU Berlin, Transport Systems Planning and Transport Telematics, 2011., 2011.
[15] M.P. Pelletier, M. Trpanier, and C. Morency. Smart card data use in public transit: A literature
review. Transportation Research Part C: Emerging Technologies, 19(4):557 – 568, 2011.
[16] L. Sun, D.H. Lee, A. Erath, and X. Huang. Using smart card data to extract passenger’s spatiotemporal density and train’s trajectory of MRT system. In Proceedings of the ACM SIGKDD
International Workshop on Urban Computing, pages 142–148. ACM, 2012.
[17] Mohamed Wahba and Amer Shalaby. Large-scale application of MILATRAS: case study of the
Toronto transit network. Transportation, 38(6):889–908, 2011.

1620

