Procedia Computer Science
Volume 29, 2014, Pages 1216–1226
ICCS 2014. 14th International Conference on Computational Science

Towards a Dynamic Data Driven Wildﬁre Behavior
Prediction System at European Level
Tom`as Art´es1 , Andr´es Cencerrado1 , Ana Cort´es1 , Tom`as Margalef1
, Dar´ıo Rodr´ıguez-Aseretto2 , Thomas Petroliagkis2 , and Jes´
us
2
San-Miguel-Ayanz
1

Computer Architecture and Operating Systems department,
Universitat Aut`
onoma de Barcelona, 08193 Bellaterra, Spain
tomas.artes@uab.cat,andres.cencerrado@uab.cat,ana.cortes@uab.cat,tomas.margalef@uab.cat
2
European Commission,Joint Research Centre,Institute for Environment and Sustainability,
Via E. Fermi 2749, I-21027 Ispra (VA), Italy
dario.rodriguez@jrc.ec.europa.eu,thomas.petroliagkis@jrc.ec.europa.eu,
jesus.san-miguel@jrc.ec.europa.eu

Abstract
Southern European countries are severally aﬀected by forest ﬁres every year, which lead to
very large environmental damages and great economic investments to recover aﬀected areas.
All aﬀected countries invest lots of resources to minimize ﬁre damages. Emerging technologies
are used to help wildﬁre analysts determine ﬁre behavior and spread aiming at a more eﬃcient
use of resources in ﬁre ﬁghting. In this case of trans-boundary ﬁres, the European Forest
Fire Information System (EFFIS) works as a complementary system to a national and regional
systems in the countries, providing information required for international collaboration on forest
ﬁres prevention and ﬁghting. In this work, we describe a way of exploiting all the available
information in the system to feed a Dynamic Data Driven wildﬁre behavior prediction model
that can deliver results to support operational decision. The model is able to calibrate the
unknown parameters based on the real observed data, such as wind condition and fuel moisture
using a steering loop. Since this process is computational intensive, we exploit multi-core
platforms using a hybrid MPI-OpenMP programming paradigm.
Keywords: DDDAS, Input Data Uncertainty, High Performance Computing, Calibration, Hybrid MPIOpenMP, Applications, Evolutionary Computation, Forest Fires, EFFIS

1

Introduction

Europe suﬀers approximately 65,000 ﬁres every year, which burn, on average, half a million
hectares of forested areas [1]. The main direct eﬀect of forest ﬁres is the destruction of the
natural landscape and the consequent loss of ecosystem services that have drastic economic
1216

Selection and peer-review under responsibility of the Scientiﬁc Programme Committee of ICCS 2014
c The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V.
doi:10.1016/j.procs.2014.05.109

DDDAS Wildﬁre Behavior Prediction System at European Level

Tom`
as Art´es et al.

impact. In addition, and no less important, ﬁres also result in the loss of human lives every
year. Although being forest ﬁres a problem present in all EU members, the most aﬀected
areas to this kind of hazards are the southern countries due to their meteorological conditions,
specially during summer season. All aﬀected countries invest lots of resources to minimize
ﬁre damages, but many times when dealing with large ﬁres, regional and national disaster
management units are lack of eﬃcient and reliable tools to help wildﬁre analysts.
Wildﬁre spread models/simulators are the basic element for designing forest ﬁre prediction
frameworks to be used as a decision support systems during an ongoing disaster. However, it
is well known that the forecast ﬁre evolutions provided by existing ﬁre spread simulators do
not exactly reproduce the real behaviour of the ﬁre. The reason for such a diﬀerence ranges
from the input parameters uncertainty to the imprecision of the model itself. In previous works
[2, 3, 4], it has been stated that a pre-processing of the simulator input parameters based on
a steering loop driven by real data acquisition and ﬁre behaviour observation, could lead to
enhanced forecast ﬁre evolutions. Since forest ﬁres are a dynamic phenomena, which is quite
aﬀected by changing data such as meteorological information, the mentioned pre-processing
data phase has been designed as a feedback loop where gathered data guides the simulation
and, the simulation results at a time, could eventually drive the data collection. This way of
work feeds the so called Dynamic Data Driven Application System [5, 6]. However, not all the
information needed by the prediction system could be considered in the calibration process. In
particular, those data considered as static information such as elevation maps and fuel data, is
typically obtained from public repositories. However, there is not an unique source of this kind
of data and, consequently, the ﬁre behaviour prediction delivered by a given forest ﬁre spread
model could vary according to the selected static data sources. Furthermore, gathering dynamic
data such as real ﬁre perimeter evolution and meteorological data could be a bottleneck to the
system if there is no a clear way to proceed.
So, in order to provide the EU community with a reliable forest ﬁre spread prediction system,
it would be mandatory to have standard actuation protocols at European level, specially when
dealing with cross-boundaries events, that specify a common data source repository to be used
for ﬁre spread prediction purposes. EFFIS (European Forest Fire Information System) raises as
the EU common platform for this kind of assessment. Although EFFIS provides comprehensive
information on forest ﬁres at EU level, the component devoted to the prediction of forest ﬁre
spread is still at an initial stage. This work is a prove of concept to update the system to support
near-real time forest ﬁre spread forecast which can help on operational decisions specially on
trans-boundary forest ﬁres, which need international collaboration. Two kind of strategies are
adopted to test the viability of including a prediction module on EFFIS. First of all, a basic
prediction scheme has been tested using as source data all the information available at EFFIS
and, the second approach consists of applying a DDDAS for forest ﬁre spread prediction where
certain meteorological data values are tuned on-line. Since the prediction results delivered
by the DDDAS scheme must be obtained in a short time in order to be useful for mitigation
purposes, a hybrid programming scheme has been adopted to exploit the computing capabilities
of the current multi-core architectures.
Subsequently, in subsection 2 the calibration strategy based on a hybrid DDDAS scheme is
detailed. In section 3, an overview of the European Forest Fire Information System is reported.
A prove of concept is presented in section 4 based on a forest ﬁre that took place in Greece in
2011. And ﬁnally, the main conclusions of this work are described in section 5.
1217

DDDAS Wildﬁre Behavior Prediction System at European Level

2

Tom`
as Art´es et al.

Dynamic Data Driven Wildﬁre Behaviour Prediction

In this section, we describe in more detail, how the above mentioned dynamic data-driven
prediction scheme used to calibrate certain input parameters of the underlying simulator works
[7]. Figure 1 sketches how the two-stage approach is implemented. As it can be observed,
in order to launch an adjustment stage, it is necessary to have access to two consecutive real
ﬁre perimeters. Each time the system could be feed with a new observed ﬁre behaviour, the
calibration process could be initiated again. The goal is to have the system working in a
continuous fashion, to provide ﬁre evolution forecasts on continuous preset times horizons (steps
ti , being the ﬁrst two-stage prediction delivered at a certain time between t1 and t2 ). So, the
input data set used for the prediction stage is calibrated in the corresponding adjustment stage.
This methodology is simulator independent and it is ﬂexible enough to change the simulator
in a plug&play way. In this work, the used forest ﬁre spread simulator is FARSITE [8], which
is based on the Rothermel model [9]. The calibration/adjustment strategy used is Genetic
Algorithms (GA), which has been demonstrated to perform well for this problem [7, 3]. The
GA starts from an initial random population of individuals, each one representing a scenario to
be simulated. A scenario/individual is composed of a number of diﬀerent genes that represent
input variables such as dead fuel moisture, live fuel moisture, wind speed and direction, among
others. Each individual is simulated and it is evaluated comparing the predicted and real ﬁre
propagation. The representation of ﬁre evolutions is carried out using a cell map that indicates
whether a cell has been burnt or not at a certain time (time of arrival). Therefore, map
diﬀerences are evaluated by the ﬁtness function described in equation 1. This ﬁtness function
computes the symmetric diﬀerence between predicted and real burned areas.

Figure 1: Two-stage prediction method.

Dif f erence =

U nionCells − IntersectionCells
RealCells − InitCells

(1)

In equation 1, UnionCells is the number of cells which describe the surface burned considering predicted ﬁre and the real ﬁre. IntersectionCells is the number of cells burned in the
1218

DDDAS Wildﬁre Behavior Prediction System at European Level

Tom`
as Art´es et al.

real map and also in the predicted map, and RealCells are the cells burned in the real map.
InitCells is the number of cells burned at the starting time. This diﬀerence takes into account
the wrong burned cells and the mistaken for burned cells. According to this ﬁtness function the
whole population is ranked and the genetic operators selection, elitism, mutation and crossover
are performed over the population, producing an evolved population which will have, at least,
the best individual of the last generation (elitism). The new population is then evaluated in
the same way. This iterative process allows us to ﬁnd a good input parameter set, but it involves high computational cost due to the large amount of simulations required. Therefore, it
is essential to speed up the execution keeping the accuracy of the prediction. For this reason,
an implementation of the two stage methodology has been developed using High Performance
Computing techniques. Since the GA ﬁts the Master/Worker paradigm, an MPI [10] implementation has been developed. At the ﬁrst stage, the master node generates an initial random
population which is distributed among the workers. Then, the workers simulate each individual
and evaluate the ﬁtness function. The errors generated by the workers are sent back to the
master, which sorts the corresponding individuals by their error before applying the genetic
operators and producing a new population. This iterative process is repeated a ﬁxed number
of times. The last iteration (generation) contains a population from which the best individual
is taken as the best solution, and then it is used in the prediction stage. Since every simulation
can be carried out in a parallel way, the individual whose simulation takes longer determines
the elapsed time for that particular generation. In order to shorten simulation times, FARSITE
has been analyzed with proﬁling tools such as OmpP[11] and gprof [12] to determine which
regions of the code could be parallelized with OpenMP. The result of such analysis determined
the particular loops that could be parallelized using OpenMP pragmas. The results of such
parallelization have been presented in [13]. The parallelized loops represents about 60% of one
iteration execution time.

3

European Forest Fire Information System (EFFIS)

The European Forest Fire Information System (EFFIS) was established by the Joint Research
Centre (JRC) and the Directorate General for Environment of the European Commission, in
close collaboration with the Member States and neighbour countries, to provide harmonised
information required for international collaboration on forest ﬁre prevention and ﬁghting, specially in cases of trans-boundary ﬁre events. The EFFIS system supports the services in charge
of the protection of forests against ﬁres in the EU countries and provides the European Commission services and the European Parliament with updated and reliable information on wildland
ﬁres in Europe. Since its ﬁrst conception as a system providing ﬁre risk forecast and ﬁre danger
assessment, the EFFIS system has evolved to become a ﬁre monitoring system that comprises
all the phases of forest ﬁres, from the pre-ﬁre assessments to the post-ﬁre estimation of damages
and the analysis of vegetation recovery [1]. However, one missing component in this current
composition of the system is a ﬁre spread prediction module, which allows to forecast, in near
real-time, the areas threatened by the ﬁres in process across Europe. Figure 2 shows the modules that are currently operative at EFFIS. Related to Active Fire Detection, one can found
two modules Fire Detection and Burnt Area Maps. These modules are feed with data providing
from EU Fire Databases and satellite images (MODIS images). The Fire Detection geoparses
the ﬁre news with the MODIS hot spots, in order to identify ﬁre burnt areas perimeters. Those
perimeters are available at EFFIS from the Burnt Area Map module. The proposed new EFFIS
module will be directly connected to this modules, specially to the Burnt Area Map as it is
shown by the red cicle in ﬁgure 2. The inclusion of a DDDAS prediction scheme will lead to a
1219

DDDAS Wildﬁre Behavior Prediction System at European Level

Tom`
as Art´es et al.

Decision Support System, which could support operational decisions at European Level.

Figure 2: How to include forest ﬁre spread prediction in the current EFFIS scheme

The dynamic data driven wildﬁre behaviour prediction system described in section 2 requires, for being operational, near past information for calibration purposes and, forecast data
at the prediction stage. As it has been previously stated, input data stems from diﬀerent
sources of errors that will aﬀect the predictions results. Since the nature of the input data is
quite diﬀerent going from static information such as the topography of the terrain, to the very
dynamic meteorological data such as the wind speed and wind direction, it is very helpful to
rely on common data sources when dealing with trans-boundaring events. However, working
within a common data framework does not relive the system from input data errors, but at
least homogenizes the error treatment and the information delivered to the wildﬁre analysts.
In the following, it will be described how each of these information is considered by EFFIS:
1. Topography: This data is obtained by processing Digital Elevation Maps (DEMs). A
DEM deﬁnes the height of the terrain in every cell of the map. This is a discretization
of a continuous surface, taking into account measures in certain points of the terrain.
Those maps are obtained from the ASTER (Advanced Spaceborne Thermal Emission and
Reﬂection Radiometer) imaging instrument onboard NASAs Terra satellite that takes
high-resolution images of the earth. These images are processed and raster ﬁles are
extracted with the information needed to perform the ﬁre spread simulations (elevation,
aspect and slope). The ASTER map resolution is 30m.
2. Fuel map: The vegetation map (or fuel map) is a raster ﬁle that describes the predominant
vegetation in every cell. The fuel model used for ﬁre simulation purposes, is the standard
1220

DDDAS Wildﬁre Behavior Prediction System at European Level

Tom`
as Art´es et al.

fuel model deﬁned by [14]. This information has been obtained from the fuel type map
of Europe developed at the JRC. The classiﬁcation scheme adopted for the fuel map
encompasses 42 fuel types representing the variety of fuel complexes found in European
landscapes. A cross-walk to the original set of 13 ﬁre behaviour fuel models tabulated by
Anderson ﬁre spread model is done at the JRC [14].
3. Metereological data: The meteorological data used is the ECMWF (European Centre for
Medium-Range Weather Forecasts) operational high-resolution single global deterministic
model (ec16 ), with a horizontal resolution of about 16 km [15]. The model is initiated
on both the 00 ans 12 UTC analysis ﬁelds reaching to an 24-hour forecast horizon with
archived time-step of 3 hour. It is worth mentioning, that is the conﬁguration that it has
been used in this work for the experimental proposes, but it is not the unique source of
meteorological data processed at the JRC.
4. Fire Perimeter: One key point in the DDDAS scheme for wildﬁre spread prediction previously described, is the evolution of the ﬁre, that is, the capability to feed the system
with real observed ﬁre perimeters in a systematic time step. As much accurate the image/perimeter processing is, more eﬀective will be the steering loop. The EFFIS Burnt
Area Map module is in charge of this data. To obtain the ﬁre perimeter information,
the JRC relies on the MODIS (Moderate Resolution Imaging Spectroradiometer) sensors
systems, which are on board both the NASAs Terra and Aqua satellites. Each satellite
requires to complete 3 orbits (approximately 3 hours) to cover the whole Europe area, so
it could be possible to obtain ﬁre perimeters twice a day, one from each satellite [16]. The
image resolution provided by the MODIS system is of 250m.
All these data inputs have been harmonized to ﬁt a simulation grid map with a basic cell of
100mx100m square. Consequently, this resolution will be the one used in the forest ﬁre spread
prediction model when applying the dynamic data driven wildﬁre prediction strategy. In the
following section, the DDDAS approach for forest ﬁre behaviour prediction is applied to a case
study by using all the above described data provided by EFFIS.

4

Case of Study

As it has been previously stated, the experiments reported in this work, are the ﬁrst step
towards a methodology to exploit the paneuropean data available at the Joint Research Centre
within EFFIS, in order to couple into the system an operational forest ﬁre spread prediction
component. For that reason, we have retrieved the information of a past ﬁre that took place in
Greece during the summer season of 2011 in the region of Arkadia. In ﬁgure 3(a), the images
provided by the MODIS system are shown for three diﬀerent time instants. The corresponding
burnt areas (shapes) once the images have been processed, are shown in ﬁgure 3(b). These
shapes are the information available at EFFIS and they are the perimeters used to apply two
prediction approaches: a basic forest ﬁre prediction scheme where no calibration is applied and
the Dynamic Data Driven prediction scheme described in section 2 where a Genetic Algorithm
is used to calibrate certain input simulator parameters. In order to simplify the initial tests,
the forecast meteorological data used for the simulations are the wind components (wind speed
and wind direction), dew point and temperature of the pinpointing centroid of the observed
ﬁre. These data values are considered homogeneous distributed through out the terrain for a
given time step. This time step has been set to 3 hours because of the arrival frequency of the
meteorological data. The prediction time horizons have been set according to the exact time of
1221

DDDAS Wildﬁre Behavior Prediction System at European Level

Tom`
as Art´es et al.

the MODIS images have been obtained and the prediction scheme applied. On the one hand,
when applying a basic prediction scheme, the initial ﬁre perimeter is the one observed by the
Terra satellite on August 26th at 09:43 pm. The time horizon has been set to almost one day
(24 hours) because the perimeter to be predicted is the one obtained on August 27th at 08:49
am. On the other hand, when dealing with the DDDAS prediction scheme the time horizon
varies because of the inclusion of the calibration stage. The simulations executed during the
calibration stage took as a reference perimeter for calibration purposes, the one obtained from
the Aqua satellite around 11:27am of August 26th, so those simulations have been set to a time
horizon around 2 hours. However, the simulation executed at the prediction stage has a time
horizon of 22 hours. Subsequently, the two prediction schemes shall be compared according to
their quality results.

(a) MODIS images

(b) Vectorial shapes as a result of MODIS images.

Figure 3: MODIS images and their corresponding extracting shapes

We want to show the viability of annexing a prediction module to the EFFIS system by
analyzing the prediction results delivered by the two prediction schemes previously described.
Therefore, the main goal consists of verifying that EFFIS data could properly be used to feed
an eventually EFFIS prediction module providing this a feasible output independently on the
prediction strategy applied. For that reason, two prediction strategies have been tested, the
Basic prediction scheme and a DDDAS approach where the observed ﬁre evolution is used in a
steering loop to improve the prediction results.
For both strategies, diﬀerent settings of the meteorological data has been used to analyze
the inﬂuence on the prediction quality. Those settings deﬁne the following test cases:
1222

DDDAS Wildﬁre Behavior Prediction System at European Level

Tom`
as Art´es et al.

1. Homogeneous Spatial and Homogeneous Temporal (HSHT) data: This setting corresponds
to use as meteorological data, the forecast information available at the ﬁre perimeter
acquisition time and in the pinpointing ﬁre centroid. Those values (wind speed, wind
direction, dew point and temperature ) are considered constant throughout the terrain
and invariable through time.
2. Homogeneous Spatial and Variable Temporal (HSVT) data: In this case, the pinpointing
meteorological information keeps constant at each cell of the terrain, but the forecast data
is injected into the system every 3 hours, that is, the meteo data varies as the prediction
time goes on.
3. Variable Spatial and Homogeneous Temporal (VSHT) data: In this case, a spatial distribution of the wind data is used by executing a wind ﬁeld model (WindNinja [17, 18]) for
the forecast wind data at the image perimeter capture time.
4. Variable Spatial and Variable Temporal (VSVT) data: This parameter setting implies the
variation in time and throughout the terrain of the meteorological data.

The prediction results obtained when applying the four above described meteorological data
settings to the Basic and DDDAS prediction approaches are shown in ﬁgure 4. Each individual
picture of ﬁgure 4 shows, in green colour, the burnt area on August 27th at 08:49am, which is
the perimeter to be predicted and, with doted lines, the forecast perimeter. The images located
at the left column of the ﬁgure correspond to the results obtained when applying a Basic
prediction scheme where no input parameter calibration is performed. On the other hand, the
propagation results depicted on the right column images reﬂect the results provided by the
DDDAS scheme. As it can be observed, the worst prediction results are the ones obtained
when the eﬀect of the terrain in the meteorological (wind speed and wind direction in this case)
data is not considered.
Both predictions strategies perform poor when the wind is considered homogeneous throughout the terrain. As it can be observed from the pictures, meteorological settings where the
terrain is taking into account, in general provides prediction results with a wider burnt area
that the predictions obtained without considering the topography of the terrain. That is a key
point when dealing with real wildﬁres because the slope of the terrain directly aﬀects the rate of
spread of the underlying propagation model and, dismissing such a eﬀect could lead to a catastrophe. Another aspect to outline, for this test case, is that in general, the burnt area predicted
is wider than the real observed burnt area. These results corresponds to one test case, so we
can not extrapolate direct conclusions. However, one can not forget that any wildﬁre used as
study case, have a spread behaviour inﬂuenced by mitigation actions and human intervention.
This aspect has a clear inﬂuence on the ﬁre ﬁnal burnt area.
For that reason, those results that predict more burnt extension than the real burnt observed
area, could not be considered as bad as it could look like. In this study case, we can stated
that using a meteorological setting where those variables which dynamic behaviour could be
incorporated to the prediction system, that is Variable Spatial and Variable Temporal (VSVT),
provides better results. It is worth to remark, that in this particular case, the wind speed and
wind direction keep quite similar during the entire prediction interval, therefore, the DDDAS
scheme performs almost the same that not using a calibration stage prior to the prediction
stage.
1223

DDDAS Wildﬁre Behavior Prediction System at European Level

BASIC HSHT

866

0

866 1732 2598 3464 m

Tom`
as Art´es et al.

DDDAS HSHT

866

0

866 1732 2598 3464 m

DDDAS HSVT

866

BASIC VSHT

866

0

866 1732 2598 3464 m

BASIC VSVT

866

0

866 1732 2598 3464 m

0

866 1732 2598 3464 m

DDDAS VSHT

866

0

866 1732 2598 3464 m

DDDAS VSVT

866

0

866 1732 2598 3464 m

Figure 4: Prediction results applying Basic and DDDAS approaches for all meteorological
settings HSHT, HSVT, VSHT, VSVT.

1224

DDDAS Wildﬁre Behavior Prediction System at European Level

Tom`
as Art´es et al.

Although the advantages of the DDDAS scheme has been widely demonstrate for prescribed
ﬁres and small real ﬁres, when moving to large wildﬁres as the one presented in this work, a
deeper analysis of more study cases should be reported to be able to determine the improvements
in terms of quality results when using the DDDAS approach. However, the main objective of
this work has been accomplished since it appears to be viable to design a prediction module for
EFFIS that uses standard data sources for provided wildﬁre behaviour predictions.

5

Conclusions

Forest ﬁres is one of the most proud natural hazard across Europe and, in particular, in the
Mediterranean area. For this reason, any eﬀort oriented to support wildﬁre analyst when a
hazard occurs is welcome. Forest ﬁre spread simulators provides wildﬁre evolution forecasts
based on the observed and gathered environmental data, therefore, the quality and reliability
of such data is a critical point in ﬁre simulation. A major aspect that must also be considered,
specially when dealing with trans-boundary ﬁres, is the agreement in the databases used to
retrieve the input data required for the phenomena simulation.
At European level, EFFIS was established to provide harmonized information on such as
hazards to be used on international forest ﬁre management, therefore, it can be considered the
meeting point for ﬁre management eﬀorts during European international wildﬁre events. So,
EFFIS becomes the facto, the standard database for European disasters. However, one missing
module in EFFIS is a prediction module. This work is a prove of concept to test the viability of
exploiting EFFIS data for eventually annexing a prediction module to the system, to be used as
a support tool during an ongoing forest ﬁre. So, it is the ﬁrst step towards a prediction system
at European level. Although being this a step forward to a standard platform for forest ﬁre
management, one can not dismissed that the accuracy and precision of the data is limited due
to the diﬀerent kind of errors introduced when generating/collecting it.
For that reason, in this paper we have analyzed two alternatives for the above mentioned
EFFIS’ prediction module: a Basic ﬁre spread simulation scheme and a Dynamic Data Driven
wildﬁre behaviour prediction approach. In the Basic scheme the ﬁre spread simulator FARSITE
is used to perform a raw ﬁre spread simulations with the available data. In the DDDAS
approach, a calibration stage is introduced to take advantage of all this data to drive the
simulations to better prediction results. Both schemes have been tested using as a study case
a forest ﬁre that took place in Arkadia (Greece) in 2011. In order to consider any kind of
data available at EFFIS, both schemes have been proved either considering or discarding the
injection of dynamic meteorological data. The results show that using a DDDAS scheme will
lead to better prediction results.
It is worthy mentioning, that any forest ﬁre analyzed in a post-mortem way, as it has been
done in this paper, suﬀers from the penalty of not being a completely free burning ﬁre, because
of the human contention actions. Therefore, better predictions are the ones that overestimate
the observed burnt area, as it happens when the DDDAS prediction is performed.

Acknowledgments
This research has been supported by MICINN-Spain under contract TIN2011-28689-C02-01.
1225

DDDAS Wildﬁre Behavior Prediction System at European Level

Tom`
as Art´es et al.

References
[1] E. Commission et al., “Forest ﬁres in europe 2009, eur 24502 en,” Oﬃcial Publication of the
European Communities, 2010.
[2] M. Denham, A. Cort´es, and T. Margalef, “Computational steering strategy to calibrate input
variables in a dynamic data driven genetic algorithm for forest ﬁre spread prediction,” in Lecture
Notes in Computer Science, vol. 5545(2), pp. 479–488, 2009.
[3] G. Bianchini, M. Denham, A. Cort´es, T. Margalef, and E. Luque, “Wildland ﬁre growth prediction
method based on Multiple Overlapping Solution,” Journal of Computational Science, vol. 1, no. 4,
pp. 229–237, 2010.
[4] A. Cencerrado, A. Cort´es, and T. Margalef, “On the way of applying urgent computing solutions
to forest ﬁre propagation prediction,” Procedia Computer Science, vol. 9, pp. 1657–1666, 2012.
[5] F. Darema, “Dynamic data driven applications systems: A new paradigm for application simulations and measurements,” in Lecture Notes in Computer Science, vol. 3038, pp. 662–669, 2004.
[6] F. Darema, “Grid computing and beyond: The context of dynamic data driven applications systems,” in Proceedings of the IEEE, vol. 93(3), pp. 692–697, 2005.
[7] B. Abdalhaq, A. Cort´es, T. Margalef, and E. Luque, “Enhancing wildland ﬁre prediction on cluster
systems applying evolutionary optimization techniques,” Future Generation Computer Systems,
vol. 21, no. 1, pp. 61 – 67, 2005.
[8] M. A. Finney, FARSITE, Fire Area Simulator–model development and evaluation. Res. Pap.
RMRS-RP-4, Ogden, UT: U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Research Station, 1998.
[9] R. C. Rothermel, “A mathematical model for predicting ﬁre spread in wildland fuels,” Director,
no. INT-115, p. 40, 1972.
[10] T. Art´es, A. Cencerrado, A. Cort´es, and T. Margalef, “Relieving the eﬀects of uncertainty in forest
ﬁre spread prediction by hybrid mpi-openmp parallel strategies,” Procedia Computer Science,
vol. 18, pp. 2278–2287, 2013.
[11] K. F¨
urlinger and M. Gerndt, “A Proﬁling Tool for OpenMP,” OpenMP Shared Memory Parallel
Programming, pp. 15–23, 2008.
[12] S. L. Graham, P. B. Kessler, and M. K. McKusick, “gprof: a call graph execution proﬁler,”
SIGPLAN Not., vol. 39, pp. 49–57, Apr. 2004.
[13] T. Art´es, A. Cencerrado, A. Cort´es, and T. Margalef, “Relieving the eﬀects of uncertainty in forest
ﬁre spread prediction by hybrid mpi-openmp parallel strategies,” Procedia Computer Science, 2013.
¡Proceedings of the International Conference on Computational Science, {ICCS} 2013.
[14] H. E. Anderson, “Aids to determining fuel models for estimating ﬁre behavior,” The Bark Beetles,
Fuels, and Fire Bibliography, p. 143, 1982.
[15] F. Molteni, R. Buizza, T. N. Palmer, and T. Petroliagis, “The ecmwf ensemble prediction system:
Methodology and validation,” Quarterly Journal of the Royal Meteorological Society, vol. 122,
no. 529, pp. 73–119, 1996.
[16] D. Rodriguez-Aseretto, D. de Rigo, M. D. Leo, A. Corts, and J. San-Miguel-Ayanz, “A data-driven
model for large wildﬁre behaviour prediction in europe,” Procedia Computer Science, vol. 18, no. 0,
pp. 1861 – 1870, 2013. 2013 International Conference on Computational Science.
[17] J. M. Forthofer, Modeling wind in complex terrain for use in ﬁre spread prediction. PhD thesis,
Colorado State University, 2007.
[18] B. Potter and B. Butler, “Using wind models to more eﬀectively manage wildﬁre,” Managementtoday, p. 40, 2009.

1226

