Procedia Computer Science
Volume 29, 2014, Pages 2295–2305
ICCS 2014. 14th International Conference on Computational Science

EPiK-a Workflow for Electron Tomography in Kepler*
Ruijuan Chen1†, Xiaohua Wan1,2,† , Ilkay Altintas 3‡, Jianwu Wang3 , Daniel
Crawl3, Sébastien Phan1, Albert Lawrence 1, Mark Ellisman1

1
2

National Center for Microscopy and Imaging Research, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, CA, USA
Key Lab of Intelligent Information Processing and Advanced Computing Research Lab, Institute of Computing
T echnology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
3
San Diego Supercomputer Center, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, CA, USA
chenruijuan1@gmail.com, bjwxiaohua@gmail.com, altintas@sdsc.edu, jianwu@sdsc.edu, crawl@sdsc.edu,
sph@ncmir.ucsd.edu, albert.rick.lawrence@gmail.com, mark@ncmir.ucsd.edu

Abstract
Scientific workflows integrate data and computing interfaces as configurable, semiautomatic graphs to solve a scientific problem. Kepler is such a software system for
designing, executing, reusing, evolving, archiv ing and sharing scientific wo rkflo ws.
Electron to mography (ET) enables high-resolution views of co mplex cellular structures,
such as cytoskeletons, organelles, viruses and chromosomes. Imag ing investigations
produce large datasets. For instance, in Electron To mography, the size of a 16 fo ld
image tilt series is about 65 Gigabytes with each projection image including 4096 by
4096 pixels. When we use serial sections or montage technique for large field ET, the
dataset will be even larger. For higher resolution images with mu ltiple t ilt series, the
data size may be in terabyte range. Demands of mass data processing and comp lex
algorith ms require the integration of diverse codes into flexible software structures. This
paper describes a workflo w for Electron Tomography Programs in Kepler (EPiK). This
EPiK workflow embeds the tracking process of IMOD, and realizes the main algorith ms
including filtered backprojection (FBP) fro m TxBR and iterative reconstruction
methods. We have tested the three dimensional (3D) reconstruction process using EPiK
on ET data. EPiK can be a potential toolkit for b iology researchers with the advantage
of logical viewing, easy handling, convenient sharing and future extensibility.
Keywords: Electron Tomography, Scientific workflows, EPiK, TxBR, Kepler

*
T his work was supported by grants from an International Community Foundation, San Diego, the National Institutes of
Health (GM103412, GM103426), the National Science Foundation (NSF DBI-1062565) and the National Science Foundation
for China (61232001, 61202210, and 60921002)
†
† Contributed equally to work
‡
‡ Corresponding author

Selection and peer-review under responsibility of the Scientiﬁc Programme Committee of ICCS 2014
c The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V.
doi:10.1016/j.procs.2014.05.214

2295

EPiK - a Workﬂow for Electron Tomography in Kepler

R. Chen , X. Wan et al.

1 Introduction
Many scientific applications are now data and in formation driven, and structured as pipelines or
workflows with a large nu mber of distinct co mputations. In general, workflow applicat ions put
together data sets from one or more data sources, transform the data into a format amenable for
processing, analyze the data to produce useful results, and store the data and results in a repository
which scientists can access [1]. Many of the steps in the processing and the data sets accessed are
distributed across different execution sites, requiring data to be moved across a network for
subsequent processing by the next step(s) in the workflo w. Thus, scientific workflows are graphs of
analytical steps that may involve, e.g., database access and querying steps, data analysis and min ing
steps, and many other steps including co mputationally intensive job s on high performance cluster
computers [2]. Kep ler [2]-[4], as one of the main workflow management systems , provides a visual
interface that can be used to define and build the processing required in a workflow, and generally
raise the level of abstraction employed in a wo rkflo w application solution. Scientists working in many
computation-intensive domains, ranging fro m astronomy to bioinfo rmatics, have adopted workflo ws
successfully by integrating large-scale, distributed and heterogeneous resources.
In the field of med icine, the head of National Institutes of Health (NIH) has pointed out that
genomics has ushered in a new era of personalized medicine. In order to exp loit the advances of
genomics and molecu lar bio logy new research tools will be created, with a major input fro m the
computational side. Relevant to this effort, there are h istorical similarities with the s cientific discovery
of antibiotics and their introduction into medicine. We are about half way through similar
developments originating fro m the discovery of the structure of DNA -a stage comparable to the
scientific develop ment of antibiotics in the early 1900s. The next step is to explo re advances in
genomics and molecular bio logy. Startups such as Celera and Hu man Lorgevity, Inc herald the next
phase of this activity.
One major challenge is to relate the molecular science to cellular structure. Much rema ins to be
done. Sit ing or partit ioning of the metabolic network, signaling, and transport all have many unsolved
issues. For the future, in order to relate the molecular science to cell structure, we must operate across
many spatial scales, employ several types of microscopy and work in diverse scientific disciplines.
Dig ital codes for image processing, structure determination and modeling of bio logical processes will
all play a role. This will require the integration of diverse codes into flexible soft ware structures.
Key to much of th is effort, Electron tomography (ET) is a powerful technology providing three dimensional (3D) imag ing of cellular ultrastructure. These structures are reconstructed fro m a set of
micrographs taken at different sample orientations, and the final volu me is the solution of a general
inverse problem. Large-field high-resolution ET facilitates visualization and understanding of global
structures, such as the cell nucleus, extended neural processes, or even whole cells on scales
approaching molecular resolution. There are many electron microscope tomography packages, such as
TxBR[5]-[10], IMOD[11], Xmipp[12][13], EMAN[14] and so on.
This paper describes an “Electron Tomography Programs in Kepler” (EPiK) workflow which is a
response to the need to include TxBR and other codes in this stream of develop ment. It co mbines
several processes including tracking, alignment and reconstruction. We have tested the 3D
reconstruction process using EPiK on an ET dataset. We demonstrate that EPiK workflow can provide
a semi-automatic platform to obtain the 3D structure of components.
EPiK facilitates ET image processing because the algorith ms are co mplex and often consist of
mu ltip le processing steps. Co mp licat ing this situation, there are many ET research groups fro m
different areas in the world. Scientists at each site may develop and use their o wn resources and codes
to perform their research. Contrary to published claims, it is difficult or impossible to make fair
comparisons of different algorith ms on common data sets. EPiK can integrate many packages and
make it possible to compare and cooperate on methods that are proposed by different research groups.

2296

EPiK - a Workﬂow for Electron Tomography in Kepler

R. Chen , X. Wan et al.

The need for high-resolution to mography of co mp lex bio logical specimens gives rise to the
requirement for large reconstructed files. Th is requires extensive use of computational resources and
considerable processing time [5]. In response to this requirement, TxBR wh ich is in production use
has been adapted for various parallel co mputers, computer clusters and processors with mult iple
graphical processor unit (GPU) boards. By using fast recursion algorithms and other parallel
processing with GPU for algorith ms such as backprojection, TxBR can achieve significan t speed-ups
on relatively inexpensive hardware that can be put together using commercial off-the-shelf
components[6]. EPiK can also give users different choices of availab le resources according to the
demand of different sizes of datasets.

2 Description of EPiK
In this section, the main structure and components of EPiK are introduced. The details will be
explained respectively for each step including tracking, alignment and reconstruction.

2.1 Introduction of Components in EPiK
In ET, a 3D structure reconstruction of a samp le is obtained fro m series of p rojection images
recorded in a microscope by imag ing a sample in various discrete orientations [15]. Generally the
sample is tilted around one or more axes to produce the various orientations. In the process of 3D
reconstruction, there are three main modules in EPiK: tracking, alignment and reconstruction.
In order to reconstruct the 3D structure of a sample, we need to know the relationship between an
object and its projections. Ideally, all images should be aligned so that each represents a known
projection of a 3D object at a known project ion angle[16]. In the process of preparing a sample, the
researchers may add a number of gold particles on both sides of the sample before the images are
collected. Those particles provide fiducial markers that are used to derive the relationship between the
sample and its projections.
The general interface of EPiK is shown in Figure 1 (a). First, tracking is carried out by IMOD
[11][17]. This produces markers for alignment. Second, images align ment is comp leted using the
bundle adjustment algorithm in TxBR [5]-[10]. TxBR was originally developed to compensate for
curvilinear trajectories, samp le warping and provide better alignment and reconstruction quality. The
final step is to normalize the gray scales and reconstruct the specimen.

2.2 Tracking
As the first part of EPiK, fiducial tracking is carried out by IMOD package [11][17]. In order to
make the workflow mo re simp le and convenient, a composite actor of tracking that contains four main
steps as shown in Figure 1 (b) substitutes the interface of IMOD.
1.

Erase

The first preprocess is to erase X-ray artifacts arising fro m high-energy electron collision as well
as defects and fiducial markers in microscope images fro m CCD cameras by looking for “peaks”
or pixels whose intensity deviate from the surrounding pixels .
2.

Cross-Correlation

As a preliminary align ment step, cross-correlation (CC) is used to find an init ial translational prealigned stack between successive images of a t ilt series. Th is is a marker-free coarse align ment

2297

EPiK - a Workﬂow for Electron Tomography in Kepler

R. Chen , X. Wan et al.

step, which adjusts the images pairwise to align the series of images well enough for the
automatic tracking of fiducial markers.

(a) Interface of EPiK

Erase

CC

Select

Track

(b) M ain Composition of Tracking

(c) Composition of Reconstruction
Figure 1: EPiK Workflow. (a) The main interface of EPiK. It includes three main parts: tracking, alignment
and reconstruction. Normalization is a pre-reconstruction step to insure that the grey-scale statistics are correct. (b)
M ain composition of tracking. IM OD is used for coarse tracking, and TxBR is used for fine tracking. All of the
steps are integrated as a composite actor in EPiK. (c) Composition of reconstruction. There are parallel
computings in this step. M ultiple nodes in a cluster are used for large data sets.

2298

EPiK - a Workﬂow for Electron Tomography in Kepler

3.

R. Chen , X. Wan et al.

Select

After a coarse align ment map is obtained by cross-correlation, it is necessary to select a number
of fiducial markers in order to get more precise projection. In EPiK, when the image stack is
firstly shown by IMOD, it is required to select fiducial markers to generate a seed model. In order
to obtain a precise align ment, markers must be located on both sides. Furthermore, the more
markers that are selected, the more precisely the align ment model will be. After a sufficient
number of seeds are selected, the seed model is saved.
4.

Track

The last step is to track the selected fiducial gold beads on a series of images with different tilt
views. In EPiK, after the seed model is saved, a new image stack will appear. This stack contains
all the pro jected images and the positions of the selected fiducials that are calculated by the
previous coarse alignment. Users need to fill the gaps and correct the position errors of the
fiducials if necessary by using the bead helper which is in the pull-down menu of “Special”.
Finally, after all the selected markers are tracked, a “.fid” file will be generated in the directory
defined by the “dataDir” workflow parameter. Th is fiducial file will be trans mitted into the align ment
step.

2.3 Alignment
Align ment of the individual images of a tilt series is a crit ical step in obtaining high -quality
electron microscope reconstructions. Electrons moving in a magnetic field will generally orbit the
magnetic field lines, thus, they will move along helical trajectories. TxBR was developed to
compensate for curved trajectories by using a high o rder polyno mial project ion map[5]-[10]. The
align ment is co mpleted on the p latform of MATLAB, which is shown as the second actor in Figure 1
(a).
Align ment provides a 3D model of marker p rojections for wh ich is consistent over all t ilt
projections and provides a separate projection model for each tilt image. TxBR emp loys nonlinear
bundle adjustment simultaneously calculating marker positions and projection maps via conjugate
gradient optimization[5].
Align ment is via conjugate gradient optimization using mean square reprojection error as the
objective function, as shown in Eq. (1) for a general polynomial projection model.
ଶ
ଶ
௜ା௝ା௞ୀ௡
௜ା௝ା௞ୀ௡
௝
௝
‫ ܧ‬ൌ σ௟ǡ௠ ሾ ൫σ௜ǡ௝ǡ௞ୀ଴ ‫ܥ‬௜௝௞௠ଵ ܺ௟௜ ܻ௟ ܼ௟௞ െ ‫ ݔ‬௠௟ ൯ ൅ ൫σ௜ǡ௝ǡ௞ୀ଴ ‫ܥ‬௜௝௞௠ଶ ܺ௟௜ ܻ௟ ܼ௟௞ െ ‫ݕ‬௠௟ ൯ ሿ (1)
Where C is the projection map whose highest order is defined by users through the interface of
EPiK. (‫ ݔ‬௠௟ ǡ ‫ݕ‬௠௟ ) is the projected coordinate of ܺ௟ ܻ௟ ܼ௟ on the mth tilt angle.
Various alternative models are possible for the align ment including polynomial functions, ratios
of polynomials and mixed trigonometric-polynomial projection maps. We have imp lemented
polynomial projection maps to 5th degree in our previous work[5]-[10].
Two output files will be generated automatically after the alignment process. One is a figure file
that gives the coordinates of markers in 3D volu me . The other file is a text file that will be used in the

2299

EPiK - a Workﬂow for Electron Tomography in Kepler

R. Chen , X. Wan et al.

following reconstruction processing. It contains the coefficients of polynomial pro jection map fro m a
3D object to its 2D projections.

2.4 Reconstruction
2.4.1 Normalization
After align ment process, we can reconstruct the 3D structures. Because image statics should
follow the cosine law, raw project ion data should be normalized before being used to reconstruct, as
shown in Figure 1 (a). In process of normalizat ion, we adopt the following functions to readjust the
gray value of each projection image.
1. Adjust grey scale to make all distributions equal in variance;
2. Adjust grey scale to make all distributions equal in mean;
3. Adjust distributions to follow cosine law;
4. Log transform image pixel values .
After that, we will get a “.st” file that has been normalized by the functions mentioned above.

2.4.2 Reconstruction Workflow
We have imp lemented two common reconstruction methods in EPiK. The first general method is
filtered backprojection (FBP) which is relatively simp le robust and fast. FBP is widely used in ET
softwares such as IMOD [17] and TxBR. Iterative methods is the other reconstructed algorithm used
in EPiK which is constituted by a class of alternatives to FBP in 3D reconstruction of ET . These
methods both give good performance in handing inco mplete, noisy data. In general, iterative methods
are real-space reconstruction algorithms that formulate the 3D reconstruction problem as a large
system of linear equations , as shown in Eq. (2).
(2)
‫ݒ‬௜ ൌ σே
௝ୀଵ ‫ݓ‬௜௝ ‫ݑ‬௝ ǡ ͳ ൑ ݅ ൑ ‫ܯ‬
ሺ଴ሻ
Iterative methods begin with an in itial ‫ ݑ‬and repeat the iterative p rocesses [18]. Here, we use an
FBP solution as an initial value, wh ich will generally imp rove the convergence rate, as simple
backprojection is subject to a high degree of smoothing which obliterates the details, and in place of
the starting point further fro m an actual solution. In each iteration cycle , the residuals, i.e. the
differences between the actual project ions ‫ ݒ‬and the computed projections ‫ݒ‬Ԣ of the current
approximation ‫ ݑ‬ሺ௞ሻ ( ݇ is the iterative nu mber), are calcu lated and then ‫ ݑ‬ሺ௞ሻ is updated by the
backprojection of these discrepancies. Thus, the algorith m p roduces a sequence of N -dimensional
column vectors ‫ ݑ‬ሺ௞ሻ. Eq. (3) below gives a typical iteration step.
ሺ௞ାଵሻ
ሺ௞ሻ
ሺ௞ሻ
σே
ൌ ‫ݑ‬௝ ൅ σெ
(3)
‫ݑ‬௝
ூୀଵ ‫ݓ‬௜௝ ሺ‫ݒ‬௜ െ ௛ ୀଵ ‫ݓ‬௜௛ ‫ݑ‬௝ ሻ
In EPiK workflow, the generic iterative reconstructing process is described as follows:
ሺ଴ሻ
1. Initialization: calculate initial value for ‫ݑ‬௝ by FBP;
2.
3.

ሺ௞ሻ

Reprojection: estimate the projection data ‫ ݒ‬based on the current approximation ‫ݑ‬௝ ;
Backp rojection: backpro ject the discrepancy Δ‫ ݒ‬between the experimental ‫ ݒ‬and calculated
projections ‫ݒ‬Ԣ , and refine the current approximation ‫ ݑ‬by incorporating the weighted
backprojection Δ‫ݑ‬.

2.4.3 Parallel Execution
Three-dimensional reconstruction in ET entails large co mputational costs and resources that are a
function of the computational comp lexity of the reconstruction algorithms and the size of the
projection images involved. This is especially true for wide-field to mography. Tradit ionally, highperformance co mputing has been used to address such computational requirements by means of

2300

EPiK - a Workﬂow for Electron Tomography in Kepler

R. Chen , X. Wan et al.

parallel co mputing on supercomputers [19], large co mputer clusters [20], and mu lticore co mputers
[21].
In EPiK workflow, we also use a parallel strategy to complete reconstructions on clusters. Our
method permits the decomposition of the reconstruction problem into independent slabs along the Z axis and makes the process well suited for parallelization. We have a natural choice for a parallel
computation, in which the reconstruction along each Z-slice is calculated on a different processor.
Thus, we can implement a parallel strategy where the sub -reconstruction along each Z-slice is
calculated at the same time. This strategy makes use of message passing interface (MPI), standard in
parallel programming. We can also apply a single program mu ltip le data (SPMD) approach to
perform the parallelization of the reconstruction on each Z-slice. The 3D volu me is decomposed into
several slabs with equal heights along the Z-axis. These slabs are assigned and reconstructed on an
individual node on a cluster. The number of slabs equals to the number of nodes. Here, we adopt
several actors including “SSH Session”, “SSH File Copier” and “Genericjob Launcher” to implement
the parallel reconstruction strategy discussed above, as shown in Figure 1 (c).

3 Experiment
In this section, we report results of the reconstruction technique des cribed in the previous sections .
In order to show the imp rovement of reconstruction by mult iple tilt series, we co llected 16 fo ld tilt
series projection images and reconstructed the same sample by single t ilt data and 16 tilt series data
respectively. The sample is fro m the electric organ of an eel. The electric organ generates a large
voltage pulse for defense of the eel. The reconstruction of its structure can greatly help biologists to
understand its physiological functions, for examp le, the trans migration of ions across cell membranes
in synchrony to san to large pulses.
The micrographs were taken in a 300kV FEI Titan TEM. The tilt series in this example is
composed of 121 micrographs, each micrograph being 1024ൈ1024. The size of reconstructions is
1035ൈ 997ൈ 66. The specimen is t ilted fro m −60 to +60 degree in one-degree increment for each t ilt.
And the angle increment for two adjacent rotation tilts is 11.25 degree.
To get the reconstruction by EPiK, users just need to set the parameters shown in the interface and
choose the reconstruction method. Subsequently, the processes will be auto matically co mpleted. EPiK
has greatly facilitated the users to test and compare the results with different raw data and by different
algorith ms. In addition, it is convenient for developers to extend EPiK with new algorith ms or
functions.
Figure 2 shows one X-Y slice of the reconstruction along Z-axis. Figure 2 (a) is one X-Y section
of the volume reconstructed by ASART after 5 iterations; and Figure 2 (b) is the section of the volume
reconstructed by 16 fold tilt series. Chromatin coils are clearly visible in the second image.
The results show that by using EPiK, the 3D structure of the eel sample can be reconstructed
successfully. Fro m both figures, we can recognize different co mponents of the sample, such as
nucleus and filaments in the cytoplasm. Co mpared to Figure 2 (a), information is more widely
distributed on the Orloff sphere[22], the reconstruction has higher quality in Figure 2 (b).
Note that multip le t ilt series reconstruction requires more co mputational resources . For instance,
the size of a 16 fo ld tilt series is about 65 Gigabyte with each projection image including 4096 by
4096 pixels. If we use higher resolution images collection or more tilt series data to reconstruct a
sample, the data size may be in terabyte range.
Furthermore, serial sectioning is generally emp loyed to reconstruct thicker samples. Montaging is
commonly emp loyed to increase the effective field of view. A montage consists of images of regions
of the specimen that overlap in order to generate a larger map [9][10]. W ith montaging, the dataset

2301

EPiK - a Workﬂow for Electron Tomography in Kepler

R. Chen , X. Wan et al.

will be even larger. Right now, montages has already been implemented within TxBR.

(a) One X-Y section of the reconstruction from ASART after 5 iterations by single tilt images

(b) One X-Y section of the reconstruction from FBP by 16 fold tilt series images
Figure 2: Reconstruction results of a cell nucleus from the electric organ of an eel sample. (a) The
reconstruction by single tilt images; (b) The reconstruction by 16-fold tilt series images. With multiple tilt series
images, the quality of volume reconstruction is greatly improved.

2302

EPiK - a Workﬂow for Electron Tomography in Kepler

R. Chen , X. Wan et al.

4 Conclusion and Future Work
We imp lemented an electron to mography workflow EPiK that includes three basic steps: tracking,
align ment and reconstruction. With Kepler, EPiK provides a visual language that can organize the
processes of electron tomography in a workflo w, and generally raises the level of abstraction in a
complicated computation instance. EPiK can achieve the reconstruction of a sample fro m its
microscope tilt series images effectively, and it makes things easier for the users. In addition, parallel
computation is used in reconstruction in the current version of EPiK. Finally, both data sets and final
reconstructions have increased by many orders of magnitude over the past two decades. EPiK
provides means for handwork-independent implementation of improved parallelization . Therefo re,
EPiK will be a potentially useful tool in ET for biologists or any other researchers in different areas.
Future plans include: (1) Production of functionality to create a realistic phantoms with the
following: realistic object, random markers, mult iple tilt axes, off-center tilt axes, projections
including helicity, warp ing and noise. This will yield a “ground truth” on which to evaluate and
compare algorith ms. (2) Incorporate alternative approaches to tracking, align ment and reconstruction.
(3) Implementation of pre and post processing, for examp le, integrate other alignment such as markerfree align ment algorith m[23] to EPiK, and the nonlinear post processing for artifact reduction [24].
EPiK provides a frame work for different kinds of algorith ms co mparison and graceful incorporation
of improvements.
With EPiK, it is convenient for developers to extend the process with new algorithms. EPiK
provides a simple means to compare and test the error using realistic phantoms and common examp les
of tilt series obtained in the lab. In line with development of TxBR, the montage function can also be
added to EPiK for large field ET[9]. Finally, the process may be scaled up by parallel processing with
supercomputers, large computer clusters and multicore computers .

References
[1]. Jared Chase, Ian Gorton, Chandrika Sivaramakrishnan, Justin Almquist, Adam Wynne,
George Chin, and Terence Critchlow. (2009) Kepler + MeDICi. In Proc. of the 2009 IEEE
Congress on Services, Los Angeles, CA, Jul 6-10, 2009, pp. 275-282.
[2]. Bertram Ludäscher, Ilkay Altintas, Chad Berkley, Dan Higgins, Efrat Jaeger-Fran k, Matthew
Jones, Edward A. Lee, Jing Tao, Yang Zhao. Scientific workflow management and the
Kepler system. Concurrency and Co mputation: Practice and Experience, 18 (2006) 10391065.
[3]. Jianwu Wang, Daniel Crawl, Ilkay A ltintas. A framework for distributed data-parallel
execution in the Kepler scientific workflow system. Procedia Co mputer Science 9 (2012)
1620-1629.
[4]. Jianwu Wang, Ilkay Altintas. Early cloud experiences with the Kepler scientific workflow
system. Procedia Computer Science 9 (2012) 1630-1634.
[5]. Albert Lawrence, James C. Bouwer, Guy Perkins, et al. (2006) Transform-based
backprojection for volu me reconstruction of large format electron microscope tilt series.
Journal of Structural Biology 154 (2006) 144-167.

2303

EPiK - a Workﬂow for Electron Tomography in Kepler

R. Chen , X. Wan et al.

[6]. Albert Lawrence, Sébastien Phan and Rajvikram Singh. Parallel Processing and Large-Field
Electron Microscope Tomograph. World Congress on Co mputer Science and Informat ion
Engineering (2009) 339-343.
[7]. Albert Lawrence, Sebastien Phan, Mark Ellisman. Electron to mography and multiscale
biology. Theory and Applicat ions of Models of Co mputation Lecture Notes in Co mputer
Science. 7287 (2012) 109-130.
[8]. Albert Lawrence, Sébastien Phan. 3D reconstruction from Electron Microscope images with
TxBR. Bio medical Imaging: Fro m Nano to Macro, ISBI '09. IEEE In ternational Sy mposium
on. (2009) 339-343.
[9]. Sébastien Phan, Albert Lawrence, To mas Molina, et al. TxBR montage reconstruction for
large field electron tomography. Journal of Structural Biology 180 (2012) 154–164.
[10]. Sébastien Phan, Masako Terada and Albert Lawrence. Serial reconstruction and montaging
fro m large-field electron microscope tomograms. 31st Annual International Conference of
the IEEE EMBS. 2009
[11]. James R. Kremer, David N. Mastronarde, J. Richard Mcintosh. Co mputer visua lizat ion of
three-dimensional image data using IMOD. Journal of Structural Biology 116 (1996) 71-76
[12]. R. Marbin i, I. M. Masegosa, M. C. San Martin, et al. Xmipp: An image processing package
for Electron Microscopy. Journal of Structural Biology 116 (1996) 237–240.
[13]. C.O.S. Sorzano, R. Marabin i, J. Velazquez-Muriel, et al. XMIPP: a new generation of an
open-source image processing package for electron microscopy. Journal of Structural
Biology 148 (2004) 194–204.
[14]. Guang Tang, Liwei Peng, Philip R. Bald win, et al. EMAN2: An extensible image
processing suite for electron microscopy. Journal of Structural Biology 157 (2007) 38–46.
[15]. Fernandez JJ: High performance computing in structural determination by electron
cryomicroscopy. Journal of Structural Biology 164 (2008), 164: 1-6.
[16]. Joachim Fran k. Electron To mography: Methods for Three-Dimensional Visualization of
Structures in the Cell. Springer (2006).
[17]. http://bio3d.colorado.edu/imod/
[18]. Xiaohua Wan, Sébastien Phan, Albert Lawrence, et al. Iterat ive Methods in Large Field
Electron Microscope Tomography. SIAM J. Sci. Comput., 35 (2012), S402–S419.
[19]. Fernandez JJ, Garazo JM and García I. Three-dimensional reconstruction of cellular
structures by electron microscope tomography and parallel co mputing. Journal of Parallel
and Distributed Computing 64 (2004) 285-300.
[20]. Wan X, Zhang F and Liu Z. Modified simu ltaneous algebraic reconstruction technique and
its parallelization in cryo-electron tomography. In Proceeding of the International
Conference on Parallel and Distributed Systems: (2009) 384-390.
[21]. Agulleiro JI, Fernandez JJ: Fast tomographic reconstruction on multicore co mputers.
Bioinformatics 27 (2011) 582-583.
[22]. Cedric Messaoudi, Nicole Garreau de Loubresse, Thomas Boudier, et al. Mult iple-axis
tomography: applicat ions to basal bodies from Parameciu m tetraurelia. Bio l. Cell, 98 (2006)
415-425.

2304

EPiK - a Workﬂow for Electron Tomography in Kepler

R. Chen , X. Wan et al.

[23]. Ren min Han, Fa Zhang, Xiaohua Wan, Jose-Jesus Fernández, et al. A marker-free
automatic align ment method based on scale-invariant features. Journal of Structural Bio logy
(2014, in press)
[24]. J. Fernandez, J. Agulleiro, J.Bilao-Castro, et al. Image processing in electron to mography.
In Microscopy: science, technology, applications and education. (2010) 19-28.

2305

