Procedia Computer Science
Volume 29, 2014, Pages 1993–2002
ICCS 2014. 14th International Conference on Computational Science

A Clustering Based Method Accelerating
Gene Regulatory Network Reconstruction
Georgios N. Dimitrakopoulos1,2, Ioannis A. Maraziotis1, Kyriakos Sgarbas2
and Anastasios Bezerianos1,3
1

2

Department of Medical Physics, Medical School, University of Patras, Patras, Greece.
Electrical and Computer Engineering Department, University of Patras, Patras, Greece.
3
SINAPSE, National University of Singapore, Singapore.
geodimitrak@upatras.gr, imaraziotis@gmail.com, sgarbas@upatras.gr,
tassos.bezerianos@nus.edu.sg

Abstract
One important direction of Systems Biology is to infer Gene Regulatory Networks and many methods
have been developed recently, but they cannot be applied effectively in full scale data. In this work we
propose a framework based on clustering to handle the large dimensionality of the data, aiming to
improve accuracy of inferred network while reducing time complexity. We explored the efficiency of
this framework employing the newly proposed metric Maximal Information Coefficient (MIC), which
showed superior performance in comparison to other well established methods. Utilizing both
benchmark and real life datasets, we showed that our method is able to deliver accurate results in
fractions of time required by other state of the art methods. Our method provides as output interactions
among groups of highly correlated genes, which in an application on an aging experiment were able to
reveal aging related pathways.
Keywords: Gene Regulatory Network, Clustering, Maximal Information Coefficient

1 Introduction
A basic goal of Systems Biology is to model the relations among genes and their products in order
to increase the knowledge about the functional organization of cells. Specifically, these relations are
modeled as networks of genes or proteins and diseases are studied through the observation of
perturbations of those relations across different experimental conditions. The ultimate goal of this
analysis is to determine genes with key role in the network that can be potential drug targets (Fernald,
et al., 2011).
Recent molecular high-throughput techniques, like microarrays and sequencing, produce a huge
amount of data, usually consisting of thousands of genes from few tens of samples. This poses a hard
challenge to the computational methods, to cope with these large scale data and deliver accurate

Selection and peer-review under responsibility of the Scientiﬁc Programme Committee of ICCS 2014
c The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V.

doi:10.1016/j.procs.2014.05.183

1993

A Clustering Based Method Accelerating Gene Regulatory ...

Dimitrakopoulos et al.

prediction, taking into account the complexity of the relations among genes (a group of genes can coregulate a third gene). Another obstacle to accurate network reconstruction is the noise embedded in
microarray experimental data.
A plethora of Gene Regulatory Network (GRNs) reconstruction methods have been developed
recently, based on different assumptions on modeling the underlying network, such as Regression
methods, Information Theory, Boolean Networks, Bayesian Networks and Ordinary or Stochastic
Differential Equation models (Hecker, et al., 2009; Emmert-Streib, et al., 2012). Methods from the
first two categories have been applied in a broad set of problems showing promising results. However,
a main problem with most of these approaches is that a high correlation value does not necessarily
mean causal relation, therefore, considering the large number of variables, there is a high rate of false
positive predictions.
In this work, the main goal is to provide a general methodology to reconstruct efficiently GRN. We
present a method based on clustering to achieve two goals; increasing accuracy and reduction in time
complexity. Clustering will guide an existing GRN inference method to avoid testing a certain set of
genes that have expression profiles with high similarity degree as possible regulators of a certain gene.
Although performance in terms of time is not critical in biological applications, it is desirable that a
method is executed fast, to allow researchers experimenting with different parameters and multiple
setups. Additionally, detection of small groups of interacting genes is of great biological interest, since
it helps understanding the organization of the network and it can lead to detection of pathways related
with a certain disease or condition (Langfelder & Horvath, 2008). Moreover, we introduce the usage
of Maximal Information Coefficient (MIC) metric (Reshef, et al., 2011) for GRN reconstruction and
show that it can accurately predict relationships among genes. First, the efficiency of our method was
explored on benchmark datasets provided by Dialogue on Reverse Engineering Assessment and
Methods (DREAM) project (Marbach, et al., 2012) and subsequently it was applied on two
experimental datasets, studying ovarian cancer and aging, showing robust results.

2 Methods
We developed a general clustering framework that can be combined with any similarity metric or
GRN method, with aim to reduce the search space and total execution time, while maintaining or
improving performance in accuracy. The outcome of our method is a large number of groups
containing relatively few genes with high similarity in their expression profiles and strong interactions
among groups. Next, we present selective state of the art GRN regression methods and similarity
metrics, including the recently proposed MIC. This metric resulted in high performance in benchmark
sets and an experimental dataset studying ovarian cancer, so we applied it in combination with our
clustering scheme to study aging.

2.1 GRN Methods
Initial approaches to create a network used a metric to assess the relation between every possible
pair of genes and constructed a similarity matrix, based on the fact that similar gene expression shows
similar functionality and interaction in molecular level. Furthermore GRNs are sparse, hence most
methods, after computing a similarity matrix for each gene pair, use a threshold to eliminate weak
interactions.
A simple and fast metric to assess similarity is Pearson Correlation Coefficient (PCC) or absolute
value of PCC. This metric is able to estimate a regulatory network effectively, with the advantage that
it can characterize interactions as activation or inhibition (Song, et al., 2012), however, is able to
capture only linear relations. Weighted correlation network analysis (WGCNA) is a framework relying
on PCC to infer and analyze gene networks in order to provide modules of highly correlated genes
(Langfelder & Horvath, 2008). Many well established methods rely on Mutual Information (MI), a
metric that can detect linear and non linear relations, such as Relevance Networks (Butte & Kohane,

1994

A Clustering Based Method Accelerating Gene Regulatory ...

Dimitrakopoulos et al.

2000), ARACNE (Margolin, et al., 2006), CLR (Faith, et al., 2007) and MRNET (Meyer, et al., 2007).
Relevance Networks (RN) computes the MI and then uses a threshold to discard low MI values.
Algorithm for the Reconstruction of Accurate Cellular Networks (ARACNE), uses the same process
and in addition uses the Data Processing Inequality criterion, which considers every triplet of genes
and removes the weakest interaction as immediate. Context Likelihood Relatedness (CLR) applies an
adaptive background correction step, taking into account the network context, by calculating the
distribution of all MI values involving either the regulator or the target. Minimum
Redundancy/Maximum Relevance Networks (MRNET) uses maximum relevance/minimum
redundancy (MRMR) strategy, under which the interactions are ranked and then each interaction is
added to the network if shows maximum relevance (direct interactions with high MI value) and at the
same time minimum redundancy (has small MI values with already selected interactions, which
eliminates indirect interactions).
Another important category of GRN inference algorithms is based on Regression methods, which
are used to predict one output variable based on one or more input variables. Various classes of
regression methods have been used in the past to predict gene networks such as Artificial Neural
Networks (ENFRN) (Maraziotis, et al., 2010), Support Vector Machines (SIRENE) (Mordelet & Vert,
2008) and Random Forests (GENIE3) (Huynh-Thu, et al., 2010). Evolutionary Neuro-Fuzzy Recurrent
Network (ENFRN) algorithm accepts as input gene expression as a training and a testing dataset and
determines the best potential regulators and target genes. Interesting properties are that it explores the
combined effect of two or more regulators to a target and that it can predict the type of the relation as
activation or inhibition. Supervised Inference of Regulatory Networks (SIRENE) uses SVM to solve a
classification problem for each Transcription Factor (TF), if a gene is target of it a or not. The
operation of SIRENE is in a little different direction, since it requires as input examples of known TFs
and their targets and can predict new targets for these TFs, but does not reconstruct the whole network,
neither can find new regulators. Random Forest is an ensemble method, which uses a large number of
classification or regression trees to infer the final result. Gene Network Inference with Ensemble of
Trees (GENIE3) trains a Random Forest for each gene as target, considering all other genes as
regulators. Next, it uses the Variable Importance metric of the Random Forest to evaluate the rank of
the potential regulators for each gene. We will use GENIE3 in comparisons to our method, because it
displayed the best performance according to DREAM 5 contest, setting the number of trees equal to
1000.

2.2 Maximal Information Coefficient
We use Maximal Information Coefficient (MIC) in our framework to estimate the pairwise
similarity of gene expression profiles. MIC is a recently proposed metric relying on mutual
information, which can detect a wide range of associations, showing solid results. The idea behind
MIC is that if a relationship exists between two variables, then a grid can be drawn on the scatterplot
of the two variables for partitioning the data points and encapsulating this relationship. Thus, it
partitions the space into different grids up to a maximal grid resolution B, Mutual Information (MI) is
computed for each grid and MIC is set equal to the maximum normalized value of MI. Formally, for
two variables X and Y, MIC is defined by the equation:

MIC ( X , Y ) = max X Y < B

MI ( X , Y )
log ( min ( X Y

))

where |X| and |Y| are the number of bins for each variable and B the maximal resolution. Number of
grids to be searched is controlled by two parameters, alpha and c. B is function of the number of
samples s, B = salpha and c is the maximum allowed difference between |X| and |Y|. Interesting
properties are symmetry, i.e. MIC(a,b) = MIC(b,a), so we can skip half of the computations and that it

1995

A Clustering Based Method Accelerating Gene Regulatory ...

Dimitrakopoulos et al.

ranges in [0,1], making easier the interpretation of the results, in contrast to mutual information which
is positive but without an upper limit.
There are only few works discussing ability of MIC to capture relationships among genes. In
(Song, et al., 2012), various metrics, including MIC, are examined resulting in the conclusion that in
most cases metrics agree, with the authors proposing a variation of correlation for GRN problems. In a
similar study, it is shown that each metric can perform well depending on the data and type of
relationship to be identified, with MIC being an appropriate selection for large data and a broad type
of interactions, such as non linear and non monotonic (de Siqueira Santos, et al., 2013).

2.3 Proposed Framework
The proposed method is based on the key idea that a set of genes, which have a high degree of
similarity in terms of their expression profiles, will have similar relation (i.e. target - regulator or vice
versa) with a certain gene. Therefore, we employ a clustering scheme to avoid computing the weight
of interactions between all possible pairs. The increased time complexity of most GRN methods (i.e.
GENIE3, SIRENE) combined with the large dimensionality of gene expression datasets makes most
of these methods practically inapplicable in full scale gene expression experiments. Hence, in the
majority of the cases, genes having small variation across the experimental conditions or small
absolute value (considered as not expressed) are discarded. In our framework, instead of applying a
GRN reconstruction method to the whole dataset, which is very consuming in time and memory, we
will apply it only on a subset which will be provided by clustering.
Initially, we cluster the data in a very large number of groups, so each group contains few genes,
but with very similar profiles. An important property of the clustering algorithm is to provide a
medoid for each cluster, which is an actual point of the dataset, in contrast to centroid, which is a mean
value of points belonging to the cluster. Thus, we are going to use only the medoid of each cluster as
representative of all genes in the group. We build a “medoid network” of reduced size, by evaluating
the weight of interactions among all medoids. At this point, we have a hierarchical network, where
each node is a group of genes, however, for evaluation and comparison with other methods, we need
to provide a network with genes as nodes. Therefore, for each gene pair, we allocate as weight of their
interaction the weight of interaction of their medoids. The rationale behind this choice is that based on
the compactness of the clustering, we need to examine one profile per cluster. Another advantage of
considering the medoid instead of each gene in a cluster is that the effect of the noise is reduced, as
one can regard each gene as a noisy measure of the expression profile of the medoid. Figure 1
summarizes the workflow of our proposed method.

Figure 1. The workflow of our method. (A) In the schematic representation, every node indicates a
gene. In (B) after clustering, the original input dataset is replaced by a compressed dataset represented by the
medoids of the corresponding clusters and in (C) the weight of interactions among medoids is calculated. In
(D) for interactions between two genes in different clusters, the weight of interaction between their
corresponding medoids is assigned.

Under this framework, genes belonging in the same cluster appear to have maximum similarity
(MIC value equal to 1). If a more detailed “picture” of the network is needed, the GRN method can be
applied locally for each cluster. An extension of this framework is for each gene inside a cluster, to

1996

A Clustering Based Method Accelerating Gene Regulatory ...

Dimitrakopoulos et al.

evaluate the interactions among the genes that belong only to a number of nearest clusters. To
determine the distance between two clusters, similarity between their medoids can be used, which is
already computed at the first step. However, initial experiments showed that this setup for large
clustering resolution increased search space without changing substantially accuracy of the inferred
network, so we have not performed these steps in this work. This is explained by the fact that the large
number of clusters increased their compactness, so genes belonging in same cluster resulted in high
similarity values and setting similarity to maximum was a satisfactory approximation.
The time complexity of inferring a network of N genes is at least O(N2) for any method as the ones
described above. To build the medoid network of C clusters, will demand O(C2) time, with C < N.
Precisely, the total process will require additional time for clustering, but we can neglect it, since in
practice clustering is usually a lot faster process than a applying a GRN method, regardless the
clustering algorithm complexity, which is usually at least O(N2). So, a significant improvement in
execution time can be achieved due to quadratic complexity.
Additionally, to further reduce the size of the dataset, we can perform clustering across the
samples. Most datasets contain few samples, but in cases such as the DREAM 5 datasets, where many
microarrays have been aggregated, this could be very helpful. Computationally, it is known that as
dimensionality increases, the points in space become very sparse and metrics underperform. From
biological aspect, replicates or samples under the same condition hold similar information, so
clustering can reduce this redundancy.
The proposed method is general and can utilize any clustering algorithm in combination with any
metric or GRN algorithm. However, in this paper for clarity, we use Affinity Propagation Clustering
(Frey & Dueck, 2007) and MIC to estimate similarity between genes. A key property for selecting this
algorithm is that returns medoids instead of centroids. Affinity Propagation Clustering algorithm
iteratively transmits real valued messages among data points, updated in each round with purpose to
minimize squared error, until a good set of medoids (exemplars) and corresponding clusters emerges.
The method is called “affinity propagation”, because at any point in time, the magnitude of each
message reflects the current affinity that one data point has for choosing another data point as its
medoid. This algorithm accepts as input a similarity matrix (negative of Euclidean distance was used)
and a parameter called preference, which indirectly affects the number of clusters. The value of
preference can be adjusted so to get a specific number of clusters, if it is desired. Other algorithms can
equally well be used such as k-centers (MacQueen, 1967), a medoid-based variation of k-means.

2.4 Data
To test the efficiency of our method, we used the datasets and the gold standards provided by
DREAM 5 network inference challenge (Marbach, et al., 2012). The DREAM project provides
benchmark datasets along with the real network topology derived from biological validated data and
organized annual challenges for Systems Biology problems like network inference. We used the 3
datasets with averaged experimental conditions, containing 1643 genes - 487 samples (in silico), 4511
genes - 487 samples (E. Coli) and 5950 genes - 321 samples (S. cerevisiae), which from now on will
be referred as D51, D53 and D54 respectively.
Additionally, we used a human ovarian cancer microarray dataset accessible through NCBI's Gene
Expression Omnibus (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo/) with series accession number GSE14407
(Bowen, et al., 2009), which is based on 12 normal surface epithelial cell samples and 12 unmatched
cancerous epithelial cell samples from serous papillary ovarian adenocarcinoma (for the network
construction, we used only the normal samples). This dataset is closer to most applications, as it has
few samples and it is based on human data. Since a reference GRN does not exist, the evaluation was
performed with the network of experimentally validated regulatory interactions from
(Madhamshettiwar, et al., 2012), containing 6,330 interactions among 280 TFs and 2,170 targets,
originally derived from TRANSFAC database.

1997

A Clustering Based Method Accelerating Gene Regulatory ...

Dimitrakopoulos et al.

Finally, we applied our method in a human aging dataset (NCBI GEO series accession number
GSE11882), which profiles gene expression in 4 brain regions of cognitively intact humans, across the
adult lifespan (173 samples of ages 20-99) (Berchtold, et al., 2008).We kept only the same 2450 genes
with ovarian cancer dataset, in order to be able to use the known TF’s-Targets network for evaluation.

3 Results
To assess the accuracy of the inferred networks, Area Under Curve (AUC) was used, which is
computed as the area under Receiver Operator Curve (ROC) which in turn is the plot of the true
positive rate versus the false positive rate at various values of threshold. This way, we avoided
selecting a specific threshold, which varies for each method and dataset, since AUC essentially takes
into account all possible thresholds. All algorithms were implemented in Matlab and executed in a PC
with i7 3.1 GHz CPU and 8GB RAM. MIC implementation by (Albanese, et al., 2013) was used. All
data were normalized per gene profile to zero mean and unit variance.

3.1 Benchmark datasets
We used the DREAM 5 benchmark datasets, to explore the efficacy of our framework and fine
tune the parameters. In all cases MIC parameter c was set to 15 (default) and alpha to 0.25, which
yielded optimal performance in DREAM 5 datasets in terms of AUC (AUC was increased about 4% in
D51and 2% in rest dataset), despite that this value led to examination of less and larger grids. In
Figure 2 we show the performance of MIC in comparison with PCC, ARACNE and CLR. It is clear
that MIC is competitive with these established methods and specifically better than MI based methods
in D53 and D54 datasets. Remarkably, it achieves the best performance in Dataset 4, which is the
largest, not only among the methods shown in Figure 2, but also among the 35 methods presented in
(Marbach, et al., 2012).

Figure 2. Performance of various metrics and methods on the 3 datasets of DREAM 5. MIC shows
similar or better performance with other state of the art methods.

1998

A Clustering Based Method Accelerating Gene Regulatory ...

Dimitrakopoulos et al.

Figure 3. Plots of (A) AUC and (B) time when clustering the 2 large DREAM 5 across samples varying
the number of medoids (x axis represents the percentage of samples kept) and inferring the network with
MIC. Keeping only about 60% of medoids results in small loss in performance and in one case in
increment, while time is reduced significantly.

Next, we performed clustering across the samples for the two largest DREAM 5 datasets D53 and
D54, keeping only the medoids, as shown in Figure 3, and then inferred the network using MIC. We
observed that despite the large dimensionality reduction, performance has decreased in a relatively
very small percentage and in one case there is improvement. The last observation indicates that a
metric might perform better with less variables and that clustering managed to successfully compress
the data. Therefore, it is a worthy process to get a quick estimation of the results, since the time needed
for any method is directly proportional to number of samples.
Moving forward, we applied our clustering framework in combination with MIC to DREAM 5
datasets and the ovarian cancer dataset. In DREAM 5 datasets, GENIE3 was the best or among the top
algorithms in performance, while for the ovarian cancer dataset 8 unsupervised GRN methods
provided predictions slightly better than random guess (0.50), with Relevance Networks having
maximum performance of 0.55 (Madhamshettiwar, et al., 2012). In Table 1, some indicative results of
our method are shown, obtained by setting the number of clusters to 30% of the original genes in
DREAM datasets and 10% in the case of ovarian cancer. As we observe, on one hand performance
better than or close to maximum can be achieved with our method and on the other, in comparison to
MIC, results remained unchanged or improved, while lowering the execution time 10 to 100 times.
Similar results were observed for a wide range of cluster numbers (10%-30%).
One important property of our method is that it can work under different metrics. Thus, replacing
MIC with PCC, despite that it is an extremely fast method and time performance is not an issue, we
observed similar behavior and improved accuracy. Specifically, in D54, PCC over the whole dataset
Method

Dataset
D51

D53

D54

Ovarian Cancer

AUC Time (sec)

AUC

Time (sec)

AUC Time(sec) AUC

Time (sec)

GENIE3

0.81 1612

0.61

5832

0.52 4788

0.50

150

MIC

0.76 411

0.60

3128

0.58 4727

0.51

204

Our method

0.72 43

0.60

284

0.58 433

0.54

1.8

Table 1. Indicative examples of performance and execution time of various methods in comparison to
our method using MIC.

1999

A Clustering Based Method Accelerating Gene Regulatory ...

Dimitrakopoulos et al.

yielded an AUC of 0.52, while with our method and 2000 medoids (i.e. 1/3 of the genes), 0.58 was
achieved. Similarly, in ovarian cancer dataset, PCC resulted in AUC=0.51 and with our method and
1000 medoids (40% of genes), it was increased to 0.52. The conclusion from all experiments is that in
order to retain a high performance, it is critical to have a very large number of clusters, with 30%
representing a good balance between speed and accuracy.

3.2 Aging
Finally, we applied our method in a dataset studying human aging. Initially, we split the data into 3
subsets, containing each young (20-30 years, 30 samples), middle (31-65, 54 samples) and old (66-99,
89 samples) ages. Next, we built a network for each age group, by applying our method with MIC,
clustering data into 500 groups. We observed a major difference in time and an improvement in
performance. Specifically, for young ages we obtained by MIC AUC of 0.48 in 240 seconds versus
0.54 in 10 seconds for our method. In both middle and old ages, the values for MIC were 0.49 in 580
seconds and 690 seconds respectively, while our method achieved 0.51 in 21 and 22 seconds
respectively. Consequently, we examined the genes which their interactions changed significantly
during aging. To determine the differentiated regulatory links, we isolated the interactions that had
more than 0.8 difference in MIC value between two networks. We detected 135 differentiated genes
between young and middle networks, 34 between middle and old and 178 between young and old. For
these genes we performed Gene Ontology (GO) and Pathway enrichment analysis using DAVID
Functional Annotation tool (http://david.abcc.ncifcrf.gov) and some indicative results are shown in
Table 2. These pathways and GO categories have been known to be associated with aging, for
example Cell cycle and p53 signaling pathway (Rufini, et al., 2013) and MAPK signaling pathway
specifically in brain tissue (Zhen, et al., 1999). Also, some cancer related pathways appeared, which is
no surprise, since literature supports that aging and cancer involve some common mechanisms (Finkel,
et al., 2007).
An important remark is that low AUC was achieved here and in previous datasets, but since gold
standard is derived from experimentally validated interactions between TFs and targets, on one hand
many true interactions are not known yet and on the other some interactions might not occur in the
specific conditions of the experiment. Finally, the usefulness of our method lies in the fact that results
can reveal valuable information when examined under different perspectives, such as genes
cooperating in pathways.
Condition
Young-Middle

Young-Old

Pathway / GO Term
p53 signaling pathway
Insulin signaling pathway
TGF-beta signaling pathway
regulation of cell death (GO)
organ development (GO)
system development (GO)
Insulin signaling pathway
MAPK signaling pathway
Cell cycle
Pathways in cancer
Thyroid cancer
Endometrial cancer

P-Value
4,9E-5
3,3E-3
8,3E-3
1,7E-9
9,8E-13
5,7E-12
5.7E-3
1,8E-2
1,3E-2
8,3E-5
2,5E-4
3,8E-3

Table 2. Gene Ontology categories and KEGG Pathways detected to differentiate significantly
among different age groups.

2000

A Clustering Based Method Accelerating Gene Regulatory ...

Dimitrakopoulos et al.

4 Conclusions and Future Work
In this work we presented a general clustering strategy, which can be combined with any GRN
method and achieve similar level of accuracy, by applying the GRN method in a fraction of the
dataset, accelerating so the network inference. We introduced usage of MIC metric for GRN inference
and achieved high performance and in some occasions better than any method reported in recent
literature. Finally, in the application on aging dataset, groups of genes showing differentiation among
different ages, successfully identified pathways relevant to the problem in study.
In future work we plan to investigate the inclusion of different kind of a priori information, such as
Gene Ontology (GO), Protein - Protein Interactions, Pathway Maps and TF's - targets (the latter is
currently used for evaluation, so it is not possible to utilize it in network reconstruction). Embedding
experimentally validated information into the network has been proved to increase the biological
consistency of results (Maraziotis, et al., 2012). This is the only way to increase accuracy in datasets,
in which all unsupervised methods provided results marginally better than random guess. A natural
adaptation of our method is, complementary to clustering, to use GO terms or Pathway Maps, which
provide a grouping of genes known to cooperate to perform a function. This way, researchers who are
studying a specific biological problem can easily focus only on GO categories or pathways related to
problem in study, rather than reconstructing the whole network. Moreover, Protein - Protein
Interaction is a different kind of a priori knowledge that is available, but it does not provide a grouping
of genes unless more preprocessing steps are followed (for example creation of a PPI graph and
extraction of functional modules).

Acknowledgement
This research has been co-financed by the European Union (European Social Fund - ESF) and
Greek national funds through the Operational Program "Education and Lifelong Learning" of the
National Strategic Reference Framework (NSRF) - Research Funding Program: Thalis. Investing in
knowledge society through the European Social Fund.

References
Albanese, D., Filosi, M., Visintainer, R., Riccadonna, S., Jurman, G. and Furlanello, C, (2013).
Minerva and minepy: a C engine for the MINE suite and its R, Python and MATLAB wrappers.
Bioinformatics, 29(3): 407-408.
Berchtold, N. C., Cribbs, D. H., Coleman, P. D., Rogers, J., Head, E., Kim, R., Beach, T., Miller,
C., Troncosoǁ, J, Trojanowski, J. Q., Zielke, H. R. and Carl W. Cotman, (2008). Gene expression
changes in the course of normal brain aging are sexually dimorphic. PNAS, 105 (40): 15605-15610.
Bowen, N.J., Walker, L.D., Matyunina, L.V., Logani, S., Totten, K.A., Benigno, B.B. and
McDonald, J.F., (2009). Gene expression profiling supports the hypothesis that human ovarian surface
epithelia are multipotent and capable of serving as ovarian cancer initiating cells. BMC Med
Genomics, 2:71.
Butte, A. J. and Kohane, I. S., (2000). Mutual information relevance networks: functional genomic
clustering using pairwise entropy measurements. Pac Symp Biocomput, pp. 418-429.
de Siqueira Santos, S., Takahashi, D. Y., Nakata, A., and Fujita, A., (2013). A comparative study
of statistical methods used to identify dependencies between gene expression signals, Brief Bioinform.
bbt051.

2001

A Clustering Based Method Accelerating Gene Regulatory ...

Dimitrakopoulos et al.

Emmert-Streib, F., Glazko, G. V., Altay, G. and de Matos Simoes, R., (2012). Statistical inference
and reverse engineering of gene regulatory networks from observational expression data. Front. Gene.,
3:8.
Faith, J. J., Hayete, B., Thaden, J. T., Mogno, I., Wierzbowski, J., Cottarel, G., Kasif, S., Collins, J.
J. and Gardner, T. S., (2007). Large-scale mapping and validation of Escherichia coli transcriptional
regulation from a compendium of expression profiles. PLoS Biol, 5:e8.
Fernald, G. H., Capriotti, E., Daneshjou, R. and Karczewski, K. J., (2011). Bioinformatics
challenges for personalized medicine. Bioinformatics, 27 (13): 1741–1748.
Finkel, T., Serrano, M. and Blasco, A. M., (2007). The common biology of cancer and ageing.
Nature, 448, 767-774.
Frey, B. J. and Dueck, D., (2007). Clustering by Passing Messages Between Data Points. Science,
315 (5814), 972-976.
Hecker, M., Lambeck, S., Toepfer, S., van Someren, E. and Guthke, R., (2009). Gene regulatory
network inference: data integration in dynamic models-a review. Biosystems, 96(1):86-103..
Huynh-Thu, V. A., Irrthum, A., Wehenkel, L. and Geurts, P., (2010). Inferring regulatory networks
from expression data using tree-based methods. PLoS One, 5:e12776.
Langfelder, P. and Horvath, S., (2008). WGCNA: an R package for weighted correlation network
analysis, BMC Bioinformatics, 9:559
MacQueen, J. B., (1967). Some Methods for classification and Analysis of Multivariate
Observations, Proceedings of 5-th Berkeley Symposium on Mathematical Statistics and Probability,
Proceedings of 5-th Berkeley Symposium on Mathematical Statistics and Probability, Berkeley,
University of California Press, 1:281-297
Madhamshettiwar, P., Maetschke, S., Davis, M., Reverter, A. and Ragan, M., (2012). Gene
regulatory network inference: evaluation and application to ovarian cancer allows the prioritization of
drug targets. Genome Med, 4:41.
Maraziotis, I. A., Dragomir, A. and Thanos, D., (2010). Gene Regulatory networks modeling using
a dynamic evolutionary hybrid. BMC Bioinformatics, 11:40.
Maraziotis, I. A., Dimitrakopoulos. G. N. and Bezerianos, A., (2012). Gene Ontology Semisupervised Possibilistic Clustering of Gene Expression Data. SETN 2012: 7th Hellenic Conference on
AI, Lamia, Greece, Proceedings, LNCS (LNAI), Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg, 7297: 262–269.
Marbach, D., Costello, J. C., Küffner, R., Vega, N. M., Prill, R. J., Camacho, D. M. and Allison, K.
R., (2012). Wisdom of crowds for robust gene network inference. Nature Methods, 9(8):796-804.
Margolin, A. A., Nemenman, I., Basso, K., Wiggins, C., Stolovitzky, G., Dalla Favera, R. and
Califano, A., (2006). ARACNE: an algorithm for the reconstruction of gene regulatory networks in a
mammalian cellular context. BMC Bioinformatics, 7(Suppl 1):S7.
Meyer, P. E., Kontos, K., Lafitte, F. and Bontempi, G., (2007). Information-theoretic inference of
large transcriptional regulatory networks. EURASIP J Bioinform Syst Biol , 79879.
Mordelet, F. and Vert, J. P., (2008). SIRENE: supervised inference of regulatory networks.
Bioinformatics, 24:i76-82.
Reshef, N. D., Reshef, A. Y., Finucane, K. H., Grossman, S. R., McVean, G., Turnbaugh, P. J.,
Lander, S. E., Mitzenmacher, M. C. and Sabeti, P. (2011). Detecting Novel Associations in Large Data
Sets. Science , 16 12, 334 (6062).
Rufini, A., Tucci, P., Celardo, I. and Melino, G., (2013). Senescence and aging: the critical roles of
p53. Oncogene, 32, 5129–5143.
Song, L., Langfelder, P. and Horvath, S. (2012). Comparison of co-expression measures: mutual
information, correlation, and model based indices, BMC Bioinformatics, 13:328
Zhen, X., Uryu, K., Cai, G., Johnson, G. P.and Friedman, E. (1999). Age-Associated Impairment
in Brain MAPK Signal Pathways and the Effect of Caloric Restriction in Fischer 344 Rats. J Gerontol
A Biol Sci Med Sci, 54 (12): B539-B548.

2002

