Procedia Computer Science
Volume 29, 2014, Pages 2145–2151
ICCS 2014. 14th International Conference on Computational Science

Numerical Optimization Technique for Optimal Design
of the n Grooves Surface Plasmon Grating Coupler
Carmen Caiseda1, Igor Griva2, Luis Martinez1, Kyle Shaw2 and Dan
Weingarten2
1

Inter American University of Puerto Rico-Bayamón Campus, Bayamón, P.R.
2
George Mason University, Virginia, U.S.A..
ccaiseda@bayamon.inter.edu, igriva@gmu.edu

Abstract
A gradient based numerical optimization technique to obtain an optimal design of the geometry of a
metal grating and parameters of an incident Gaussian beam (GB) to excite surface plasmons is
introduced. The numerical gradient is obtained by exploiting the available Finite Element Method
discretization data, and by direct differentiation of the GB parameters, such as its angle of incidence
and the position of the center.
There are two approaches considered. One uses a fixed mesh via discrete geometry update steps for 4
grooves with a 14 dimensional gradient. Another approach uses a general n grooves grating with
independent user defined dimensions of the rectangular grooves. With just doubling the number of
grooves, the 8 grooves grating with a 26 dimensional gradient shows a much improved energy
conversion rate (up to 77%) demonstrating considerable practical value of the methodology.
Keywords: Finite Element Methods, Gradient Based Optimization, Optimal Design, Surface Plasmons, Grating,
COMSOL, JAVA

1 Introduction
Mathematical modeling and optimization gives practitioners insight to develop more powerful and
efficient nanosystems capable of tailoring the electromagnetic properties of light [1]. Optimization
with PDE constraints is capable to improve designs of nanosystems with a help of an ever increasing
computational power.
The practical importance and design sensitivity of nanodevices is demonstrated in the fact that
diverse numerical optimization strategies have been implemented to obtain the optimal design of the
grating coupler for efficient excitation of surface plasmons (SP). Applications include remote sensing,
light harvesting and cloaking. Many simulations on the optimal design of the SP grating coupler use
the Finite Element method (FEM) to model the electromagnetic field, but differ in the numerical

Selection and peer-review under responsibility of the Scientiﬁc Programme Committee of ICCS 2014
c The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V.

doi:10.1016/j.procs.2014.05.199

2145

Numerical Optimization Technique for Optimal Design ...

Caiseda et al.

optimization strategies. These strategies include topology optimization [2], adjoint gradient shape
analysis [3], and sequential parameter search [4]. Topology optimization uses a material distribution
approach that requires additional parameter constraints to obtain properties of known materials. The
shape analysis formulation of the sensitivity uses an efficient adjoint gradient, but its formulation can
be complex depending on the objective functional. The sequential parameter search modifies the
geometry of a small number of parameters of the metal/dielectric interface, but requires much more
computational effort as it searches the design space in any direction.
This work develops a comprehensive optimal design technique for finding an efficient SP grating
coupler and parameters of the incident Gaussian Beam (GB). The developed numerical gradient
optimization modifies both the geometry of the grating grooves, and the GB parameters. This amounts
to solving a discretized optimization with PDE constraint problem. The objective functional depends
on design variables that are determined both analytically and numerically. The gradient of this
objective functional is a hybrid computed from simulation data by finite difference, and whenever
possible, direct differentiation. The technique has been applied initially to a 4 groove grating, and
modified later to tackle 8 grooves. Following the direction of the gradient, the objective functional and
conversion rate is greatly improved for both gratings.

2 Problem formulation
The conversion of energy between the GB and plasmonic modes can be modeled in two approaches
by choosing which mode will be incident at the boundary of the system. This defines an output or
input coupler [2]. In this work the output coupler is studied, where the plasmonic beam is incident to
the boundary, and the energy converted to an output Gaussian Beam mode is calculated. This choice
proves to be very convenient because changes in the parameters of the Gaussian Beam modify the
objective function, not the solution (state variables) computed by FEM. The quantity of energy
converted from the plasmonic mode to the GB will measure the efficiency of the coupler. The
conversion efficiency is measured as the percentage of the energy transferred. The energy that the
plasmon has lost as it travels the distance between the boundary and the grating is also taken into
account by multiplying the converted energy by the lost fraction.
The geometry of the domain consists of an (x,y) rectangle, a bottom n-groove silver grating
embedded in air.
Perfectly matched layers (PML) are appended to the physical boundaries of the domain to simulate
a transparent boundary that absorbs electromagnetic modes with little reflection back into the domain
[5]. The output coupler is chosen such that the plasmonic mode Hz is incident at the left-most
boundary of the domain. The excited scalar electromagnetic phasor Hz is modeled by ports and
Maxwell's equations that are simplified to a scalar Helmholtz PDE in (1), where    for air and
metal.
2

∂ ⎛ 1 ∂H z ⎞ ∂ ⎛ 1 ∂H z ⎞ ⎛ 2π ⎞
⎟− ⎜
⎟ = ⎜ ⎟ μr H z ,
− ⎜⎜
∂x ⎝ ε r ∂x ⎟⎠ ∂y ⎜⎝ ε r ∂y ⎟⎠ ⎝ λ ⎠
The finite element method (FEM) is used to find the numerical solution to the PDE. The electric
and magnetic phasors of the electromagnetic (EM) field E,H are coupled with the Gaussian beam EB,
HB via the wave coupler functional J over a horizontal boundary Γ that spans over the whole

2146

(1)

Numerical Optimization Technique for Optimal Design ...

Caiseda et al.

computational domain in x direction, defined in (2). Γ is parallel to the metal/dielectric boundary at a
distance d.

J ( E, H ) =

1
E B × H + E × H B ⋅ n ds ,
4 ∫Γ

((

) (

))

(2)

This formulation departs from the common use of the Poynting vector in (3) that has been further
simplified in literature in terms of the scalar magnetic [3].

J (H ) =

1
1
2
H z ds
Re
∫
4 Γ εr

(3)

The objective function is the modulus of J = Jr + j*Ji normalized. The objective function after
normalization is given by: P = |J(E,H)|2/|J(EB,HB)|.
For the Plasmonic Mode defined in equation (4), the form magnetic phasor satisfies the following
equations in [6] at the dielectric/metal interface with y=0, with λ= 800 nm, ε1 = 1, and the permittivity
of the metal ε2 taken according to Palik’s handbook [7].

⎧ A e − k2 y
H z ( y) = ⎨ 1 k y
1
⎩ A2 e

y≥0
y<0

k 2 = β 2 − k 02 ,

β = k0

(4)

ε2
,
1+ ε 2

k 0 = 2π / λ , k1 = −k 2ε 2
Fig. 1 illustrates the GB transformation with an angle of rotation θ and displaced horizontally s
and at a distance dist from the metal constrained by the size of a typical fiber optic. Here u is the
propagation axis.

Figure 1: Gaussian beam parameters

2147

Numerical Optimization Technique for Optimal Design ...

Caiseda et al.

The GB formulation in terms of the transformed variables (u,v) is defined in (5),



  
and   
.


H B ( x, y) = H 0



with  



⎛ v2 ⎞
w0
exp⎜⎜ − 2 ⎟⎟ exp( A + B)
w
⎝ w ⎠

For the optimization a numerical gradient has been obtained by using both numerical and analytical
differentiation when possible. The gradient of P is obtained separating real and imaginary
components as in [8]. The HB formula in (5) is differentiated analytically with respect to three
parameters: (θ, s, dist). The geometric gradient is more involved as it includes the magnetic and
electric field of the simulation. In order to obtain the electric field an 8th order accurate finite
difference scheme is implemented using the identity derived from Maxwell's equations:   .
The sensitivity of the magnetic field is obtained by direct differentiation of the matrix with respect to
each boundary v of the grooves. Given the linear system Au = b then Dvu =A-1 (Dvb – DvA)u). The
factorization of the matrix A is then efficiently used for both the solution of the FEM system and the
sensitivity of the magnetic field.
In this work the input and output coupler designs were tested. The input design uses the GB as the
excitation mode and produces the plasmon mode, while the output design is the inverse. In the
simulation code it has been shown that the output and input coupler produce the same results. The
computational advantages of the output coupler in the optimization of the GB parameters make this
the object of study of the implementation stage.

3 Computational implementation
Two different strategies have been implemented using COMSOL Multiphysics for the optimal
design of the SP grating. The first strategy used a fixed mesh approach with discrete size changes for
grooves. This guarantees the sensitivity of the objective function depends only on the changes of the
size of the grooves but not changes in the mesh. The second strategy uses a new geometry approach
and provides arbitrary size modifications that require remeshing. In both cases the same numerical
gradient of the objective functional P with respect to geometrical as well as Gaussian Beam
parameters is used for optimization. Fig. 2 shows the fixed mesh geometry with 450 sub-domains per
groove to be defined as air or metal according to the permittivity. In this domain an initial 4 grooves
grating was designed that improved energy conversion rate from an initial 7% to 27%.

2148

(5)

Numerical Optimization Technique for Optimal Design ...

Caiseda et al.

Figure 2: Groove in fixed mesh strategy

Duplicating this design, an initial geometry of the 8 grooves grating was studied. To overcome the
limitations of the discrete design, and a large number of subdomains per groove, an alternative
geometry strategy was used at each modified design step, see Fig. 3. A new Java tool was built to
produce the script necessary to describe the physics, geometry and meshing of an n-groove grating
according to a user defined size, depth and distance between the n grooves. The Java script that builds
the new 8 grooves grating and its PML boundaries was further modified to include the gradient based
optimization algorithm. The 26 dimensional numerical gradient computed by the optimization tool
includes the 23 sensitivity parameters of the wave coupler functional P with respect to the left, right
and bottom boundary of each groove modifications (with the left boundary of the leftmost groove is
fixed) as well as the three GB parameters. A fixed step is used for modification in the direction of the
gradient. The results have produced a significant increase in conversion rate for the output grating
coupler optimal design.

Figure 3: 8-grooves grating initial design

4. Results
The initial conversion rate of the optimal design of the 4 grooves grating with Plasmon Beam and
Gaussian Beam output obtained a 27% conversion rate using silver as the metal, 21% using gold. A
geometric change of 11% of the depth of one of the grooves produces a conversion rate change from
27 to 25% that shows the design fairly robust.

2149

Numerical Optimization Technique for Optimal Design ...

Caiseda et al.

The optimal geometric design for 4 grooves was duplicated twice to make 8 grooves. Immediately
the new design yielded 47% of conversion efficiency for gold coupler and served as an initial guess
for the 8-groove optimization. After running the gradient based optimization algorithm the 8-groove
grating geometry was modified to attain a 77% of energy conversion. Fig. 4 shows the magnitude of
the magnetic field H augmented by the attained design of the 8 groove grating.

Figure 4: Magnetic field augmentation

5. Conclusion
We developed a methodology that optimizes geometric parameters for energy efficient inter-mode
conversion nanodevices. The developed computational tools can significantly improve a conversion
rate of an initial design using a gradient based optimization with analytical and numerical
differentiation.
One of the reasons the methodology can find the design with high conversion efficiency is that the
geometric parameters for each groove can be modified independently from those of the other grooves.
As a part of the developed methodology, we created a Java code that outputs a FEM model with
arbitrary number of grooves and independent values of geometric parameters for each groove.
Changes in the geometry may have a strong effect on the EM field as it interacts with the grooves.
We also found that the sensitivity is significant with respect to the depth of the grooves suggesting the
importance of producing grooves with independent depths in the grating in order to obtain a better
conversion rate, similar to the optimal design obtained by Andjaer in [2].
The conversion rate improvement from 21% to 77% shows the capability of the developed
computational tools to improve a SP grating design. The optimization tools have produced better
designs for 4 and 8 grooves gratings proving the potential for the scalability of the proposed approach.
The computational tools developed in this work have proven to be useful for the optimal design of
the grating coupler by showing how much the coupler conversion efficiency can be improved by
optimizing the geometric parameters.
The developed approach opens an opportunity to be used for addressing similar problems for
finding an optimal design of nanodevices that manipulate electromagnetic radiation.

Acknowledgements
The authors would like to thank Dr. Vladimir Aksyuk and the Center for Nanoscale Science and
Technology at the National Institute of Standards and Technology for critical suggestions and practical
considerations that led to improvement of the manuscript.

2150

Numerical Optimization Technique for Optimal Design ...

Caiseda et al.

References
1. Koev S T, Agrawal A, Lezec H.J, Aksyuk V A. An efficient large-area grating coupler for surface plasmon polaritons.
Plasmonics, 7: 269-277, 2012
2. Andajaer J, Nishiwaki S, Nomura T, Sigmund O. Topology optimization of grating couplers for the efficient excitation of
surface plasmons. Optical Society of America, June 2010.
3. Huan Y. Optimal design for the grating coupler of surface plasmons. Proceedings of COMSOL Boston conference. 2008.
4. Lu J, Petre C, Yablonovitch E. Numerical optimization of the grating coupler for the efficient excitation of surface plasmons
at an Ag-SiO2 interface. Optical Society of America, 24(9): 2268-2271, 2007.
5. Jin J. The finite element method in electromagnetics, 2nd edition. Wiley-IEEE Press 2002.
6. Maier S A. Plasmonics: fundamentals and applications. Springer 2007.
7. Palik E D. Handbook of optical constants of solids. Academic Press,1998.
8. Caiseda C. Development of numerical optimization techniques for the optimal design of nanophotonic and nanoplasmonic
systems. PhD thesis, School of Physics, Astronomy and Computational Sciences, George Mason Unviersity, August 2012.

2151

