Procedia Computer Science
Volume 29, 2014, Pages 2401–2411
ICCS 2014. 14th International Conference on Computational Science

Evolutionary simulation of complex networks structures
with speciﬁc topological properties
Victor V. Kashirin1
ITMO University, Saint-Petersburg, Russia
kashirin.victor@gmail.com

Abstract
The expanding variety of observable real-world complex networks (CN) required development
of mathematical models aimed to explain the nature of such constructions and to model their
structure with certain precision. Existing models of CN seem to lack ﬂexibility because of rigid
modelling algorithm they are built upon. This might be inconvenient when there is a need to
have an extended set of hypotheses about possible networks structures for some experiments.
In present work we consider heuristic approach to modelling complex networks structures
based on simulated annealing algorithm and applying it to the problem of modelling smallworld networks with speciﬁc properties. We demonstrate that this approach helps to simulate
realistic structures with properties unobtainable by traditional models of complex networks.
Keywords: complex networks, network design, simulated annealing

1

Introduction

Mathematical models of complex networks aim to explain how real-world networks develop and
obtain speciﬁc properties which were observed in data. In addition, complex networks modelling
tries to provide toolkit the for researchers that allows to build various types of networks, helping
to ﬁnd out which topological characteristics do or do not aﬀect the networks properties. This
second issue is also considered network design problem, which is examined in multiple research
areas. Due to complex nature of real-world network structures, which possess large amount
of nodes and non-trivial connections made between them, design of complex network with
certain qualities is a laborious and computationally expensive problem. One might imagine the
complexity of road network design, where lots of objectives like cost of construction, coverage
area, average route length and etc. have to be considered and optimised, and there are plenty
of similar examples to consider.
Real-world complex networks are characterised by set of topological characteristics, e.g.
high clustering coeﬃcient, short average path lengths and scale-free property (when node degree
distribution follows power law). Hence, models of complex networks strive to reproduce some of
these properties in a model structures. Actual problem with current complex networks models
Selection and peer-review under responsibility of the Scientiﬁc Programme Committee of ICCS 2014
c The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V.
doi:10.1016/j.procs.2014.05.224

2401

Evolutionary simulation of complex networks structures with speciﬁc topological properties Kashirin

is related to a ﬁxed algorithm, attributed to model, which deﬁnes the construction process
of a network structure: single complex network model is able to provide a bounded space of
solutions, and do not favour a tweaking of obtainable properties. This lead to creation of
diﬀerent derivatives and modiﬁcations of base complex networks models in order to obtain
desired properties. For instance, Barabasi-Albert (BA) [1] model of scale-free network does not
allow variation of clustering coeﬃcient, which depends solely on modelling algorithm. To deal
with this issue, alternative models were proposed [9, 8], which are based on BA model and
diﬀerent techniques such as edge rewiring or controlling triangles formation. Additional models
were developed to deal with insuﬃciencies of BA approach [14]. Examples like this demonstrate
presence of mentioned problem, which is emphasised by the fact that some properties of realworld networks might not be captured by generalised models of complex networks.
Earlier researches demonstrated that some problems of structure design in general [2] and
network design in particular can be solved using heuristic optimisation algorithms [10]. For
example, the chip placement problem was successfully solved [5] with Simulated Annealing
algorithm [11], which was applied for design of transportation networks [13], water distribution
network [4], pressure relief header networks and heat exchanger networks [6] as well.
Success of heuristic approach to network design suggests the idea to apply the same approach to the problem of modelling the general types of network structures with traditional
properties, such as small-world and power law degree distribution. Present work demonstrates
the eﬃciency of method for modelling general network structures using Simulated Annealing
algorithm, evaluated by ﬂexibility and its potency to realise desired properties in modelled
structures to available degree.

2
2.1

Method of complex network structure simulation
The optimisation task

The optimisation task presented in the introduction can be expressed a bit more formally in
the following manner. Suppose there is a set of topological properties that are required in
simulated network structure. Network is represented as graph G = V, E , where V denotes
the set of vertices in the network and E is the set of (bidirectional) edges between pairs of
nodes in V . The size of the network is given by N = |V | and ﬁxed. The task is to model the
graph of rank N which satisﬁes to some degree the topological requirements. In present paper
we focus on imitation and modelling of such structures as small-world networks, networks with
high clustering coeﬃcient, communities and scale-free property. Emergence of those properties
in real-world networks was shown in a numerous publications.
In the following sections we describe a method to ﬁnd a (near-)optimal graph structure with
desired properties.

2.2

Simulated networks

We try to simulate networks with combination of properties like small-world eﬀect, power-law
degree distribution, high clustering and clustered structure. To compare obtained results with
previous studies we consider the following models.
Watts-Strogatz (WS) model of small world networks [19] provides an algorithm to obtain a
network with high clustering coeﬃcient and relatively small average path length. Using edge
rewiring procedure it generates a range of networks from regular lattice (high clustering, big
path lengths) to random graphs (small path lengths, low clustering). Problem of this model
2402

Evolutionary simulation of complex networks structures with speciﬁc topological properties Kashirin

is based on strong bond between probability of edges rewiring and the properties of networks
obtained by models, meaning that getting wider set of networks is impossible.
Barabasi-Albert (BA) model of complex network [1] addresses implementation of another
property of real-life networks: power-law distribution of nodes degrees. It helps to model
scale-free networks with relatively short path lengths and relatively high clustering coeﬃcient.
The problem with this model is that it doesn’t allow tweaking of clustering coeﬃcient or path
lengths, as Watts-Strogatz model does.
Neither model allows to model networks with bold division into communities.
We will address the mentioned problems and provide a universal heuristic algorithm for
implementation of networks with desired topological properties.

2.3

Objective functions

Here we introduce a set of objective functions, which evaluate to what extent some graph
possess certain topological property. These objective functions are built upon metrics which
calculate numerical properties of graph structures. First, we describe the set of metrics which
are considered in present work.
Density of the network evaluates the relation between the amount of links and nodes within
network. Density of the network G with N nodes and M edges equals D = 2M/(N (N − 1)).
Its objective function is denoted as fdensity .
The number of strongly connected components cG shows how many separate parts of the
network are in place. There are diﬀerent ways to calculate this property, e.g. using BFS. Since
most of the time it is just required that modelled network is connected, then the optimal number
of connected components ρoptimal equals 1. Objective function of this property is denoted as
fcomponents .
Clustering coeﬃcient of the network represents the willingness of nodes neighbours to be connected with each other, having C = 1 when for any node node its neighbours are connected with
each other, and C = 0 when neighbours of each node are never connected. Clustering coeﬃcient
is calculated by formula C = (3 × number of triangles)/(number of connected node triples).
Objective function for clustering coeﬃcient is denoted as fclustering .
Average path length (APL) represents how small the world of network is: the smaller the
path lengths the smaller the world is. Its objective function is denoted as fAP L .
Distribution of nodes degrees is one of the most important characteristic of the complex
networks. Recently the largest attention in literature on complex networks has been given to
so-called scale-free networks, whose distribution of nodes degrees follows power-law with speciﬁc
exponent. To determine whether or not the given network possesses power-law distribution of
its nodes degrees Newman proposed the method based on MLE and Kolmogorov-Smirnov test,
described in [16]. This method provides three values as a result: exponent value λ, xmin — the
initial point of power-law distribution, and p-value. We use λ and p-value in objective function
N
1
2

Objective function f
1 − |ρoptimal − ρcurrent |
1/(|ρoptimal − ρcurrent | + 1)

Property the function is used for
density, clustering coeﬃcient, modularity
average path lengths, number of communities,
scale-freeness, number of components

Table 1: Objective functions for networks topological properties, where ρoptimal is desired value
of certain property and ρcurrent is the value of metric for current graph
2403

Evolutionary simulation of complex networks structures with speciﬁc topological properties Kashirin

which tests if network is scale-free or not. Objective function for scale-freeness is denoted as
fpowerlaw .
The number of communities is an important property of real-world networks, representing
how many clusters of nodes there are in the network. For this metric, ρcurrent is a number of
communities, calculated with fast greedy algorithm [3]. One might note that this function is
useless until we consider another property - modularity of the network. Modularity expresses
the relation between the part of links which stay within the found communities to the amount
of links which a linked to nodes from other communities. Hence, we provide additional objective function for modularity of the network, where ρcurrent is a modularity metric which is
calculated for communities of nodes found by greedy algorithm, and related formula for modularity calculation Q is described in [3]. We refer to those objective functions as fcommunity and
fmodularity .
Table 1 displays base functions for all the described properties. Function 1 is assigned for the
metrics with real values between 0 and 1, and function 2 is assigned for all other metrics. For
power-law property we use objective function 2 where ρoptimal = λ, but with slight modiﬁcation:
we multiply it by p − value. Note that the values of all deﬁned objective functions are bounded
between 0 and 1. It allows weighting of objectives to emphasise or diminish the importance of
certain topological property.
Considering these many properties and objectives it is obvious that building a structure
which satisﬁes all of them might be a complex or even impossible task, since almost all of
those parameters inﬂuence each other to some degree. Thus, the procedure of complex network
modelling is a multi-objective optimisation problem. In present paper we transform this problem
into single-objective optimisation problem using weighted sum.
Formally, we consider a set of n properties with their metrics Φ = {F1 , F2 , ..., Fn }, which
should have speciﬁc values Π = {ρ1 , ρ2 , ..., ρn } on modelled network G. Based on those metrics and properties we assemble a set of objective functions ΠO = {f1 , f2 , ..., fn } : fi (G) =
1 when Fi (G) = ρi and 0 ≤ fi (G) ≤ 1, i = 1, 2, ..., n.
Based on ΠO we deﬁne main objective function:
n

fi (G)wi .

Ψ(G) =

(1)

i=1

Here, wi is the weight of objective function fi for i = 1, 2, ..., n: 0 ≤ wi ≤ 1, and w1 + w2 +
... + wn = 1. Maximum of function Ψ is 1. Therefore, the optimisation problem of network
modelling is to ﬁnd a graph G∗ within search space R of all possible non-oriented graphs of
rank N :
G∗ = arg max Ψ(G)
(2)
G⊆R

Weights wi might be selected either by expert or randomly. The latter solution was chosen
in this paper.

2.4

Simulated Annealing algorithm

In order to ﬁnd the (near-optimal) graph structure G which maximises Ψ(G) we employ a
simulated annealing algorithm [18]. The SA algorithm will search for an optimal network
within space R. Hence, the solution, which is developed on each iteration of algorithm, is a
graph which might be stored as adjacency matrix Aij .

2404

Evolutionary simulation of complex networks structures with speciﬁc topological properties Kashirin

The Simulated Algorithm (SA), applied to current problem, is deﬁned as follows:
1. Obtain initial solution graph and set the initial temperature of the system T0 .
2. Evaluate the current energy of the system:

current

= 1 − Ψ(G)

3. Perform random modiﬁcation of the network (see section 2.5) and get a new solution G .
4. Evaluate the energy of new solution

new

= 1 − Ψ(G).

5. Accept the new solution G with probability Paccept , deﬁned by Metropolis criterion:
Paccept = exp[−

1
max{0,
T (t)

new

−

current }]

6. If the energy of new solution is higher than the predeﬁned limit
T (t) ≥ Tmin , then go to step 2. Otherwise, stop the algorithm.

(3)

min

or temperature

The procedure of initial solution generation was considered thoroughly in this work. It
was found out that generating solution with random graph model (Erdos-Renyi [7]), although
intuitively acceptable, is not eﬀective for a few reasons. First, random graph model doesn’t
cover all search space due to small probability of generation networks of certain types. Second,
generation of random graph with random density is ineﬀective, because most of the real-world
networks have relatively low density, and evaluation of objective functions on dense networks
can be very slow. Thus we take empty graph as the initial structure, since its zero density
is quite close to the required density of networks, and most of objective functions never meet
desired values on the empty graph.
Modiﬁcation, applied on step 3, consists of multiple execution of randomly selected type of
alterations, described in section 2.5. As it will be discussed and shown in section 3, the amount
of modiﬁcations performed on each step inﬂuences the speed of solution search process.
So, the objective of the SA is to ﬁnd the graph structure G∗ that maximises the objective
function and minimizes the system energy :
G∗ = arg min 1 − Ψ(G).

(4)

G⊆R

2.5

Types of network modiﬁcations

The process of heuristic search traditionally relies on random modiﬁcations of present solution.
To generate of new solution-networks we propose ﬁve types of network alterations:
1. Connection of random pair of nodes: Aij ← 1, where i and j are random nodes from V .
2. Removal of random edge: Aij ← 0, where i and j are random nodes from V so that
Aij = 1.
3. Rewiring a pair of randomly selected edges:
(a) Choose two random pairs of nodes i, j and m, n:
i, j, m, n ∈ V , Aij = Amn = 1 and Aim = Ain = Ajn = Ajm = 0.
(b) Remove present edges: Aij ← 0, Amn ← 0.
(c) Add new edges: Amj ← 1, Ain ← 1.
2405

Evolutionary simulation of complex networks structures with speciﬁc topological properties Kashirin

4. Connecting local nodes:
(a) Choose random node i: i ∈ V .
(b) Consider set of nodes Vnei : ∀j ∈ Vnei : 2 ≤ dij ≤ 4.
(c) Select random node j from Vnei and connect it with i: Aij ← 1.
5. Local rewiring a pair of random edges:
(a) Choose two random pairs of nodes i, j and m, n:
Aij = Ain = Ajm = 1 and Amn = 0.
(b) Remove present edges: Ajm ← 0, Ain ← 0.
(c) Add new edges: Amj ← 1, Ain ← 1.
This selection of possible network modiﬁcations is inﬂuenced by natural activities that happen in real networks: new links emerging with and without preference by distance between
nodes, present links removal and rewiring. Although links rewiring looks a bit artiﬁcial, it
happens in real networks too, and the main beneﬁt of this action is that it preserves current
distribution of the network nodes degrees.

3

Experimental study

For present work a set of experiments was settled to evaluate the proposed method eﬃciency.
We chose the following parameters setting for SA algorithm. Cooling proﬁle function was taken
T0
as T (t) =
, with the initial temperature T0 = 0.03 and the cooling speed r = 0.001.
1 + rt
All simulated networks had rank N = 50 and the amount of similar type modiﬁcations was 3.
Weights for selected objectives functions were selected randomly for each run. Computations
were performed on the CLAVIRE platform [12].
Complex networks modelling using Simulated Annealing showed the following results.

3.1

Small-world networks simulation

First, we considered the problem of modelling a small world network of given rank (N = 50)
and density (D = 0.08) with high clustering coeﬃcient C and small average path length
¯l. There is a trade-oﬀ of those properties within complex networks structures, therefore it is a classical optimization problem: maximisation of clustering coeﬃcient (C =
1) and minimisation of path lengths (¯l = 1). The set of objective functions included
fcomponents , fdensity , fclustering and fAP L . We were looking for a set of non-dominated solutions
for clustering coeﬃcient and an average path lengths objectives. The solution is non-dominated
if it is not possible to improve any objective function without lowering some other objective
function.
Figure 1a depicts Pareto front of non-dominated solutions. Networks, obtained with Simulated Annealing, are compared with networks generated by Watts-Strogatz models.
It is obvious, that proposed SA algorithm outperforms WS model, providing structures with
higher clustering while lowering the average path length. More than that, SA algorithms gives
wider diversity of available networks, e.g. networks with clustering coeﬃcient larger that 0.5.
2406

Evolutionary simulation of complex networks structures with speciﬁc topological properties Kashirin

Simulated Annealing

Watts-Strogatz

Average path length, ¯l

X
6

4

Y

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

Clustering coefﬁcient, C

(a) Pareto front of solutions generated with
SA algorithm and WS model

(b) WS model, network X: (c) SA, network Y:
C = 0.5, ¯
l = 6.63
C = 0.52, ¯
l = 3.55

Figure 1: Resuls of modelling small-world networks with high clustering coeﬃcient and small
average path lengths using Simulated Annealing algorithm and Watts-Strogatz model
It is also interesting to compare networks with similar clustering coeﬃcient. Solution X of WS
model with clustering coeﬃcient of 0.5 (ﬁg. 1b) represents a regular lattice, while SA solution
Y with similar clustering (ﬁg. 1c) resembles more natural structure.

3.2

Scale-free small-world networks simulation

We also considered the problem of simulation the small-world scale-free networks, since those
properties are most often attributed to real-world networks, such as WWW or social networks.
So, there were three main objectives: power-law degree distribution, high clustering coeﬃcient
and small average path lengths. We compare the networks obtained with SA with the networks
generated by BA model. The set of objective functions was the same as in sec. 3.1 but with
addition of fpowerlaw . Since traditional BA model generates networks having power law degree
distribution with λ = 3, this parameter was ﬁxed for SA algorithm together with density and
number of components. Clustering coeﬃcient as well as average path lengths were set as variable
parameters.
Figure 2 depicts the results of those simulations. Pareto front of generated solutions (ﬁg. 2a)
shows, that BA model gives strictly limited variation of clustering and path lengths properties
while providing scale-free structure (ﬁg. 2b). Generating scale-free networks with diﬀerent
combinations of those properties was possible by means of SA (ﬁg. 2c - 2e).

3.3

Simulation of scale-free networks with communities

The third type of modelled networks was scale-free networks with communities. Traditional BA
model is not suitable for modelling of networks with given communities structure. Networks,
obtained by BA model, have low modularity, therefore detection of communities is problematic
and gives uncertain results (see ﬁg. 3a). Since this is a common property of real-world networks,
the SA algorithm was succesfully applied to simulation of scale-free network structure with given
set of communities. Objective function included fcomponents , fdensity and fpowerlaw . Example
of modelled network is shown on ﬁg. 3b. It has 3 communities and ﬁxed modularity 0.85, while
2407

Evolutionary simulation of complex networks structures with speciﬁc topological properties Kashirin

Barabasi-Albert

Average path length, ¯l

Simulated Annealing

3.5

3

2.5
0

0.1

0.2

0.3

0.4

0.5

Clustering coefﬁcient, C

(a) Pareto front of non-dominated solutions generated with Simulated Annealing algorithm and
Barabasi-Albert model.

(c) SA: C = 0.0, ¯
l = 2.45

(b) BA: C = 0.05, ¯
l = 2.62

(d) SA: C = 0.24, ¯
l = 2.83

(e) SA: C = 0.47, ¯
l = 3.71

Figure 2: Results of modelling scale-free small-world networks with high clustering and small
average path lengths using Simulated Annealing algorithm and BA model

BA model network of the same rank and density (see ﬁg. 3a) has comparatively low modularity
and unrecognisable communities structure.

3.4

Network modiﬁcation procedures research

Two questions related to the selected method were considered as a part of research. The ﬁrst
one evaluates whether or not it is eﬀective to utilise local types of graph modiﬁcation (see section
2.5, modiﬁcations 4 and 5). To answer this question we examined two groups of modiﬁcation
types: local and global. Global modiﬁcations group consists of modiﬁcation types 1, 2 and 3,
which are aimed to modify structure regardless position of aﬀected edges. Local group consists
of modiﬁcations 2, 4 and 5. Edge removal procedure is included in both groups as there is
no speciﬁc local edge removal procedure. Instead of selecting type of modiﬁcation randomly
on each step, we introduced probabilities Plocal and Pglobal = 1 − Plocal for local or global
modiﬁcation respectively.
Table 2 shows the results of experimental comparison of diﬀerent mixes of local and global
modiﬁcations, made on the networks during modelling of scale-free small-world networks (see
2408

Evolutionary simulation of complex networks structures with speciﬁc topological properties Kashirin

Pglobal /Plocal
0.0 / 1.0
0.25 / 0.75
0.5 / 0.5
0.75 / 0.25
1.0 / 0.0

Iterations
154
18008
16631
19220
19550

Energy,
0.10
1.4 × 10−3
7.0 × 10−4
8.2 × 10−4
1.6 × 10−3

Table 2: Eﬃciency of small-world networks modelling with diﬀerent mixes of local and global
modiﬁcations

3.2). Obviously, applying both local and global types of modiﬁcations with equal probability
helps to generate better solution in less steps, while application of local or global modiﬁcations
exclusively slows down the searching process. It is intuitively clear why it happens this way. Lots
of considered metrics heavily rely on distances between nodes. Thus, global modiﬁcations have
strong inﬂuence on those properties, as removal or addition of an edge between random nodes
causes breaking or adding a shortcut within the network, which in turn drastically aﬀects paths
lengths. Local modiﬁcations, vice versa, aﬀect some local part of the network, never bringing
a shortcut to the network. At the same time, local modiﬁcation help to develop some local
features and properties, which might be unaﬀected by global modiﬁcations.
Another research considered the optimal amount of modiﬁcations, performed on each step
of searching process. Applying too small amount of modiﬁcations slows down the search process
and makes graph alterations almost insensitive. As opposed to that, applying too many modiﬁ-

500

1000

2500

5000

(a) BA model:
Communities: 6,
Modularity: 0.21

Obtained energy of the network,

·10−2
6

4

2

0
0

50

100

150

200

250

Number of network modiﬁcations per step

(b) SA model:
Communities: 3,
Modularity:0.85

Figure 4: Relation between the number of graph modiﬁcations, performed on each step of SA algorithm, and the opFigure 3: Scale-free net- timality of ﬁnal result calculated for networks with speciﬁc
amount of edges E = 500, 1000, 2500, 5000
works with communities
2409

Evolutionary simulation of complex networks structures with speciﬁc topological properties Kashirin

cations makes search process fast but inaccurate, making achieving optimal solution impossible.
Experimental research was performed by modelling small-world networks with diﬀerent densities and ranks (see section 3.1). As experiments have shown (see Fig. 4), that optimal number
of modiﬁcations depends on density of modelled network. The bigger the modelled network,
the larger the optimal number of modiﬁcations is.

4

Discussion and conclusions

The work presented in this paper was undertaken to design and evaluate the eﬀectiveness of a
heuristic method for small world network modelling, which, in contrast to the present models
[17], allows delicate conﬁguration of topological and functional properties of modelled networks.
Further research can be aimed at exploring diﬀerent sets of metrics and heuristics in order to
implement additional structural features. For example, additional objective functions could be
included to require modelled networks possess speciﬁc types of motifs [15] within their structure.
The parameters for the simulated annealing algorithm were set rather intuitively. Better
results can be obtained when diﬀerent parameter settings are applied, for example, for system
cooling proﬁle. Another intriguing question, which arises out of experiments with local and
global modiﬁcations, is whether or not it is eﬀective to apply global/local modiﬁcations on
early and later stages of annealing process? Global modiﬁcations may happen to be more
suitable for early stages while local modiﬁcations, being applied exclusively in late stages, may
help to preserve developed local properties of network.
This paper continues to evaluate promising method of applying a heuristic algorithms in
order to model more ﬂexible, robust, and very special network structures. The author would
like hope that continuing research along the lines set out in this paper will assist in better
understanding of relations between multiple topological and functional properties of complex
networks.
This work was ﬁnancially supported by Government of Russian Federation, Grant 074-U01.

References
[1] A.L. Barab´
asi and R. Albert. Emergence of scaling in random networks. Science, 286(5439):509,
1999.
[2] Aditi Chattopadhyay and Charles Seeley. A simulated annealing technique for multiobjective
optimization of intelligent structures. Smart Mater. Struct., 98(3):98–106, 1994.
[3] A Clauset, Mark E J Newman, and Cristopher Moore. Finding community structure in very large
networks. Physical Review E, 2004.
[4] M. Cunha and J. Sousa. Water Distribution Network Design Optimization: Simulated Annealing
Approach. Journal of Water Resources Planning and Management, 125:215–221, 1999.
[5] F. Darema, S. Kirkpatrick, and V. A. Norton. Parallel algorithms for chip placement by simulated
annealing. 31:391–402, 1987.
[6] W.B. Dolan, P.T. Cummings, and M.D. LeVan. Process optimization via simulated annealing:
Application to network design. AIChE Journal, 35(5):725–736, May 1989.
[7] P. Erdos and A. Renyi. On random graphs. Publ Math Debrecen, 6:290–297, 1959.
[8] Carlos Herrera and Pedro J. Zuﬁria. Generating scale-free networks with adjustable clustering
coeﬃcient via random walks. IEEE Network Science Workshop, 0:167–172, 2011.
[9] Petter Holme and Beom Jun Kim. Growing scale-free networks with tunable clustering. Phys.
Rev. E, 65:026107, Jan 2002.

2410

Evolutionary simulation of complex networks structures with speciﬁc topological properties Kashirin
[10] V.V. Kashirin and L.J. Dijkstra. A Heuristic Optimization Method for Mitigating the Impact of
a Virus Attack. Procedia Computer Science, 18:2619–2628, January 2013.
[11] S. Kirkpatrick, C. D. Gelatt, and M. P. Vecchi. Optimization by simulated annealing. Science
(New York, N.Y.), 220:671–680, 1983.
[12] Konstantin V. Knyazkov, Denis a. Nasonov, Timofey N. Tchurov, and Alexander V.
Boukhanovsky. Interactive Workﬂow-based Infrastructure for Urgent Computing. Procedia Computer Science, 18:2223–2232, January 2013.
[13] Hisafumi Kokubugata and Hironao Kawashima. Application of Simulated Annealing to Routing
Problems in City Logistics. (February), 2008.
[14] Xiang Li and Guanrong Chen. A local-world evolving network model. 328:274–286, 2003.
[15] R. Milo, S. Shen-Orr, S. Itzkovitz, N. Kashtan, D. Chklovskii, and U. Alon. Network motifs: simple
building blocks of complex networks. Science (New York, N.Y.), 298(5594):824–827, October 2002.
[16] M.E.J. Newman. Power laws, Pareto distributions and Zipfs law. (1).
[17] M.E.J. Newman. Networks: An Introduction. Oxford University Press, Inc., 2010.
[18] S.N. Sivanandam and S.N. Deepa. Introduction to Genetic Algorithms. Springer Publishing Company, Incorporated, 1st edition, 2007.
[19] D.J. Watts and S.H. Strogatz. Collective dynamics of ’small-world’ networks. Nature, 393:440–442,
1998.

2411

