Procedia Computer Science
Volume 29, 2014, Pages 2412–2421
ICCS 2014. 14th International Conference on Computational Science

Modeling and Visualization Individual and Collective
Opinions Towards Extremism in a Society.
Vinicius Nonnenmacher1 , Luiz Paulo L. de Oliveira1 , Marta B. Villamil1 , and Bardo
E. J. Bodmann2
1

2

Universidade do vale do Rio dos Sinos,
Sao Leopoldo, Brazil
mbvillamil@unisinos.br
Universidade Federal do Rio Grande do Sul,
Porto Alegre, Brazil
mbvillamil@unisinos.br

Abstract
The present work is an attempt to approach the modeling and visualization of individual opinion towards extremism in a society. We consider a scenario where two opposite concepts are on a dispute for
exclusivity, via the effort of the individuals to convince each other of their own oppinion/decision. The
power of convincement of each individual over the community depends on its inﬂuence, its communicability and on the enthusiasm (extremism) it defends its side. Here we propose a model taking these three
factors into consideration. We analyze the system changes in real time by following the agent’s extremism parameter of the society, representing its distribution in a graphical fashion and present realizations
of the proposed model for a variety of initial conﬁgurations (input parameter sets). The results analysis
suggest that the most important factor is inﬂuence more then the number of individuals defending a
position. Moreover, communicability has small or no relevance. Visualization schemes for following
individuals interactions are also included.
Keywords:

2412

Selection and peer-review under responsibility of the Scientiﬁc Programme Committee of ICCS 2014
c The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V.
doi:10.1016/j.procs.2014.05.225

Modeling Opinion Towards Extremism

V. Nonnenmacher et al.

Introduction
Modelling and computer simulation of certain aspects of societal dynamics does exist now for several
decades. However, attempts to deﬁne a community system on a quantitative and formal basis remains
still a challenge because of the inherent complexity of society and the uncountable degrees of freedom
that could be thought of as to be taken into account. Nevertheless, one may defend the position, that
in principle it should be possible to consider only signiﬁcant properties and mechanisms in order to
analyse speciﬁc aspects of societal dynamics, in an analogue reductionist fashion, that lead exact and
technological sciences to their success. One may thus hope, that from a selection of basic laws or individual rules one may simulate and also understand complex manifestations as superposition of simpler
but a set of contributions.
In this line the present work is an attempt to approach the opinion distribution formation from a
social inﬂuence based model. Although, society is composed by individuals with a spectrum of age,
distinct social histories, different education, speciﬁc skills and many others, the principal driving mechanism for opinion distribution formation may be synthesized by a involviment consequence relationship,
independent of the speciﬁc cause for individual opinion formation, whether of objective or subjective
origin, in the realm of academic, social, spiritual, or any other interest. If a involviment consequence
scenario already represents in an essential way a mechanism for opinion distributions as a collective
behaviour property emergent from some individual attributes, then it shall be sufﬁcient to implement a
decision mechanism for each individual based on a minimal set of characteristics. In the present approach we consider the social inﬂuence from one individual over another, a mobility characterizing the
frequency of interactions with the remaining individuals of the community and an individual degree of
extremism as the necessary attributes for the agents in the simulation.
In the further we assume the simplest scenario involving opinion formation, i.e. two antagonistic
groups of individuals. As some real examples one may think of a small group such as senators who are
expected to vote in favour or against a law proposal, a large group that represents a whole society in
the end competition of a presidential election. An extension to cases in which individuals in a society
are ruled by immense networks of social inﬂuence that may lead to a development of a wide spectrum
of opinions, is possible without changing the basic reasoning of the present consideration. In all alike
cases, there is a social process called dynamics of opinions, that can lead to a consensus, a polarization
or a mere fragmentation of opinion between individuals.
There are many examples in the history of human civilization, with people who suddenly changed
their opinion due to the inﬂuence of even a small minority. The German people suffered in the thirties
this process during the early Nazi movement. In some degree, one can also cite the cold war, where
the world was taken over by an almost complete bi-polarization. In many cases, the basic driving
force for those phenomena in social structures is social interaction, which in simple terms occurs when
individuals communicate with one another and possibly triggering reactions that alter somehow the two
individuals. In those processes the feedback may be reciprocal or not depending on the extreme or
moderate position adopted by each individual as well the inﬂuence of one over the other. In general,
while we try to validate socially ourselves through our ideas and behaviour, during interactions with
others, we are also inﬂuenced by the opinions of others. This phenomenon, known as ”social inﬂuence”
is thoroughly deﬁned in reference [1].
Among the variety of models that approach opinion transmission mechanisms, one of the most
recent works by Deffuant focusses on the question: “How can extremism prevail ?” [11]. In this model
agents are represented by two variables, an opinion between two extremes, represented by a real number
between −1.0 and 1.0, and an uncertainty that represents a degree of doubt in that opinion, given by
a real positive number. The Deffuant model is an extension of “Bounded Conﬁdence” (BC) [12] that
deﬁned a non-linear interaction scheme: One agent inﬂuences another only if the distance between their
2413

Modeling Opinion Towards Extremism

V. Nonnenmacher et al.

opinions is below the uncertainty of the agent. In other words, the uncertainty can be interpreted as a
threshold or a bounded conﬁdence, with respect to that opinion. This reasoning assumed that people do
not take into consideration opinions that are out of their range of acceptance, i.e. uncertainty. Deffuant’s
contribution to the BC model is that the uncertainty as well as the opinion variable can be modiﬁed by
interactions resulting in a “Relative Agreement” (RA model). In fact, most of the opinion transmission
models use this approach, examples are [13], [14], [15], [4] and [16].
In this sense the formal dynamics that drives a process of opinion distribution formation is not only
restricted to election type scenarios, but may also be found in the behaviour of consumption, in economics and many other complex systems conﬁgured in society [4]. Especially the revolution in communication technology with its increasing interactivity resources does not only increase the complexity
in the ﬁeld of modelling social systems, but also makes it mandatory to analyse possible consequences
on the society and to develop strategies for its beneﬁcial use. In order to open doorways for a better understanding of this social process an explicit formalization of the problem through a simple model is of
need, that represents the essential elements involved, i.e. individuals (agents), agent-agent interactions
and interest groups or factions.
To this end, in the next section we present and comment on publications relevant for the development
and discussion of the present work, in section 3 we present the model, section 4 is dedicated to the
simulation and its results and last we present our conclusions.

Proposed model
Social inﬂuence drives the process by which the agent changes its internal state [1]. Under a discretization scheme, we consider agent-agent interaction in the model as being a process of inﬂuence of one
agent over another at an instant (a simulation step). For example, in the instant in which agent i takes
inﬂuence on agent j the vice-versa can occur. This way, the considered interactions are mutual, with
no intrinsic order. However, this hypothesis does not discard unidirectional interaction. It is also supported by the fact that in real decision processes there is generally dialog (a change of arguments) before
both individuals change their status. Debates and conversations are examples. But, unidirectional situations also exists even with apparently different communication channels such as a popular newspaper
columnist can inﬂuence the opinion of several people without immediate feedback from the readers.
The playground of the simulated social scenario where agents are placed is a bi-dimensional environment. These agents move linearly with a twenty percent chance to change their route at each
simulation step, with a total of 5 extrinsic variables: velocity, space and time coordinates (i.e. classical
phase space and time). In order to impose some social characteristics on these agents, each has three
variables ranging from zero to one. These variables are:
• (S) State: The state parameter represents the opinion of the agent with respect to the two considered opposite concepts indicating its degree of extremism. In order to differentiate two distinct
tendencies of opinions, agents with S < 0.5 are considered in favour of one opinion, and with
S > 0.5 are considered in favour of an alternative. Agents with S closer to zero are considered
neutral. Those with S closer to zero or one, respectively, are considered more extremist towards
one or other concept. In other words, agents with S close to limits are considered more certain in
their own opinion.
• (I) Inﬂuence: The inﬂuence parameter represents the degree of an agent agent to exert social
inﬂuence over others. In society this parameter indicates the social status of an individual, which
can be measured by different characteristics like power, scholar degree, or wealth. Also, as will
be described later, this variable is used to determine the domain around the agent where it will
2414

Modeling Opinion Towards Extremism

V. Nonnenmacher et al.

interact with others. The larger this parameter is the larger is the number of agents that suffer
interaction at a time step t. Besides, more inﬂuent agents have more inﬂuence impact over the
others. Therefore, the larger this parameter is for an agent, the larger is the opinion change it
imposes over the others.
• (C) Communicability: Indicates the degree of communicability of the agent and its value belongs
also to the interval [0, 1]. In the simulations, it is represented by the speed with which the individual moves in the environment. Thus, this parameter is connected to the quantity of interactions
of the agent and the homogeneity scale of individuals he interacts with, since a faster agent can
interact with more agents while a slower agent is restricted to interact with nearest agents, only.
C = 1 means that, at each turn of simulation, agent crosses the entire environment.
As a simpliﬁcation, we are assuming the above parameters to be proportional to their respective concepts
in social science, if they were by someway possible to be quantiﬁed. Also, except for S, parameters I
and C are considered constant for each agent.
Each agent has what was deﬁned as a circle of inﬂuence (Figure 1), that represents its degree as
well as its reach of inﬂuence on the remaining agents. This circle moves with the agent and its radius
is proportional to the variable I of the individual. At each simulation step, agents inﬂuence those that
are located within their circle of inﬂuence. An agent may be simultaneously within several circles of
inﬂuence of different agents (Figure 1). Thus, each agent i with speciﬁc Ii has a proportional social force
(Fi ) on the opinion of each agent that he takes inﬂuence on. This force is deﬁned by
Fit =

Ii (2Si − 1)
,
N

(1)

for any agent j such that its position x j satisﬁes |xi − x j | ≤ Ii and Fit = 0 otherwise. Besides, Ii is the
inﬂuence of the active agent, 0 ≤ Si ≤ 1 its status, and N is the total number of agents in the system.
Note, that Fit is negative if the agent has S < 0.5 and positive if S > 0.5, i.e., the side of an agent deﬁnes
the signal of its social force. Also, it is a time dependent quantity since Si can vary with time. According
to the above deﬁnition |Fit | is proportional to i is extremism as well as to its inﬂuence, being opposite
from one position to another. That is the simplest way of taking those prerequisites into consideration.
The division by N is the natural way of weighting each individual force taking into consideration the
whole society it is taking part of.
To obtain the resultant social inﬂuence that an agent i is subject to at time t, one has to add all social
forces that contain the position of i in their action radius at time t and thus deﬁne the change of state in
(2) that holds until the next simulation time step (t + 1) to deﬁne St+1
as
i
St+1
= Sti + ∑ Fjt ,
i

(2)

j

where the j are to be taken as the ones of the agents that have position xi inside their action radius.
Considering the proposed scenario, where there is a dispute of two opposing views, the idea is that
an agent attempts to inﬂuence others in order to push them closer to its point of view. The result of the
opinion (state) of each agent is the sum of its initial opinion with the sum of changes (social inﬂuences)
that were contemplated during a simulation time step. It is important to note that, the scale size of the
sphere of inﬂuence is relative to the environment size, where a value of 0 has no domain of inﬂuence
and a value of 1 has a domain given by a circle with radius equal to half the size of the environment. An
agent with a position close to or at the centre of the room has an area of inﬂuence that covers almost the
whole environment.
Another considered characteristic of an agent is its communicability, which is represented in our
model by the velocity it moves about the simulation environment. Accordingly, the faster an agent
2415

Modeling Opinion Towards Extremism

V. Nonnenmacher et al.

Figure 1: Agent with circle of inﬂuence represented by a wire sphere and environment with eight agents
with different degrees of inﬂuence.
moves about in the environment the more often it will cross the circle of inﬂuence of other agents as
well as the more it will have other agents inside its radius of inﬂuence. Consequently, as a general
rule, that agent has a higher contact rate with other agents and thus spreads its inﬂuence with more
agents in a given time interval. Thus this parameter is related to the agent’s ability to communicate via
communication channels, skills and others, or generically the communicability of the individual. Notice
that the communicability of an agent contibutes to its social role in the opinion distribution, as is the
case with the inﬂuence deﬁning its reach of interaction. However, ulike I, C does not contributes to the
social strength as can be veriﬁed in Equations (1) and (2).

Visualisation Module
There are two ways to view the system status in real time. The ﬁrst is based on the spatial arrangement of
agents in a three-dimensional environment. Each agent i is represented by a point denoting its position
xi , and its degree of inﬂuence by spheres of radius Ii with center xi . The color of the spheres are
represented by two color channels: one for representing S (opinion) of an agent, ranging from 0 to 1 in
grey scale (where 0 is black and 1 is white). And the other channel that determines the transparency
of the sphere. The alpha channel, as it is also called, is proportional to the size of the sphere. This
convention was adopted to visualize the composition of smaller and larger spheres without loosing sight
of covered smaller spheres within larger ones. In this way we can visualize the spatial location of agents
and what kind of opinion prevail in the environment. Any emergent behavior related to the agents
displacement and their opinions can be seen through this method. In Figure 2 this method is used to
show a uniform distribution of agents with their inﬂuences.
Another way to analyse the system changes as a whole is to verify agent’s internal parameters in real
time, represented by a graph where the agents are represented by particles and the three axes represent
the agent’s parameters I, S and V , respectively. In addition, the colour of each particle related to the
agent is deﬁned by three channels (RGB), normally used to represent different colours. Each channel is
directly associated with a variable of the agent. More speciﬁcally, the red channel (R) is associated with
I, the green (G) with V , and the blue (B) is associated with S. A screen shot of a uniform conﬁguration
is shown in Figure 2.
Besides, its function to visualize the activity of each agent, the time evolution of those diagrams
allow to validate some of the rules of the system. Moreover, a feature was implemented that permits
2416

Modeling Opinion Towards Extremism

V. Nonnenmacher et al.

Figure 2: Representation of agents internal parameters in real time and some selected agents and their
related information
to select any agent with the pointer device and its particular status in the system is returned. More
speciﬁcally, when selecting a particle A, all its interactions with other particles are drawn by lines, that
connect the conﬁguration point of A with all the agents that are taking inﬂuence on that agent in a
speciﬁc simulation time step. Another information that is exhibited, is the total social force that A is
suffering. Each particle inﬂuencing A is presented in blue, and the numerical value of its social force is
printed above its position. A typical example is shown in Figure 2.
Two selection modes are possible: the given information from the selected agent is the social force
that it is subjected to and the given information is the social force that it is exerting on others. Note, that
mode 2 inverts the colors, showing the selected agent in blue and the particles that it is taking inﬂuence
on in red. In order to optimise the best point of view for any speciﬁc conﬁguration, the environment can
be fully rotated through all angles and in all directions. This allows the user to select any particle, even
hidden ones, and additionally the global status of the system may be represented from any angle.

Model Analysis
In the following we present and discuss realizations of the proposed model for a variety of initial conﬁgurations (input parameter sets). The individual parameters are S, I and V and the total number N of
agents of the simulation. The stopping criteria was when Si = 0 or Si = 1 for all agent i.

From a uniform initial state to a dichotomized ﬁnal state
All simulations in this Subsection started from uniform distributions for S, I and C into the interval
[0, 1] and ended with the emergence of a dichotomic ﬁnal state in the agent’s choice possibilities, i.e.,
SI ∈ {0, 1}. Moreover, all agents choices between the two states coincides. We ran 500 simulations
with 200 agents. In all tests, the agent’s opinion converged numerically to the lower or the upper limit of
S but after different total simulation times. An example of this typical behavior of the system is shown
in Figure 4. As early as 50 simulation steps already revels a bi-polarization in opinions with S = 0 and
S = 1 (see Figure 3). This phenomenon may be understood from Equation (1), where agents attract
others to the extremism of its own opinion, so that the resultant behavior ends in the formation of two
groups with opponent opinions (group G1 with S > 0.5, and group G2 with S < 0.5) as shown in Figure
3.
2417

Modeling Opinion Towards Extremism

V. Nonnenmacher et al.

Figure 3: Simulation snapshot for t = 50. Polarization of opinions.

Figure 4: Initial state conﬁguration of agents according to uniform distributions of S, I and V .
Going further, after 100 simulation steps, agents of group G2 change their opinion and join agents
of group G1 (see Figure 5). This process occurs when group G1 begins to inﬂuence group G2 with its
more inﬂuential agents. From the number of trials one may conclude that almost all simulations lead to
convergence, and the only difference between different simulation realizations is the elapsed time until
polarization occurs. Thus, it is necessary to explore different convergence time simulations in order to
identify factors that lead to faster or slower convergence to a ﬁnal state.

Convergence time and agent inﬂuence
One of the arguments of this work is that the convergence of an opinion is caused by the agents’ inﬂuences. However, because of the complexity of the system, one cannot determine promptly the correct
dependence. For example, it is clear that the larger the average I is the larger the number of mutual
relations. A number of these can be constructive in the sense that agents of same opinion reinforce their
convictions which leads the population towards a polarization. But a number of the mutual relations can
be destructive, which leads the population against that polarization. For the veriﬁcation of the dependence of time of convergence T with respect to the mean inﬂuence I the agents inﬂuence was generated
by a normal distribution, where tests were realized using different mean values with a ﬁxed deviation of
σ (I) = 0.1. The values of C and S are taken from a uniform distribution into the closed interval [0, 1].
The ﬁrst test used a mean of 0.2 and deviation of 0.1 for agents’ inﬂuences. Other parameters were
2418

Modeling Opinion Towards Extremism

V. Nonnenmacher et al.

Figure 5: Simulation snapshot for t = 100. Group 2 (black) starts to follow group A (white).

Figure 6: Time evolution of NG1 , with S > 0.5, for low inﬂuence I = 0.2. The graphics for NG2 are
symmetric with respect to the horizontal line N = 100.
generated with a uniform distribution of values in the closed interval [0, 1] and the total number of
agents was set to 200. The simulation was run 100 times to verify the time of convergence. As can
be veriﬁed in Figure 6 repetition of the simulations shows a spread of convergence time. The average
value of the ﬁrst simulation set is T = 3866.37 steps with a standard deviation of σ (T ) = 2846.21. In
a second test, the mean for agents’ inﬂuences was set to 0.5 with deviation 0.1 and the simulation was
run another 100 times as shown in Figure 7, where the average number of time steps until convergence
was of T = 2100.89 and its standard deviation was σ (T ) = 2667.69. In the last set of tests we used
the same parameters except for the normal distribution mean that was ﬁxed at 0.8 with deviation 0.1.
The simulation was run with this conﬁguration 100 times and the time of convergence was found to
be signiﬁcantly shorter with an average around T = 599.13 time steps (and the standard deviation was
σ (T ) = 1641.21 (Figure 8).
The above results, suggest that higher degrees of inﬂuence in a society leads to a faster polarization
and its consequent decision between the two antagonic positions. Also, in absolute terms, the variation
of position obey the same tendency as can be observed from the obtained deviation values. However,
in proportional terms, the opposite occurs to that, i.e., the higher the inﬂuence mean I, the higher the
deviation proportionally. Indeed we see this as a very reasonable result since a the higher the inﬂuence
average of the members of a society the more strong are the arguments which leads to a faster result as
well as higher oscillations of opinion, relatively speaking.
2419

Modeling Opinion Towards Extremism

V. Nonnenmacher et al.

Figure 7: Time evolution of NG1 , with S > 0.5, for moderate inﬂuence I = 0.5. The graphics for NG2 are
symmetric with respect to the horizontal line N = 100.

Figure 8: Time evolution of NG1 , with S > 0.5, for strong inﬂuence I = 0.8. The graphics for NG2 are
symmetric with respect to the horizontal line N = 100.

Conclusion
With the present work we proposed a new computational model that simulates the process of opinion
distribution formation in relation to two opposite concepts, among individuals using an agent-based
model approach and computer graphics visualization techniques throughout which one can follow the
relationship of an agent with the others while the society evolves. Individuals interact and change their
individual opinion based on the inﬂuence of others. The considered parameters represents inﬂuence,
communicability and status/position with respect to both concepts. By the study of the proposed model,
we conclude that in all cases, the society tents to a stationary fate where all agents becomes totally convinced about one of the concepts, with no agent convinced about the other concept. Moreover, the most
important parameter for society decision is their mean inﬂuence, even considering initial asymmetries
on the number of agents following one and the other concept.
From the ﬁndings one might be tempted to criticize that as a result there is only one group that
emerges as the survivor of the opinion distribution formation process, which does not necessarily correspond to reality or is only present in eliminatory scenarios. However, the one group ﬁnal state represents
a static limit, which in reality is rarely attained. Thus time scales that are considered for realistic scenarios shall be shorter than the ones that lead to the static limit. The stopping criterion of the simulation
may be deﬁned according to the characteristics of the situation in consideration. For instance, in elec2420

Modeling Opinion Towards Extremism

V. Nonnenmacher et al.

tion scenarios, voting situations sometimes a simple majority is sufﬁcient in other occasions an absolute
majority may be necessary, which is close to the static limit. Thus, conducting the simulation until the
static limit includes all desired situations and time evolution cuts may be applied afterwards to ﬁlter conﬁgurations of realistic scenarios to be compared with. Furthermore, a relevant quantity that may be used
in comparison to realism is the total number of individual interactions per total time of the simulation,
that may serve as a quantity to calibrate a simulation step in comparison to real time.
In order to deduce some quantitative collective characteristics from a decision simulation system that
was deﬁned based on agent-agent interaction rules, a more detailed analysis of the opinion distribution
formation may be performed upon employing mechanical statistics conceptions that might shed further
light on this type of dynamics. Attempts in this direction will be addressed in a future work.

References
[1] L. Rashotte, ASR Manstead, and M. Hewstone. Social inﬂuence. The blackwell encyclopedia of Social
Psychology, pages 562–563, 2007.
[2] B. Pabjan. The use of models in sociology. Physica A: Statistical Mechanics and its Applications, 336(1):146–
152, 2004.
[3] H.A. Simon. The sciences of the artiﬁcial. the MIT Press, 1996.
[4] R. Hegselmann and U. Krause. Opinion dynamics and bounded conﬁdence: models, analysis and simulation.
Journal of Artiﬁcial Societies and Social Simulation, 5(3), 2002.
[5] G.N. Gilbert. Agent-based models. Number 153. Sage Publications, Inc, 2008.
[6] J.D. Murray. Mathematical biology, volume 2. Springer, 2002.
[7] P. Kolesar and W.E. Walker. A simulation model of police patrol operations: Program description. No.,
1625:111, 1975.
[8] C.J. Krebs. Empirical Test of Lotka-Volterra. 1985.
[9] I. de Sola Pool, R.P. Abelson, and S.L. Popkin. Candidates, issues, and strategies: a computer simulation of
the 1960 presidential election [by] Ithiel de Sola Pool, Robert P. Abelson [and] Samuel L. Popkin. MIT Press,
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 1964.
[10] T.C. Schelling. Dynamic models of segregation. Journal of mathematical sociology, 1(2):143–186, 1971.
[11] G. Deffuant, F. Amblard, G. Weisbuch, and T. Faure. How can extremism prevail? a study based on the
relative agreement interaction model. Journal of Artiﬁcial Societies and Social Simulation, 5(4), 2002.
[12] U. Krause. A discrete nonlinear and non-autonomous model of consensus formation. Communications in
Difference Equations, pages 227–236, 2000.
[13] L. Conradt and T.J. Roper. Group decision-making in animals. Nature, 421(6919):155–158, 2003.
[14] R.C. MacCallum, S. Zhang, K.J. Preacher, and D.D. Rucker. On the practice of dichotomization of quantitative
variables. Psychological methods, 7(1):19, 2002.
[15] MF Laguna, G. Abramson, and D.H. Zanette. Vector opinion dynamics in a model for social inﬂuence.
Physica A: Statistical Mechanics and its Applications, 329(3):459–472, 2003.
[16] P. Sobkowicz. Modelling opinion formation with physics tools: Call for closer link with reality. Journal of
Artiﬁcial Societies and Social Simulation, 12(1):11, 2009.
[17] E.O. Laumann, J. Galaskiewicz, and P.V. Marsden. Community structure as interorganizational linkages.
Annual review of sociology, 4:455–484, 1978.

2421

