Procedia Computer Science
Volume 29, 2014, Pages 557–564
ICCS 2014. 14th International Conference on Computational Science

Large Eddy Simulation of Flow in Realistic Human
Upper Airways with Obstructive Sleep
1

M.Z Lu1*, Y. Liu1† , J.Y. Ye 2‡ and H.Y. Luo1§
Department of Mechanical Engineering, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hong Kong
2
Tongren Hospital, Capital Medical University, Beijing, China.
mmyliu@polyu.edu.hk, mingzhen.lu@connect.polyu.

Abstract
Obstructive sleep apnea (OSA) is a common type of sleep disorder characterized by abnormal
repetitive cessation in breathing during sleep caused by partial or complete narrowing of pharynx in
the upper airway. The upper airway surgery is commonly performed for this disorder, however the
success rate is limited because the lack of the thorough understanding of the primary mechanism
associated with OSA. The computational fluid dynamics (CFD) simulation with Large Eddy
Simulation (LES) approach is conducted to investigate two patient-specific upper airway flow with
severe OSA. Both pre and post-surgical upper airway models are simulated to investigate the
capability of CFD simulation for the prediction of the OSA surgery. Only the inhaled breathing is
conducted with six periods (about 15 second) unsteady flow. Compared with the results before and
after treatment, it is illustrated that there exists a significant pressure and shear stress dropping region
near the soft palate before treatment; and after the treatment the flow resistance in the upper airway is
decreased and the wall shear stress value is significantly reduced which means both surgery are
successful. The analyze from the CFD is consistent with the parameters of clinical and LES can be a
good tool for OSA study.
Keywords: OSA, CFD, Large eddy simulation, surgery

1 Introduction
Obstructive Sleep Apnea is a type of sleep disorder that is characterized by abnormal repetitive
pauses in breathing or instances of abnormally low breathing during sleep in the upper airway (Figure
1), and it is usually associated with a reduction in blood oxygen de-saturation and sleep disruption.
This disorder affects maximum 20% adults in the world and is increasingly recognized as an
*

Finished the simulation part and the draft of this document
Created the revision of this document
‡
Created the 2D CT scans of the models in this document
§
Created the 3D modeling and related mesh generation
†

Selection and peer-review under responsibility of the Scientiﬁc Programme Committee of ICCS 2014
c The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V.
doi:10.1016/j.procs.2014.05.050

557

Large Eddy Simulation of Flow in Realistic Human Airways ...

M. Lu, Y. Liu, J. Ye and H. Luo

independent risk factor for a range of conditions including diabetes, hypertension and stroke (McCabe
& Hardinge, 2011).
The short-term consequences of sleep apnea include sleep fragmentation, snoring, daytime
sleepiness, and fatigue-related accidents. Without reasonable cure in the early stage of OSA, long-term
adverse effects on cardiovascular functions may develop negative impacts on multiple organs and
systems (Lipton & Gozal, 2003). Among the anatomical factors, airway narrowing, which may be
caused by airway restriction or collapse, has been reported in both child and adult subjects with OSA.
The morphological variation of narrowed upper airway could induce the airway to collapse. A better
understanding of the unsteady flow field inside the airway, will allow us to characterize the airflow
and pressure forces associated with airway narrowing in OSA patients (Mylavarapu, et al., 2009).

Figure 1: Major structure of upper airway.

Continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP) is the first choice for OSA treatment because of its
non-invasive characteristic. However, the compliance of CPAP is a problem in some of the patients.
So, surgery can be considered as the first-line treatment in OSA patients, for whom other non-invasive
treatments failed. Surgical treatment of OSA aims to improve the size or tone of a patient’s upper
airway (Boudewyns & Van de Heyning, 2006). For decades, tracheostomy, including
uvulopalatopharyngoplasty (UPPP), laser-assisted uvulopalatoplasty (LAUP) and Maxillomandibular
advancement (MMA) etc., is the only effective treatment for sleep apnea and it is particularly effective
for Asian people. However, the success rate of upper airway surgery is not good (Ito, et al., 2011;
Iwasaki, et al., 2011; LI, et al., 2000). The post-operative complications after surgery are often the
result of a dilemma during the operation of how much tissue to resect: too little is ineffective, yet too
much may leave a patient with speech impedance and palatal stenosis, which can make OSA worse.
Therefore, accurate prediction of tissue reduction for this treatment is urgently needed (Van Lierde, et
al., 2002).
Due to the non-invasive nature, the Computational Fluid Dynamics (CFD) technique is used in this
study to visualize the fluid flow in the upper airway. It can predict the fluid flow characteristics with
static pressure, flow velocity, wall-shear stress etc. in the upper airway. It is believed that the CFD
simulation is possible to predict the surgical outcome of the upper airway. However most of the
studies in this field were based on the Reynolds-Average Navier-Stokes (RANS) solvers with two
equation turbulence models, which have some limitations on the accuracy (Nithiarasu, et al., 2008; Yu,
et al., 2009; Xu, et al., 2006; Mihaescu, et al., 2008; Jeong, et al., 2007; Powell, et al., 2011; Sung, et
al., 2006; Zhao & Lieber, 1994). Therefore, a verified and validated Large Eddy Simulation (LES)

558

Large Eddy Simulation of Flow in Realistic Human Airways ...

M. Lu, Y. Liu, J. Ye and H. Luo

approach was employed to investigate the flow pattern in the severe OSA patients (Mihaescu, et al.,
2011; Luo, et al., 2004).
This work utilizes LES with Sub-Grid-Scale (SGS) models to evaluate the surgery effect
associated with OSA subject. Then the relationship between two OSA subjects results are analyzed to
reveal the connection and evaluate the effectiveness of the operation. The airway models are
reconstructed from cross-sectional computerized tomography (CT) imaging date. The static pressure
and wall-shear stress in the upper airway for both subjects with pre- and post-treatment are addressed.

2 Methodology
2.1 Reconstruction of upper airway
Thoracic CT scans are taken from two Chinese male patients using a single-slice helical CT
scanner (SS-CT). The images were obtained in the axial plane with a resolution of 0.7×0.7 mm2, and
slice thickness is 0.625 mm. The three-Dimensional point cloud data of upper airway models were
reconstructed using the image processing software Mimics (Figure 2).

Figure 2: The upper airway models: (a) subject #1-before surgery; (b) subject #1-after surgery; (c) subject #2before surgery; (d) subject #2-after surgery.

2.2 Construction of the computational model
The mesh generator Gambit is used to reconstruct the airway geometry and to generate the mesh.
The meshes near the wall are refined with the tetrahedral layer close to the wall surface to enhance the
resolution in that region. The cell quantity in the computational model is about 3,400,000 for four
models. A refined mesh has been employed near the larynx; these numbers are determined by using
different meshes, from coarse to progressively finer meshes, and the numerical results of velocity are
mesh-convergent to within a prescribed tolerance (~0.2%).
After meshing, the CFD software package Fluent (ANSYS 14.5) is used to solve the flow
governing equations with finite volume method. Only the inspiratory process with tidal volume of
700ml is conducted with six periods (about 15second), and the inspiratory period is 2.5 s. The LES
approach, which is a validated method for capturing transitional/turbulent unsteady, separated or
vortical flows accuracy (Pope, 2000), is used to reveal such relevant flow features in the flow
separation region located near the minimum cross-sectional area of the airway and the downstream
region.

559

Large Eddy Simulation of Flow in Realistic Human Airways ...

M. Lu, Y. Liu, J. Ye and H. Luo

In the LES modeling, the filtering operation for a variable (x) is provided by

φ (x) =

1
φ (x′)G(x, x′)dx′
V ∫V

(1)

where V is the volume of a computational cell, and the filter function G (x, x′) is defined as:

⎧1 for x′ ∈V
G(x, x′) = ⎨
⎩0 otherwise

(2)

The filtering process effectively filters out eddies whose scales are smaller than the filter width or
grid spacing. Thus the filtered Navier-Stokes equations are:
(3)
∇⋅u = 0

ρ

∂u
+ ρu ⋅ ∇u = −∇P + μ eff ∇ 2 u
∂t

(4)

where u is the filtered velocity, P is the filtered pressure, t is time, and ρ is the fluid density. The
μeff is the effective viscosity which is unknown and will be modeled by sub-grid scale (SGS) model.
The flow governing equations are discretized on the computational domain using second-order
finite-volume schemes and a second-order implicit scheme is employed for the time integration. The
coupling between the pressure and velocity uses the scheme of SIMPLE. The Wall-Adaption Local
Eddy-Viscosity (WALE) model is selected as the Subgrid-Scale model for returning the correct wall
asymptotic behavior for wall bounded flows. The User-Defined inlet velocity is specified normal to
the boundary plane (nostril) and the static pressure is set to be zero at the outlet (Luo & Liu, 2008).
No-Slip boundary condition is imposed on all solid walls.

3 Results and Discussion
The numerical computation are mostly concerned with the pressure and wall shear stress
distribution in the upper airway to evaluate the surgery effect for the airway collapse. Figure 3 and
Figure 4 show the pressure distribution and wall shear stress distribution of subject #1 and #2 for both
pre- and post-treatment. In both OSA subjects, the pressure shows similar distribution qualitatively
associated with the airway shape. The static pressure at the minimum cross-section region (near retropalatal) for pre-treatment, decreases rapidly to a large negative pressure that is considered as the main
factor induced the airway collapsed and caused the airway obstruction (Figure 3a, Figure 4a). While
after surgery, the narrowed airway is widened and the pressure distribution changes into a much more
uniform flow pattern, the negative pressure near retro-palatal became positive value. However, it still
exists but moves to the downstream, near the posterior part of epiglottis tip in which section this
negative region is not enough to cause airway collapse (Figure 3b, Figure4b).
Figure 3c and Figure 4c show the wall-shear stress distribution which also indicate the similar
results at pre-treatment conditions. For both pre-surgery models the wall shear stress illustrates a sharp
increase at the narrowed airway, indicating a significant velocity increasing which may induce a jetlike downstream flow, as shown in Figure 5. For the post-treatment models (Figure 3d and Figure 4d),
the wall shear stress shows the same distribution characteristics for an obvious increasing at the
epiglottis tip region with the disappearance of wall shear stress near soft palate.
Figure 5 shows the axial velocity contour and streamlines along a sagittal plane. It shows clearly
that there is a jet flow for pre-surgery models. After surgery, the jet flow is attenuated for both
subjects. There exists an obviously vortex downstream of the minimum cross-sectional area after the
surgery that may active the mechanoreceptors then optimize the surgical effect (Liu, et al., 2012).

560

Large Eddy Simulation of Flow in Realistic Human Airways ...

a

M. Lu, Y. Liu, J. Ye and H. Luo

b

c

d

Figure 3: LES results of subject #1 during inspiration at peak flow rate: (a) instantaneous static-pressure
distribution at pre-treatment condition; (b) instantaneous static-pressure distribution at post-treatment condition;
(c) instantaneous wall shear stress distribution at pre-treatment condition; (d) instantaneous wall shear stress
distribution at post-treatment condition.
a

b

c

d

Figure 4: LES results of subject #2 during inspiration at peak flow rate: (a) instantaneous static-pressure
distribution at pre-treatment condition; (b) instantaneous static-pressure distribution at post-treatment condition;
(c) instantaneous wall shear stress distribution at pre-treatment condition; (d) instantaneous wall shear stress
distribution at post-treatment condition.
a

b

c

d

Figure 5: The axial velocity contour at peak flow rate time during inspiration along a sagittal plane: (a)
instantaneous axial velocity distribution at pre-treatment condition for subject #1; (b) instantaneous axial velocity
distribution at post-treatment condition for subject #1; (c) instantaneous axial velocity distribution at pretreatment condition for subject #2; (d) instantaneous axial velocity distribution at post-treatment condition for
subject #2.

561

Large Eddy Simulation of Flow in Realistic Human Airways ...

Samples
Subject #1
Subject #2

Before surgery
69
60.7

M. Lu, Y. Liu, J. Ye and H. Luo

After surgery
15.8
23.9

Table 1: AHI measurement of OSA subjects.

Figure 6 and Figure 7 shows the variation of cross-sectional area at each cross-section for subject
#1 and subject #2. For subject #1, as shown in Figure 6, the cross-sectional area at the minimum
section is enlarged from 53.2 mm2 to 111.1 mm2, increased by two times. Meanwhile the AHI (Table
1) decreases from 64.8 (Severe OSA) to 15.8 (Mild), indicating an acceptable surgery outcome as can
be seen from Table 1. For subject #2, as shown in Figure 6, the area is enlarged from 47.4 mm2 to 235
mm2, as about four times in area expansion. However, the reduction of the AHI from 60.7 (Severe) to
23.9 (Moderate) may suggest an unsatisfactory surgery outcome relative to the result of subject #1.
Compared with the AHI after the surgery for both, it is concluded that the over-widened upper airway
may not lower the AHI and get better treatment for the OSA patient.

(a)
(b)
Figure 6: The area of cross-section along the flow direction of subject #1 before(a) and after (b) surgery.

Figure 7: The area of cross-section along the flow direction of subject #2 before(a) and after(b) surgery.

4 Conclusions
The flow in CT-scan based OSA upper airways were simulated using CFD technique with LES
turbulent modeling. Before treatment, the narrowed airway may induce significantly negative pressure

562

Large Eddy Simulation of Flow in Realistic Human Airways ...

M. Lu, Y. Liu, J. Ye and H. Luo

and large wall shear stress. Such negative pressure, if strong enough, can cause airway collapse, which
is the most important factor for the obstruction in the airway. While large wall shear stress may
eventually cause injury to the wall of upper airway. After surgery, the location of maximum static
pressure and wall shear stress moves downward and the flow pattern becomes streamlined. All the
pressure and wall shear stress values were significantly reduced in the whole upper airway of subject
#2 while those of subject #1 did not change that much. This may indicate that the location where the
largest aerodynamics forces distribution is also important. What worthy noting is that the over-widen
may be worse for the condition of patients. The flow characteristics from simulation are consistent
with the measurement of the surgery (mainly the AHI). From the simulation, we believe that the LES
is able to capture the flow of OSA and predict the surgical outcome.

References
Boudewyns, A. N. & Van de Heyning, P. H., 2006. Surgical treatment for obstructive sleep apnea.
Basel: KARGER.
Ito, Y. et al., 2011. Patient-specific geometry modeling and mesh generation for simulating
Obstructive Sleep Apnea Syndrome cases by Maxillomandibular Advancement. Mathematics and
Computers in Simulation, 81(9), pp. 1876-1891.
Iwasaki, T. et al., 2011. Evaluation of upper airway obstruction in Class II children with fluidmechanical simulation. American Journal of Orthodontics and Dentofacial Orthopedics, 139(2), pp.
e135-e145.
Jeong, S. J., Kim, W. S. & Sung, S. J., 2007. Numerical investigation on the flow characteristics
and aerodynamic force of the upper airway of patient with obstructive sleep apnea using
computational fluid dynamics. Medical Engineering & Physics, 29(6), pp. 637-651.
LI, K. K. et al., 2000. Long-Term Results of Maxillomandibular, 4(3), pp. 137-139.
Lipton, A. J. & Gozal, D., 2003. Treatment of obstructive sleep apnea in children: do we really
know how?. Sleep Medicine Reviews, 7(1), pp. 61-80.
Luo, H. Y. & Liu, Y., 2008. Modeling the Bifurcating Flow in an CT-Scanned Human Lung
Airway. Journal of Biomechanics, 41(12), pp. 2681-2688.
Luo, X. Y., Hinton, J. S., Liew, T. T. & Tan, K. K., 2004. LES modelling of flow in a simple
airway model. Medical Engineering & Physics, 26(5), pp. 403-413 .
McCabe, C. & Hardinge, M., 2011. Obstructive sleep apnoea. Practice Nurse, 41(10), pp. 36-41.
Mihaescu, M. et al., 2008. Large Eddy Simulation and Reynolds-Averaged Navier-Stockes
modeling of flow in a realistic pharyngeal airway model: An investigation of obstruction sleep apnea.
Journal of Biomechanics, 41(10), pp. 2279-2288.
Mihaescu, M., Mylavarapu, G., Gutmark, E. J. & Powell, N. B., 2011. Large Eddy Simulation of
the pharyngeal airflow associated with Obstructive Sleep Apnea Syndrome at pre and post-surgical
treatment. Journal of Biomechanics, 44(12), pp. 2221-2228.
Mylavarapu, G. et al., 2009. Validation of computational fluid dynamics methodology used for
human upper airway flow simulations. Journal of Biomechanics, 42(10), pp. 1553-1559.
Nithiarasu, P. et al., 2008. Steady flow through a realistic human upper airway geometry. Internal
Journal for Numerical Methods in Fluids, Volume 57, pp. 631-651.
Pope, S. B., 2000. Turbulent Flows. s.l.:Cambirdge Univeristy Press.
Powell, N. B. et al., 2011. Patterns in pharyngeal airflow associated with sleep-disordered
breathing. Sleep Medicine, 12(10), pp. 966-974.
Sung, S. J. et al., 2006. Customized Three-dimensional Computational Fluid Dynamics Simulation
of the Upper Airway of Obstructive Sleep Apnea. Angle Prthodontics, 76(5), pp. 791-799.
Van Lierde, K., Van Borsel, J., Moerman, M. & Van Cauwenberge, P., 2002. Nasalance, Nasality,
Voice and Articulation after Uvulopalatopharyngoplasty. The Laryngoscope, 112(5), pp. 873-878.

563

Large Eddy Simulation of Flow in Realistic Human Airways ...

M. Lu, Y. Liu, J. Ye and H. Luo

Xu, C. et al., 2006. Computational fluid dynamics modeling of the upper airway of children with
obstructive sleep apnea syndrome in steady flow. Journal of Biomechanics, 39(11), pp. 2043-2064.
Yu, C. C. et al., 2009. Computational fluid dynamic study on obstructive sleep apnea syndrome
treated with maxillomandibular advancement. The Journal of Craniofacial Surgery, 20(2), pp. 426 430.
Zhao, Y. & Lieber, B. B., 1994. Steady inspiratory flow in a model symmetric bifurcation.
American Society of Mechanical Engineers, 116(4), pp. 448-496.

564

