Procedia Computer Science
Volume 29, 2014, Pages 1314–1323
ICCS 2014. 14th International Conference on Computational Science

Dynamic Data Driven Crowd Sensing Task Assignment
Layla Pournajaf, Li Xiong, and Vaidy Sunderam
Emory University, Atlanta, Georgia, U.S.A.
lpourna@emory.edu, lxiong@emory.edu, vss@emory.edu

Abstract
To realize the full potential of mobile crowd sensing, techniques are needed to deal with uncertainty in participant locations and trajectories. We propose a novel model for spatial task
assignment in mobile crowd sensing that uses a dynamic and adaptive data driven scheme to assign moving participants with uncertain trajectories to sensing tasks, in a near-optimal manner.
Our scheme is based on building a mobility model from publicly available trajectory history
and estimating posterior location values using noisy/uncertain measurements upon which initial
tasking assignments are made. These assignments may be reﬁned locally (using exact information) and used by participants to steer their future data collection, which completes the
feedback loop. We present the design of our proposed approach with rationale to suggest its
value in eﬀective mobile crowd sensing task assignment in the presence of uncertain trajectories.
Keywords: Mobile crowd sensing, Dynamic task assignment, Uncertain trajectories, Feedback loop

1

Introduction

Mobile crowd sensing [7] enables individuals to participate in a collective data sensing paradigm
using their smartphones or other computing devices (e.g., contributing pictures, videos, audios,
location, or speed measurements). To fully utilize such a paradigm, a task assignment module
could be used to recruit a set of qualiﬁed individuals to perform the sensing tasks. A general
task assignment framework in mobile crowd sensing includes three main entities:
1. Participants are individuals who use a sensor to obtain or measure the required data
about a subject of interest.
2. Applications or end users are the entities that request data through tasks and then utilize
the information acquired by participants.
3. Tasking entities are responsible for distribution of tasks to participants who meet the
requirements of applications. In certain architectures, end users and participants can also
act as tasking entities.
1314

Selection and peer-review under responsibility of the Scientiﬁc Programme Committee of ICCS 2014
c The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V.
doi:10.1016/j.procs.2014.05.118

Dynamic Data Driven Crowd Sensing Task Assignment

(a) Exact Trajectories

Pournajaf, Xiong and Sunderam

(b) Uncertain Trajectories

Figure 1: Eﬀect of uncertainty on spatial task assignment with two participants P1 and P2 , and
a task T1 .
An interesting and valuable class of crowd sensing applications is geospatial crowd sensing,
in which the goal is to collect data about speciﬁc targets that could be objects, events, or
phenomena at particular locations. Examples of such geospatial sensing tasks include instant
event-based news reporting at the place of event, traﬃc monitoring, or trail condition updates
after storms. In geospatial task assignment, participants’ location information are often used
in order to coordinate sensing tasks based on the participants’ proximity to the sensing targets. Tasks are distributed to participants based on their locations which can be optimized for
coverage-based goals (e.g. maximum coverage or partial coverage) combined with cost-based
goals (e.g. minimum cost in terms of distance that needs to be traveled to the sensing target or
budgeted cost) [11, 23, 18]. However, in many applications, the exact location of participants
might not be available to the task assignment server due to error in location-detection devices,
noisy transmissions, or explicit location perturbation due to privacy concerns. In addition,
participants may be constantly moving (e.g. commuters) and sensing tasks may be updated
(e.g. moving crowd in an event).
Figure 1 illustrates an example of the spatial task assignment problem with two participant
trajectories indicated as P1 and P2 and the location of a spatial task shown as T1 at current
time (i.e. labeled as now in the ﬁgure). Figure 1a includes exact trajectories as the sequence of
locations and time stamps while Figure 1b only contains uncertain trajectories as the sequence
of location areas at each time point. Assume that a task assignment server has access to these
trajectories along with the location of the task, and an assignment goal which requires tasks
to be assigned to the closest participants at each time point. While it is intuitive to assign T1
to P1 at current time in Figure 1a using exact locations, it might not be as straightforward in
Figure 1b which deals with uncertain trajectories. Thus there is an urgent need for dynamic
task assignment in mobile crowd sensing for maximized sensing coverage and minimized sensing
cost, while adapting in real-time to the dynamic and uncertain locations of participants and
the sensing requirements of the applications.
In this paper, we propose a dynamic data driven framework for spatial task assignment
in mobile crowd sensing with dynamic and uncertain participant locations. Our approach is
based on the DDDAS (Dynamic Data Driven Application Systems) [4] paradigm. The DDDAS
concept is crucial to address the big data problem in such crowd sensing applications in order to
steer and assign the data collection tasks in targeted ways, adapting dynamically to application
needs and the dynamic and uncertain locations of participants. The task assignment entails
a synergistic feedback loop between application simulations and data collection: 1) based on
1315

Dynamic Data Driven Crowd Sensing Task Assignment

Pournajaf, Xiong and Sunderam

assigned tasks, participants report the collected data and possibly their current (uncertain)
locations to the application; 2) the collected data are dynamically integrated into an executing
simulation to augment or complement the application model (e.g. ﬂood movement), 3) the
reported (uncertain) locations are dynamically integrated into an executing mobility model to
accurately track participants’ moving locations, and 4) conversely the executing simulations
update the data collection targets and requirements as well as participants’ locations which
are then used by the task assignment module to make new task assignments and steer future
data collection. Through model-based prediction and ﬁltering, the DDDAS feedback loop is
essential to dynamically steer future data collection, adapting in real time to data dynamics,
moving participants, and application needs.
An overview of our project PREDICT (Privacy and secuRity Enhancing Dynamic Information Collection and moniToring) is given in [25] which develops a framework for dynamic data
collection, aggregation, and analysis with feedback loops enhanced by privacy mechanisms (i.e.
when personal information is being collected), while in this paper, we focus on task assignment
for data collection in crowd sensing applications. The remainder of this paper is organized as
follows. In Section 2 we give an account of previous work. In Section 3 we present an step
by step overview of our proposed framework followed by a comprehensive description of each
module. Finally, Section 4 gives the conclusions and our future research direction.

2
2.1

Related Work
Mobile Crowd Sensing Task Assignment

Task management in mobile crowd sensing can be categorized based on the task allocation
scheme as i) autonomous task selection or ii) coordinated task assignment [17]. In autonomous
task selection scheme, participants select their tasks autonomously from a pool of globally
available tasks. Examples of these approaches may be found in [22, 6]. Since the selected tasks
are not optimized globally, these approaches tend to be ineﬃcient with respect to sensing cost
or global utility. On the other hand, coordinated task assignment recruits qualiﬁed participants
and eﬃciently allocates available sensing resources (i.e. participants) to tasks to meet the goals
of applications. Applications might aim for diﬀerent criteria such as high task coverage, data
credibility and quality, or low cost. Examples of this approach can be found in [19, 21, 5, 11, 12].
In this paper, we are interested in a coordinated task assignment approach, however, our work
diﬀers from these previous works since we deal with uncertain trajectories of participants and
do not have access to exact locations. In addition, we apply the DDDAS concept to account
for dynamic data and application needs.

2.2

Mobility Modeling and Prediction

Recent mobility studies aim at mining individual’s mobility patterns and constructing mobility
models using high resolution positioning data such as GPS [1, 15, 16]. In contrast to synthetic
mobility models which are based on randomly generated movements, trace-based mobility models ﬁt a statistical model of individual’s mobility using real-world trajectories. These models
can be constructed based on the trajectories under the walk mode [13, 20] or may consider
other modes of transportation [14] (i.e. such as driving or public transportation) which may
introduce diﬀerent statistical properties. Several techniques have been proposed in literature
for clustering locations or trajectories, mining their dependencies, and modeling the probability
of transition between locations which can be found in a recent survey [15]. Variants of Markov
1316

Dynamic Data Driven Crowd Sensing Task Assignment

Pournajaf, Xiong and Sunderam



	

		






	


	


		



			


		



		

	








	




	
	



Figure 2: Adaptive dynamic data driven framework for uncertain spatial task assignment
model are widely used to model the transition probability between locations by individuals and
predict their next destination [2, 9, 14]. Another popular framework for destination prediction
using historical trajectories is Bayesian inference [26]. In this paper, we utilize these mobility
models in addition to the reported (uncertain) locations to augment the mobility models in
order to get more accurate estimates of participants’ locations for task assignment.

3

Dynamic Data Driven Framework For Task Assignment

We propose a novel DDDAS based framework for dynamic spatial task assignment with uncertain trajectories illustrated in Figure 2. Our framework includes an oﬄine learning process
which builds a mobility model by mining the public trajectories to be used as the process model
in the ﬁltering module. The framework entails a feedback loop composed of the following key
components:
• Participants, based on their assigned tasks, report collected data and voluntarily their
current (uncertain) locations to the application.
• The collected data are dynamically integrated into an executing simulation to augment
or complement the application model (e.g. ﬂood movement), which updates the sensing
targets for future data collection,
• The reported (uncertain) locations are dynamically integrated into a ﬁltering component
to augment or complement a mobility model. The prediction step computes or simulates
a participant’s current location based on her historic trajectory and the mobility model
(i.e. prior estimates). The correction step integrates the reported (uncertain) location
and predicted location into a more accurate location (i.e. posterior estimate).
• The updated sensing targets and requirements as well as participant information with
posterior estimates of their locations are then fed to the uncertain task assignment module
which assigns tasks to participants using a probabilistic model while globally optimizing
sensing coverage and cost. The output of this module, which is a mapping of tasks to
participants, will be returned back to participants.
1317

Dynamic Data Driven Crowd Sensing Task Assignment

(a) A 3 × 3 grid representation

(b) A graph representation

Pournajaf, Xiong and Sunderam

(c) A Markov model

Figure 3: An example map with a grid, graph, and Markov model representation
• Once each participant receives a set of tasks from the tasking server, if she has access to
her exact location, a local task reﬁnement step (i.e. a second-stage tasking module) can
be used to further optimize her set of tasks.
• The ﬁnal assigned tasks are then used to steer the future data collection as well as possibly
participants’ future trajectories since they might need to travel to the location of sensing
targets.
Since the application model is dependent on speciﬁc applications and sensing tasks, we
focus on the general task assignment module in this paper and explain each component in
detail below.

3.1

Learning Mobility Models

To learn a mobility model, we use a set of publicly available trajectories as a historical data
set to calculate transition probabilities between adjacent locations. To formulate the location
transition process, Bayesian inference and Markov model are two popular methods which are
examined in this paper. Note that, we do not consider modes of transport or location-based
activities to build these models, however this module can be easily extended to include them.
We note that we can learn mobility models for speciﬁc individuals if we have suﬃcient historical
personalized trajectories. Of course, additional privacy mechanisms may be required to protect
the individual’s privacy when learning such personalized models.
3.1.1

Bayesian Inference

A grid-based road network with mapped trajectories can be used to build a Bayesian inference
framework for next location prediction [26]. Generally, a map is a two-dimensional g × g grid
with granularity of a cell (i.e. all the locations within a single cell are considered to be the
same). A graph is build based on the grid where each cell corresponds to a node in the graph,
then trajectories are mapped to sequences of these nodes. An example of a 3 × 3 grid is given
in Figure 3a, where trajectories T1 , T2 , T3 , and T4 are shown in the map. Figure 3b represents
the trajectories mapped in a graph which is created based on the grid. T1 and T2 are identical
in the graph because of the granularity which is a grid cell.
After mapping the set of all trajectories T , given a partial trajectory Tj , the probability
of a node n being the next destination of Tj can be computed based on the Bayes rule as
1318

Dynamic Data Driven Crowd Sensing Task Assignment





Pournajaf, Xiong and Sunderam

 

	




 

Figure 4: A Simple State-Space Model
Equation 1, which is the probability that node n contains the next location in given trajectory
Tj , conditioning on the query trajectory Tj .
P (next(Tj ) = n | Tj ) =

P (Tj | next(Tj ) = n)P (next(Tj ) = n)
P (Tj )

(1)

On the other hand, the probability that node n is the next destination of trajectory Tj can be
calculated as Equation 2 which is the number of trajectories containing the sequence of nodes
in Tj followed by node n divided to the total number of trajectories.
P (next(Tj ) = n) =
3.1.2

|{Ti | (Tj , n) ∈ Ti }|
|T |

(2)

Markov Model

Using the same graph as Figure 3b, a Markov model can be constructed which assumes a state
for each node of the graph as in Figure 3c. For each pair of adjacent nodes, both transition
directions are considered and the probability of each directed edge prs and psr are calculated as
the probability of location transition between nr and ns and vice versa. In a ﬁrst-order Markov
model, only the current state determines the probability of transiting to the next state, so the
probability prs is calculated as the number of trajectories which have the sequence of two nodes
(nr , ns ) divided to the number of trajectories which have nr as shown in Equation 3.
prs =

|{Ti | (nr , ns ) ∈ Ti }|
|{Ti | nr ∈ Ti }|

(3)

After calculating all the probabilities between the nodes, a g 2 × g 2 transition matrix M is
created which can be used as a process model in a state-space model as described in Section 3.2.
Moreover, other advanced Markov models such as higher order or hierarchical Markov models
can be built to feed more variables to the model which are not considered in this paper, but
can be easily plugged into the framework.

3.2

Adaptive Filtering

The ﬁltering component in our framework provides estimates of noisy locations in order to
improve the accuracy of location information per time stamp to be used in task assignment
module. First, given the mobility model as described in Section 3.1, we can create a linear state
space model as shown in Figure 4 and formulated in Equation 4. In Figure 4, x represents true
states while z shows observed states.
xt+1 = Axt + ωt
ωt ∼ N (0, Q)

(4)

1319

Dynamic Data Driven Crowd Sensing Task Assignment

Pournajaf, Xiong and Sunderam

where A is the time-invariant, linear coeﬃcient and ωk represents the noise of the linear model.
Intuitively, the process model linearly relates the current location state xt+1 to the previous
state xt as described in Markov model, except for a white Gaussian noise ω, called the process
noise with variance Q. The observed state zt is also obtained from the true state xt at each
time point t and contains additive measurement noise. we can build a observation model as
Equation 5.
zt = Hxt + νt
νt ∼ N (0, R)

(5)

where H is the linear coeﬃcient and νk represents the additive measurement noise. In our
context, this noise can originate from device inaccuracy (e.g. GPS noise) or a perturbation
method (e.g. diﬀerential privacy) and be modeled diﬀerently according to the measurement
equipment or process. In this paper, we assume a Gaussian noise with variance R.
Given the process model and the measurement model, a ﬁltering algorithm is used for posterior
estimation of true state to minimize the measurement error. Two popular ﬁltering algorithms
in literature are Kalman Filter [10] and Particle Filter [8]. Kalman ﬁlter is optimal for linear
processes with a Gaussian noise, while Particle ﬁlter makes no assumption about the process
model or noise in the state-space model but can be computationally expensive.

3.3

Uncertain Spatial Task Assignment

The output of the ﬁltering module for the given set of noisy participant locations at time t is a
set of ﬁltered uncertain locations to be used in spatial task assignment. Given a set of updated
spatial tasks and assignment goals by applications, and the set of participants with uncertain
locations (i.e. output of ﬁltering module), we have developed methods and algorithms to handle
location uncertainty and optimize assignment process to achieve required goals of the applications [18]. In our work, we considered coverage-based assignment goals with a distance-based
cost model, however, any assignment goal can be adopted in our task assignment module in the
dynamic framework. General deﬁnitions of task assignment, spatial task and distance-based
cost model is given as follows.
A task assignment is a mapping of participants to tasks. Each participant-task pair can be
considered also an individual assignment. A cost might be set for each assignment.
A spatial task (i.e. location-based task) includes a target (i.e. an object, event, or phenomena),
a location, a time-frame for sensing, and other speciﬁc instructions or sensor requirements to
perform sensing.
A distance-based cost model deﬁnes the cost of each assignment as a function of distance between the participant and the task location. In the simplest deﬁnition which considers the exact
distance as cost, closest participants to each task will form least costly assignments.
Task coverage could be deﬁned in diﬀerent ways.
• Single-coverage model means each task needs to be performed by only one participant to
be considered as covered.
• K-coverage model requires each task to be assigned to k participants to be considered as
covered. This model can be used in untrustworthy or uncertain environments to avoid
faulty or missing data.
1320

Dynamic Data Driven Crowd Sensing Task Assignment

Pournajaf, Xiong and Sunderam

Considering these task coverage models, coverage-based assignment goals might fall in one of
the following categories.
• Maximum coverage assignment aims at maximizing the coverage of tasks by participants.
In a single-coverage model, the assignment goal can be summarized as maximizing the
number of assigned tasks.
• Minimum-cost coverage-based assignment aims at achieving a task coverage goal with
minimum cost. In a single-coverage model, the assignment goal might require only a
portion of tasks to be assigned with minimum cost.
• Minimum-cost maximum-coverage assignment aims at maximizing a task coverage goal
with minimum cost.
Task Assignment with Uncertain Locations In spatial task assignment with uncertain
locations, since exact locations of participants are not provided, the distance information between task locations and participants is unavailable to the tasking server, therefore the server is
required to deal with location uncertainty to achieve assignment goals. Spatio-temporal queries
over uncertain data have been extensively studied with many algorithms to handle queries such
as nearest neighbors, top-k, and range queries [24]. These queries mostly consider the results
for one query object and not a set of objects, therefore cannot be directly adopted in our work
or would be very ineﬃcient. Among other spatio-temporal queries, K closest pairs query (KCPQ) [3] which is the problem of ﬁnding the K closest pairs between two spatial datasets is
the most related query type to our problem, but is not studied for uncertain datasets.
Knowing the set of uncertain locations of participants as a set of minimum bounding area of
each uncertain location with a probability density function, we can apply two simple methods
to calculate the expected distances between this set and the set of exact locations of the tasks.
As a naive method, for each participant, we calculate the centroid point of all possible location
samples in each uncertainty area and use it to calculate the expected distances between this
point and all locations of the task set. As a more accurate alternative method, we ﬁrst apply a
geometric pruning algorithm to remove the task-participant pairs with zero probability of being
accessible (i.e. a participant can not travel to the place of a task) and shrink the uncertain areas
to only contain the accessible location samples. Then, for the remaining pairs with shrinked
areas, we calculate the probabilities of the task locations being accessible by participants as well
as the expected distance between task locations and shrinked areas. Finally, the set of expected
distances and the accessibility probabilities can be used in our probabilistic task assignment
methods proposed in [18].
Local Task Reﬁnement Once the task assignment is done at the tasking server, the assignments are sent to individual participants. The goal of the local task reﬁnement is to further
optimize task assignment results of the global assignments by each participant using her exact
location. This approach requires the participants to know their actual locations. This assumption is reasonable when spatial noise is added by participants for privacy-preserving purposes,
but can not be applied to other types of uncertainty. Hence, we have considered an optional
task reﬁnement module in participant side of our proposed framework.
The ﬁnal assigned tasks are then used by the participants to steer their future data collection, which completes the feedback loop. Our main insights are that given this feedback loop,
data will be collected in a targeted way, adapting dynamically to application needs and data
dynamics. The data collection process is adapted according to participants’ moving trajectories
and the sensing tasks in such a way that sensing cost and resource utilization are optimized.
1321

Dynamic Data Driven Crowd Sensing Task Assignment

4

Pournajaf, Xiong and Sunderam

Conclusions and Future Work

The emergence of a variety of crowd sensing applications on top of a platform based on moving
individuals (i.e. carrying smart devices) prompts an urgent need for eﬀective management
models such as spatial task assignment. Such crowd sensing platform comes with some inherent
challenges including a dynamic environment (i.e. moving participants or task targets) with
uncertainty (i.e. noisy or imprecise location information) which are addressed in our dynamic
spatial task assignment framework based on the DDDAS (Dynamic Data Driven Application
Systems) paradigm. Our approach includes 1) a dynamic data driven framework with feedback
loops to steer data collection, adapting in real time to moving participants, data dynamics, and
application needs, 2) a state-space modeling of participant mobility using public trajectories
which continuously adjusts to the dynamic and uncertain locations of participants exploiting
an adaptive ﬁltering module, and 3) a spatial task assignment approach to recruit the best
set of participants to achieve application-speciﬁc goals such as maximum coverage or minimum
cost. As a next step, we plan to evaluate our framework with real-time data by implementing
a real-world crowd sensing application using our dynamic task assignment approach. We are
also interested in extending our approach to take into account other assignment criteria such
as data credibility and quality.

Acknowledgments
This research is supported by the Air Force Oﬃce of Scientiﬁc Research (AFOSR) DDDAS
program under grant FA9550-12-1-0240.

References
[1] Nils Aschenbruck, Aarti Munjal, and Tracy Camp. Trace-based mobility modeling for multi-hop
wireless networks. Computer Communications, 34(6):704–714, 2011.
[2] Daniel Ashbrook and Thad Starner. Using gps to learn signiﬁcant locations and predict movement
across multiple users. Personal and Ubiquitous Computing, 7(5):275–286, 2003.
[3] Antonio Corral, Yannis Manolopoulos, Yannis Theodoridis, and Michael Vassilakopoulos. Algorithms for processing k-closest-pair queries in spatial databases. Data & Knowledge Engineering,
49(1):67–104, 2004.
[4] Frederica Darema. Dynamic data driven applications systems: A new paradigm for application
simulations and measurements. In Computational Science-ICCS 2004, pages 662–669. Springer,
2004.
[5] T. Das, P. Mohan, V. N. Padmanabhan, R. Ramjee, and A. Sharma. Prism: Platform for remote
sensing using smartphones. pages 63–76. in Proceedings of the 8th ACM International Conference
on Mobile Systems, Applications, and Services (MobiSys), 2010.
[6] Dingxiong Deng, Cyrus Shahabi, and Ugur Demiryurek. Maximizing the number of worker’s
self-selected tasks in spatial crowdsourcing. In Proceedings of the 21st ACM SIGSPATIAL International Conference on Advances in Geographic Information Systems, pages 314–323. ACM,
2013.
[7] Raghu K Ganti, Fan Ye, and Hui Lei. Mobile crowdsensing: Current state and future challenges.
Communications Magazine, IEEE, 49(11):32–39, 2011.
[8] Neil J Gordon, David J Salmond, and Adrian FM Smith. Novel approach to nonlinear/nongaussian bayesian state estimation. In IEE Proceedings F (Radar and Signal Processing), volume
140, pages 107–113. IET, 1993.

1322

Dynamic Data Driven Crowd Sensing Task Assignment

Pournajaf, Xiong and Sunderam

[9] Ramaswamy Hariharan and Kentaro Toyama. Project lachesis: parsing and modeling location
histories. In Geographic Information Science, pages 106–124. Springer, 2004.
[10] Rudolph Emil Kalman et al. A new approach to linear ﬁltering and prediction problems. Journal
of basic Engineering, 82(1):35–45, 1960.
[11] Leyla Kazemi and Cyrus Shahabi. Geocrowd: enabling query answering with spatial crowdsourcing. In Proceedings of the 20th International Conference on Advances in Geographic Information
Systems, pages 189–198. ACM, 2012.
[12] Leyla Kazemi, Cyrus Shahabi, and Lei Chen. Geotrucrowd: trustworthy query answering with
spatial crowdsourcing. In Proceedings of the 21st ACM SIGSPATIAL International Conference on
Advances in Geographic Information Systems, pages 304–313. ACM, 2013.
[13] Kyunghan Lee, Seongik Hong, Seong Joon Kim, Injong Rhee, and Song Chong. Slaw: A new
mobility model for human walks. In INFOCOM 2009, IEEE, pages 855–863. IEEE, 2009.
[14] Lin Liao, Donald J Patterson, Dieter Fox, and Henry Kautz. Learning and inferring transportation
routines. Artiﬁcial Intelligence, 171(5):311–331, 2007.
[15] Miao Lin and Wen-Jing Hsu. Mining gps data for mobility patterns: A survey. Pervasive and
Mobile Computing, 2013.
[16] Mirco Musolesi and Cecilia Mascolo. Mobility models for systems evaluation. In Middleware for
Network Eccentric and Mobile Applications, pages 43–62. Springer, 2009.
[17] Layla Pournajaf, Li Xiong, Daniel A. Garcia-Ulloa, and Vaidy Sunderam. A survey on privacy in
mobile crowd sensing task management. Technical Report TR-2014-002, Department of Mathematics and Computer Science, Emory University, 2014.
[18] Layla Pournajaf, Li Xiong, Vaidy Sunderam, and Slawomir Goryczka. Spatial task assignment
for crowd sensing with cloaked locations. In Proceedings of the 2014 International Conference on
Mobile Data Management (MDM). IEEE, to appear.
[19] S. Reddy, D. Estrin, and M. Srivastava. Recruitment framework for participatory sensing data
collections. pages 138–155. in Proceedings of the 8th International Conference on Pervasive Computing, Springer Berlin Heidelberg, May 2010.
[20] Injong Rhee, Minsu Shin, Seongik Hong, Kyunghan Lee, Seong Joon Kim, and Song Chong.
On the levy-walk nature of human mobility. IEEE/ACM Transactions on Networking (TON),
19(3):630–643, 2011.
[21] Mehdi Riahi, Thanasis G. Papaioannou, Immanuel Trummer, and Karl Aberer. Utility-driven
data acquisition in participatory sensing. EDBT/ICDT, ACM, March 2013.
[22] M. Shin, C. Cornelius, D. Peebles, A. Kapadia, D. Kotz, and N. Triandopoulos. Anonysense:
A system for anonymous opportunistic sensing. Journal of Pervasive and Mobile Computing,
7(1):16–30, 2010.
[23] Houtan Shirani-Mehr, Farnoush Banaei-Kashani, and Cyrus Shahabi. Eﬃcient viewpoint assignment for urban texture documentation. In Proceedings of the 17th ACM SIGSPATIAL International Conference on Advances in Geographic Information Systems, pages 62–71. ACM, 2009.
[24] Yijie Wang, Xiaoyong Li, Xiaoling Li, and Yuan Wang. A survey of queries over uncertain data.
Knowledge and Information Systems, pages 1–46, 2013.
[25] Li Xiong, Vaidy Sunderam, Liyue Fan, Slawomir Goryczka, and Layla Pournajaf. Predict: Privacy and security enhancing dynamic information collection and monitoring. Procedia Computer
Science, 18:1979–1988, 2013.
[26] Andy Yuan Xue, Rui Zhang, Yu Zheng, Xing Xie, Jin Huang, and Zhenghua Xu. Destination
prediction by sub-trajectory synthesis and privacy protection against such prediction. In Proc.
IEEE 29th International Conference on Data Engineering, ICDE, 2013.

1323

