Procedia Computer Science
Volume 29, 2014, Pages 740–753
ICCS 2014. 14th International Conference on Computational Science

Simulation Platform for Multiscale and Multiphysics
Modeling of OLEDs
M.Bogdanova1*, S.Belousov1* , I.Valuev1,4* , A.Zakirov1, M.Okun1 ,
D.Shirabaykin1, V.Chorkov1 , P.Tokar1, A. Knizhnik1, B.Potapkin1,
A.Bagaturyants 2,3, K.Komarova2,3, M.N.Strikhanov3, A.A.Tishchenko 3,
V.R.Nikitenko 3 , V.M.Sukharev3, N.A.Sannikova3, I.V.Morozov4
1

Kintech Lab, Moscow, Russia
Photochemistry Center of the Russian Academy of Sciences (PC RAS), Moscow, Russia
3
National Research Nuclear University «MEPhI», Moscow, Russia
4
Joint Institute for High Temperatures of the Russian Academy of Sciences, Moscow, Russia
2

bogdanova@kintechlab.com, belousov@kintechlab.com, valuev@kintechlab.com

Abstract
We present a simulat ion platform which serves as an integrated framework for mu ltiscale and
mu ltiphysics modeling of Organic Light Emitting Diodes (OLEDs) and their co mponents. The
platform is aimed at the designers of OLEDs with various areas of expert ise ranging fro m the
fundamental theory to the manufacturing technology. The platform integrates an extendable set of inhouse and third-party computational programs that are used for predict ive modeling of the OLED
parameters important for device performance. These computational tools describe properties of
atomistic, mesoscale and macroscopic levels. The platform automates data exchange between these
description levels and allows one to build simu lation workflows and manage remote task execution.
The integrated database provides data exchange and storage for the calculated and experimental
results.
Keywords: organic light emitting diodes, simulation platform, multiscale multiphysics simulation, distributed
computing, quantum chemistry, drift-diffusion, FDTD, ray -tracing

1 Introduction
Organic light emitting diodes (OLEDs) are flat and thin large-area light sources that form a b ranch
in the technology of solid state lighting which has been actively developing over the last decade. The
working princip le of OLEDs is based on the electroluminescence - the radiat ive reco mb ination of
injected electron–hole pairs in a solid, wh ich is fundamentally d ifferent fro m thus far existing lighting
techniques and holds the promise for h ighly efficient, long -lived, and environ mental friendly light
*

740

Corresponding authors

Selection and peer-review under responsibility of the Scientiﬁc Programme Committee of ICCS 2014
c The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V.
doi:10.1016/j.procs.2014.05.066

Simulation platform for modeling OLEDs

M.Bogdanova, S.Belousov, I.Valuev, A.Zakirov et al

sources (1). Modeling of light outcoupling and efficiency of OLEDs is a very comp lex physical
problem. Fro m the optical point of view the outcoupling of light emission in an inner layer of a p lanar
mu ltilayer structure could not be higher than 20% (2). The electrical charge trans port in organic
structure depends strongly on layer energy properties and geometry of a device (3). M icrostructure of
the organic layer defines the energy properties of transport levels and depends on the synthesis
conditions of the material. The properties of a fluorescent mo lecule in a specific surrounding define
the fluorescent spectrum and power.
Each of the described above processes is simulated by a corresponding numerical method. Finite
different time do main (FDTD) (4), ray tracing and transfer matrix (5) methods deal with the optical
aspects. Monte-Carlo method and drift-diffusion simulat ions describe the charge transport in organic
med ia. With mo lecular dynamics methods it is possible to obtain the layer bulk or interface
microstructure either for poly mers or for s mall mo lecule systems. Quantum chemistry deals with the
spectrum and energy of a single molecule playing a role of recombination or charge transfer site.
The output data from each spatial (and consequently physical) level that is considered in our
simu lation platfo rm is used as the input for the next level. The typical co mpute time a nd resources for
each of the methods are very different. Because of this we emp loyed distributed computing and
workflow/data management to execute compute scenarios required for simu lation of OLED physics
and optimizat ion of device parameters. The platform includes a number of nu merical models in each
physical level (calculation modules), task manager (calculation scheduler), data storage system and
database, graphical user interface.
The platform implements a well-developed “Scientific workflow” concept. It has an open
architecture: the user can add, modify and rep lace calculation modules without developers. It supports
mu ltiuser collaboration and data exchange and provides highly performance , scalability and flexib ility
in customization and configuring.
In our platform we use a set in-house (developed in Kintech Lab and M EPhI) simu lation codes and
provide interface to several third party codes. The third party codes are not distributed with the
platform and should be individually obtained and installed by the users. The list of the software
currently interfaced by the simu lation platform contains the following programs: GAM ESS (US) (6),
Quantum Espresso (7), MD-kM C (developed in Kintech Lab, Moscow, Rus sia) (8), GROMACS (9),
Monte-Carlo simu lation of hopping transport (developed in MEPhI, Moscow, Russia), FDTD-II
(based on EMTL, developed in Kintech Lab, Moscow, Russia) (10), Ray Tracing code (based on
EMTL, developed in Kintech Lab, Moscow, Russia) (11), T-matrix code (based on the CAMFR
program) (12), Drift-Diffusion code (developed in Kintech Lab, Moscow, Russia).

2 Related Work
The modern approaches of numerical simu lation of OLEDS include both well-developed methods
and new techniques. For optical modeling one has successfully applied the fin ite-difference time
domain method (see Section 3), finite element method (13), ray tracing (14) and other computational
techniques. Special organic -material versions of Monte-Carlo method (15) and drift -diffusion (16)
were used to describe the charge carrier transport. The possibilities of the integrated into the platform
physical models take the up to date state of the OLED research into account and are described in
Section 3.
There exist several software tools that are dedicated to simu lation of OLEDs. Examp les are SetFos
by FLUXIM A G and SimOLED by Sim4Tec Ltd. These programs are specialized device -oriented
software dealing with the optical and charge carrier transport level of the OLED simulation. Our
platform is different fro m these tools main ly because it is designed to possibly cover the whole area of
the related physics from atomistics up to the device properties. Rather than being a single specialized

741

Simulation platform for modeling OLEDs

M.Bogdanova, S.Belousov, I.Valuev, A.Zakirov et al

program it comb ines different calculat ion programs and methods that may originate fro m various
research groups or be commercial software.
On the other hand, there exists a variety of scientific workflow plat forms and tools such as Kepler,
Taverna, MAPPER, Triana, Pegasus. Generally these tools are universal and allow one to build a
scientific workflow fro m a set of calculat ion routines and to execute this workflo w using existing
compute resources. Usually the prerequisite for these tools is an infrastructure of some kind: there
must be either a functional Grid environment or web portal, most of the tools require Condor software
to manage the task execution. Although it is possible to use a universal tool to build a research specific distributed simu lation framework, we found th e requirements to maintain the Grid
infrastructure, user reg istration and the limitations of the interface too restrict ive fo r the needs of
OLED simu lation. Instead we fo llo wed a route of creating a relat ively lightweight applicat ion that can
be installed even on a single computer and that can operate remote co mpute resources in a passive way
on behalf of the user. For the purpose of task and workflow management we used a free C++ library
called GridM D (17), wh ich is able to co mmunicate with various task schedulin g systems, including
Globus Grid (see Section 4.2).
Another significant feature of our approach is the data specialization, which was performed for the
OLED area. Instead of operating the universal data entities such as files or numbers on a user level
(which most workflow systems do), the user is offered to work with structured data types that have
physical meaning for the OLED scope (see Section 4.1). Certain ly, these data types may be extended,
and new types added, but these software configuration procedures are hidden from the standard user.
Thus being a physicist or a technologist, the standard user is not required to have an expert level in
software configuration and scripting.

3 Physical Models
Nu merical simu lation tools include three spatial scales: atomistic scale deals with the molecular
properties, mesoscopic scale deals with the energy and structure properties of a single layer, macro
(device) scale deals with the optical and electrical properties of a mu ltilayered device. In the fo llo wing
subsections we briefly describe the utilized physical models and the computational resources required
by the simulation tools.

3.1 Atomistic Level
The platform integrates two levels of ato mistic scale simu lations. They are presented as a
specialized GUI and data exchange scripts which support the following third -party products:
1.

GAM ESS (US) - a general ab initio quantum chemistry package, which is maintained by the
members of the Gordon research group at Iowa State University (6);

2.

Quantum Espresso - an integrated suite of Open-Source co mputer codes for electronic-structure
calculations and materials modeling at the nanoscale (7);

3.

GROMA CS - a versatile package to perform mo lecular dynamics, i.e. simu late the Newtonian
equations of motion for systems with hundreds to millions of particles (9).
We use also one of our in-house programs for molecular dynamic calculation of polymer materials:

4.

MD-kMC (molecular dynamics method) allows calcu lating the geo metry of poly mer layer
microstructure (8).

The first level includes the simu lation of the photophysical properties of a single molecu le in
specific med ia. The GUI is designed to configure several types of calculations: emission spectra and

742

Simulation platform for modeling OLEDs

M.Bogdanova, S.Belousov, I.Valuev, A.Zakirov et al

radiation lifetime simu lation, including the effect of spin-orbit coupling between singlet and triplet
states; excited state energies calculation; distribution function simulation for HOM O and LUM O
energies in a layer; reorganization energy calculation; metal work function calculation based on
density-functional theory, plane waves, and pseudopotentials.
All these calculations use the density functional theory with hybrid or coulomb-attenuated
functionals, which provides fast and good quality simu lations both for exciton and charge -transfer
characteristics. The distribution function calculation for HOMO -LUM O energies requires the
microstructure of small mo lecules bulk as an input. It is calculated using mo lecular dynamics
simulation.
The second level provides insight into molecu lar packing in a layer within mo lecular dynamics
approach. The molecular structure of the layer, average distance between molecules and layer density
could be simulated. Three tasks are imp lemented: s mall mo lecules bulk simulat ion; polymer
molecules bulk simulation; simulation of the interface between two layers.
Quantum chemistry calculations are limit ing the overall performance of the atomisic leve l
scenarios. The total computational time to calculate atomistic properties can be rather long (up to one
week fo r a single run on a supercomputer). However the material p roperties wh ich can be obtained
with these runs could be used in various macroscopic simulat ions without being recalculated again.
These material p roperties may be stored in a database which we developed especially for this project.
In the subsequent optical and electrical calculations either experimental or calculated material
properties could be used.

3.2 Mesoscopic Level
Monte-Carlo Simulations for Mobility and Diffusion Coefficients.
Hopping charge transport, energetic (diagonal) and non-diagonal (spatial) disorder are the inherent
features of organic materials. Hopping rates are d istributed randomly and vary by many orders of
magnitude fro m site to site. Modeling of mob ility and diffu sion coefficient, hence, requires
calculations on the mesoscopic scale, which exceeds considerably mean inter-mo lecular distance.
Monte-Carlo (MC) simu lations, although time -consuming, seem to be the most adequate modeling
tool for disordered organics. Therefore, M C-modeling of charge t ransport in separate organic layers
has been integrated into the developed simulation platform.
Disordered organics is modeled by a cubic lattice with site energies, distributed randomly in
accordance with the Gaussian law. One can consider only a fraction of lattice sites as hopping centers,
in order to model non-diagonal disorder. Charge carrier, being born at injecting electrode, has to
perform rando m walk across a layer, which is biased by a given voltage. The algorithm of MCmodeling of the random walk is standard and has been described previously (18). Charge carriers are
generated at a given concentration at the injecting electrode, and the calculation proceeds until a
stationary concentration establishes inside the entire sample.
The modeled quantities are the charge current density across every layer o f hopping centers, the
local concentration of charge carriers and the local electric field strength (the latter is related to the
charge density via Poisson’s equation). The local mobility and d iffusion coefficients are ext racted
fro m the equations for current density at two adjacent layers. Th is procedure yields the field - and
concentration- dependent mobility and diffusion coefficient for a given organic layer.
Site hopping Monte-Carlo simulat ion is imp lemented as a parallel program wh ich is well scaled
with the number of CPUs and requires typically up to 100 CPU-hours to execute.

3.3 Device Level
Drift-Diffusion Method for Charge Carrier and Exciton Transport and Kinetics

743

Simulation platform for modeling OLEDs

M.Bogdanova, S.Belousov, I.Valuev, A.Zakirov et al

On the continuous mediu m scale the charge carrier transport and exciton dynamics is represented
in the p latform by the drift -diffusion model and the corresponding numerical tool developed at
Kintech Lab. The organic nature of the layer materials is manifest in site energy disorder (Extended
Gaussian Energy Disorder (EGDM ) (19)) and generalized Einstein relation between the charge
mobility and diffusion coefficients (20). The dependence of the mobility on the field strength and
carrier density could be modeled either with the Pool-Frenkel function or with EGDM relations. The
code includes reflected charge model for a contact with metals.
Each material is characterized by a set of parameters: charge carrier mobility model and its
constants, HOMO and LUMO levels, d isorder parameter, density of states for charges, kinetic
coefficients for exciton dynamics. So me of these material parameters may be obtained fro m the
experimental literature; however most of them cannot be measured directly and fitting procedures are
required to extract the parameter values. Our p latform has an advantage of calculating the material
properties (or at, least, many o f them) in an ab-init io way fro m the ato mistic models. As a result of
charge transport simulat ions the electrical propert ies of a device can be obtained: the current -voltage
curve, distribution of the charge concentration within a device, d istribution of the exciton
concentration in the emissive layer.
The most essential computation operation in the drift-diffusion code is the sparse matrix inversion
in course of the Newton-Raphson iteration procedure. For the 1D model which is generally sufficient
for the OLED emissive layer description, the drift-diffusion code requires less than 1 CPU-hour to
calculate the whole current voltage curve. The model is implemented as a sequential code that can be
run locally or remotely.
Optical Properties
Modeling of optical properties of an OLED is a crucial step in evaluation of the overall device
efficiency (2) (1). The optical simu lation provides information about OLED optical perfo rmance in
terms of the total emitted power, outcoupled power and angular pattern as functions of the wavelength
of the emitted light. Optical performance of an OLED depends on several factors: its geometry,
material properties of constituent layers, the position of the emitting reg ion with in the OLED. The
latter is dependent on the charge transport properties of the device and should be input from the charge
transport simulations.
OLED geo metry is the key to optimizing optical perfo rmance of the device. Strong enhancement
of the optical performance can be ach ieved by applying either one of several approaches, such as
varying the thickness of layers (21), adding specific geomet ric features at different scales, such as
periodic or random corrugation of the interfaces (nanoscale) (22) (23) (24), introducing volumetric
scattering layers (microscale) (25), modifying the substrate with microlenses (micro- and macroscale)
(26), or co mbination thereof. Essentially, the OLED consists of a stack of thin layers where emission
occurs (overall thickness of the order of the emitted light wavelength) and several th ick layers
including the substrate (thickness is much greater than the wavelength of emitted light). Therefore
optical modeling of OLEDs can be naturally split in two parts:
1.

Full-wave calculation of electro-magnetic field propagation in the thin layers. In this calculation,
the first adjacent thick layer (e.g. substrate) is considered semi-in fin ite. The outcoupled power and
angular pattern in the first adjacent thick layer are the outputs to be calculated.

2.

Geo metrical optics calculation for the rays propagating in the micro - or macrostructured layers
(substrate, volumetric scattering layers). The angular pattern fro m the fu ll-wave calculat ion serves
as an input to this calculation. Ultimately, both the outcoupled power and angular pattern in the
air are obtained.

In our platform the full-wave calculat ion may be co mbined with the geo metric optics to perform a
through-out optical characterization of OLEDs on nano and micro / macro scales. Optical modules in

744

Simulation platform for modeling OLEDs

M.Bogdanova, S.Belousov, I.Valuev, A.Zakirov et al

the platform incorporate several methods and predefined workflows optimized for modeling of
different geometries. Full-wave calculation for thin layers includes:
1.

Semi-analytic transfer matrix approach (TM) is used for calcu lating the properties of a p lanar
OLED. The emitter is treated as a dipole source, the problem is essentially one-dimensional, that
is, only the position of the dipole with respect to the layer interfaces is used as an input for the
calculation. The total emitted power, outcoupled power and angular distributions are
simu ltaneously calculated for d ipoles oriented both parallel and norma l to the layer interfaces.
Averaging over the dipole orientations is performed (5).

2.

Fin ite-difference time-do main method (FDTD) (4) is used for calculat ing the properties of
OLEDs with corrugated interfaces, where the simple p lanar approach is not applicable. The
emitter is treated as a dipole source, the dipole source position with respect to the layer interfaces
as well as the corrugation features are used as inputs. Each calculat ion deals with a certain d ipole
position and orientation. The total emitted power, outcoupled power and angular distributions are
calculated. Averaging over dipole orientations and essential positions with respect to the
corrugation features is performed.

Geo metric optics is realized with ray-tracing method (RT) (14). This method is used for
calculating the propagation of rays in the thick layers. The angular pattern of the rad iation fro m the
thin layers (obtained by the fu ll-wave calcu lation) serves as an input to the RT model. Different types
of scattering behavior are incorporated in the model: Fresnel reflection / refraction at s mooth media
interfaces; Mie scattering on randomly d istributed particles (volu metric scattering); back reflection
fro m the thin layer stack is calculated with the transfer-mat rix approach. In the ray-tracing calcu lation,
reflection of light fro m the thin layers of OLED is calculated with the T-matrix formalism (27).
Ult imately, ray-tracing calculat ion yields bidirectional scattering function (BDSF) of thick layer as
well as the angular pattern of rad iation of OLED in the surrounding mediu m (air). Both the outcoupled
power and angular pattern in the air are obtained.
The used optical models have various computational resource requirements. The most resource
consuming model is the fu ll wave FDTD method. There are several aspects, which determine the time
and memo ry resources needed to obtain a reliable result with this method. Firstly, trans verse
dimensions of the modeled OLED should be sufficiently large in order to avoid edge effects. The
transverse size is generally determined by the attenuation length of surface waves, excited by a source
in thin layers of the OLED. The typical lateral dimensions are 20 by 20 microns and can be larger
depending on the materials used. Secondly, the spatial mesh resolution should be sufficiently small in
order to accurately account for large field grad ients in the nano -structured device. The typical mesh
step is then less than 5 nm. These considerations put memory requirements of FDTD at 100-200 Gb
for the modest estimation, whereas the typical single run simulat ion is 500-800 CPU-hours. Moreover,
several dipole orientations and positions in the nano-structured OLED should be separately evaluated
in order to fully characterize its optical properties. Typically, the nu mber of such runs amounts to ~10.
We use the scalable FDTD implementation that is based on EMTL library, which allo ws for effective
employment of large HPC systems for the FDTD runs.
The semi-analytical TM method is not time-consuming and is implemented as a serial code.
Co mpute resources required by a ray-tracing calculation depend largely on the number of rays
launched. In a typical calculation, the number of rays is ~1E+7 – 1E+8, and a typical run requires
around 1 CPU-hour. We implement the ray tracing model on the base of the EMTL geometrical
primitives and use a perfectly scalable MPI version to run on an HPC system.

745

Simulation platform for modeling OLEDs

M.Bogdanova, S.Belousov, I.Valuev, A.Zakirov et al

4 Simulation Platform Architecture
The architecture of the developed platform is outlined in Figure 1. The p latform consists of a set of
modules that a managed fro m the executable running on a client mach ine. The manager application
provides platform operation and data transfer. So me platform modules are part of the manager
program and some are external programs. The manager application and all client modules are cross platform and have Windows and Linu x versions. The platform includes graphical user interface
modules, calculat ion modules, business logic modules, database of materials properties and structures
and the result storage system. The modules are interacting with each other by the standard
communicat ion protocols. All platform modules can be divided into 3 levels (colu mns fro m left to
right in Figure 1):
GUI level – provides interaction with the user, data input and visualization;
Data storage level – provides in itial data and calculat ion results storage along with access to this
data from GUI and business logic modules;
Calculation level – provides calculation modules management
This mu ltico mponent platform architecture ensures platform scalability and possibility of relat ively
simple module replacement.

4.1 Platform Data Exchange
The core parts of the simu lation p latform making it suitable for mu ltiscale mult iphysics simulation
are data storage system and data exchange module. They co mbine simu lation tools operating on
different physical scales in one calculation project. The key concept of the data exchange system is a
data type, which is a structure of primit ive data fields such as numbers, tables, character strings. The
data types that are available in the project reflect the physical specifics of the OLED research. There
are several tens of the defined data types for transferring material properties, model paramete rs and
calculation results. Since each field of the data type has its physical meaning, the visualizat ion or
editing tools may be associated with certain data types. Also the data of a defined type is used to fill
input and output ports when the computational modules are operated on the GUI desktop.

Figure 1 M ultiscale platform architecture

746

Simulation platform for modeling OLEDs

M.Bogdanova, S.Belousov, I.Valuev, A.Zakirov et al

Each project has an associated data storage, where the structured (typed) data is placed after
fin ishing of each calculation tool and fro m where it is retrieved for constructing the input to the next
calculation tool in the workflo w chain. For examp le, the atomistic level models (quantum chemistry),
meso-scale models (mo lecular dynamics) and device-scale models (FDTD, Ray tracing, etc.) are
connected in our platform with the help of suitable data exchange procedures , extracting the typed data
fro m the calculation outputs (data import) and constructing the application specific input files (data
export). On ly the data important for the purpose of the calculation module in the OLED-specific
computation is extracted this way, so this stage assumes some area-specific filtering of the output.
These procedures (data transfer scripts) are included in the workflow as au xiliary tasks and become
part of the simulation scenario.
Data exchange module imp lements a data storage for the calculation project, where all calculation
results and calculation modules parameters are stored in a structured way in the xml format. Thus
despite of the fact that the platform architecture and the main platfo rm co mponents are universal, the
project data file is application-specific. All the data used in calculation are d ivided into physically
important categories grouped in “ports”. The ports can contain input or output of the calculation
module and some specific parameters such as project status, links to files with results, etc. (Figure 2).
Data exchange module is a script-based data conversion engine. It operates in two regimes
- ext racting important data fro m calculat ion results files and saving th is data to project data
storage;
- template-based generation of the input files for calculat ion models based on the data from project
data file.
Data conversion scripts are written in Java Script language. These scripts are created for each
integrated third-party computational program, while the in-house computational tools are usually
programmed to understand the project file XM L fo rmat and do not require conversion scripts. T hese
scripts can be modified by the user without requirement to modify or reco mpile the other platform
components. This constitutes also the mechanism for th ird party or user-developed simulation tools
adaptation for the simu lation platform. When adapting a new module the corresponding data exchange
scripts should be created while following certain documented s pecifications on data types. As
mentioned in the preceding sections, the physical properties significant for the OLED model are
grouped in data types. New data types may be added as necessary when including new modules,
making the corresponding new data ports available for data exchange in the workflow.

Project status
•Workflow elements calculation status
Modules
•Module info
•Module specific input parameters
•Input ports data (transferable)
•Output ports data (transferable)
•Calculated result files links
Data flows
•Modules data connections and dependencies
Figure 2 Project file structure

747

Simulation platform for modeling OLEDs

M.Bogdanova, S.Belousov, I.Valuev, A.Zakirov et al

4.2 Calculation Task Management
Scenarios created by the user of the simulat ion platform with the help of the graphical user
interface describe mainly the physical problem to be solved and the corresponding data flow between
coarse-level modules. These modules may in turn contain lower level co mputational tasks, which
exact composition and execution sequence is hidden from the user. For examp le, each module
represented as an icon on the desktop may imp ly a sequence of runs of different applications with data
transfers between them. These applications may include actual co mputational programs and also
auxiliary tools such as data converters. The low-level workflow resulting fro m a co mbination of
subtasks for the whole scenario specified by the user is created automatically by the business logic
modules when the user starts calculation. As well as the data exchange scripts, the scenarios specific to
a certain calculation module may be configured or modified by an expert user.
The description of the project workflow is passed to a special co mponent called task manager.
Task manager schedules the tasks on the corresponding computational resources, collects and passes
data between tasks and maintains the status information on the whole computation.
Task manager is created on the base of GridMD workflow lib rary (17). Originally this library was
designed for programmers of (mo lecular dynamics) compute applications allo wing fo r distributed
execution. GridMD is a lightweight portable C++ library, that contains universal APIs for access to
remote systems using SSH, scheduling compute jobs with different cluster queue managers (PBS,
SLURM, Linu x/Windows command shells) as well as Grid environ ments. Job management in
GridMD is organized in the passive mode, not requiring any tas k management agents or special
programs to be running or even installed on the remote system. The workflo w execution is monitored
by a tool (task manager) running on a client machine and authorizing itself on remote co mpute sites
with the user credentials. Apart fro m standard local or remote application launches, GridM D workflo w
may also manage tasks that are described as a local code (compiled as part of task manager) executed
on the client. Moreover, these local tasks may change the workflo w dynamically b y adding addit ional
jobs or dependencies to the existing wo rkflo w graph. This feature simplifies au xiliary processing for a
programmer: it is possible to put all task management procedures into a single portable C++ code.
Data transfer between different compute resources and from the client machine and a compute
resource is performed via the exchange of files. Task manager is able to checkpoint and restart the
whole workflow, to recover fro m different types of errors that can happen while executing
applications. Task manager can easily be terminated on the client machine, for example when the user
exits the simulat ion platform GUI. The workflow in th is case can be restored and continued when task
manager starts again.

5 Graphical User Interface
The platform graphical user interface (GUI) is a client program operated by a user. The GUI
program has Linu x and Windows versions and may be generally run on any local machine. The GUI is
used to operate calculation modules, init ialize data, create workflows, manage the calculation process
and analyze results.

748

Simulation platform for modeling OLEDs

M.Bogdanova, S.Belousov, I.Valuev, A.Zakirov et al

Figure 3 M ultiscale platform: main window

The main window of the platfo rm GUI is separated into three areas: the list of calculat ion mod ules
(left side of Figure 3); the desktop («Workflow» insert) (in the middle o f Figure 3) and the panel of
calculation parameters (the right side of Figure 3). The user can construct a calculation workflow by
dropping the calculation modules and editors from the list on the left and connecting them by arrows.
Each arrow means an automatic data transfer from one calculation module to another.
The right hand panel appears when the user selects one of the module icons on the desktop by a
mouse click and contains two parts: “Module parameters” and “Port parameters”. The “Module
parameters” subpanel may contain several inserts with the input data for all numerical models which
are used in the selected computational module. A ll parameters in this part of the window are mod elspecific and they could not be a result of any previous calculation. Examp les of such model-specific
settings are mesh sizes, the number of iterations, and residue maximu m for the drift -diffusion module.
The “Port parameters” subpanel also contains inputs for the calculation; however they may be (but
not necessarily) obtained as an output from another calculat ion module. These data are called the
transferrable data and may be used for specification o f the workflow. The transferable data is grouped
into so-called ports according to the physical mean ing for the OLED simu lation. The ports may be
used to connect modules on the desktop and are marked by the colored t riangles on the modu le icons.
Each color corresponds to a particular data type. In the case wh en an input port of one module is
connected with an output of another one the data will be transferred auto matically as soon as the
calculation of the first module is comp lete. If there are no workflow connections an input port can be
filled in “by hands” by editing the data fields in the “Port parameters” panel. If the connection exists
the port data can also be viewed after the calculations performed by the previous module.
Each co mputational module generates outputs of two types: transferable and non-transferable
results. Transferable results can be used as input for the next module in the chain and therefore are
sent to the output port; non-transferable but useful results appear in the Module/Results drop-drop
down menu. These results may be v iewed in GUI in various ways, for examp le as a text o r as a
graph/picture.

749

Simulation platform for modeling OLEDs

M.Bogdanova, S.Belousov, I.Valuev, A.Zakirov et al

6 Integrated Database
The OLED simu lation plat form is supplied together with the applicat ion-specific database which is
intended for storage of some finished results or experimental data that ma y be important in other
calculations or have to be shared by a group of researchers. Th us the database is not directly used for
the data exchange between modules, but rather for the results and model parameters exchange for the
platform users. The database contains atomistic, t ransport and optical properties of the materials that
are relevant for OLEDs. These properties are obtained either fro m the experimental data and literature,
or fro m nu merical simu lations, and can be efficiently used for subsequent mo deling and development
of OLEDs. Fro m one side, the database is a warehouse for storing data, and from the other side it is
the source of the data to use as an input for calculation modules.
The database is based on free portable SQL server Fireb ird 2.5, formerly known as Interbase. It is
developed by the open source community and has versions for various operating systems: Windows,
Linux, MAC. The main features of the database include:
x
x
x
x

Client-server architecture – possibility to use centralized database server for pro ject group
or laboratory along with the local user database;
Multiuser access to the database with user rights management;
Data tracking and database change log system. Generation of reports with database
modification history;
Portability – the same code works under a variety of operation systems .

7 Example of Calculation
In Figure 4 we present the workflow for calculation of a single carrier device electrical properties.
This computational chain aims to obtain the energy parameters of charge carriers in an organic
material and then to calcu late the voltage-current characteristic for a single layer device (o rganic layer
between two electrodes).

Figure 4 Example of multilevel calculation of a single carrier device electrical properties

Two co mputational modules on the atomistic scale are involved: the module fo r calcu lation of
microstructure for small mo lecule organic layer (the first unit in the chain), the module fo r calculation
of energy disorder in semiconductors (second unit in the chain).
In a single layer device there are three different materials: anode, cathode and organic layer. Each
material is represented by an icon on the desktop. The parameters of metals (the anode and cathode) in
this calculation are taken fro m the literature and are filled in the input port parameters manually. The

750

Simulation platform for modeling OLEDs

M.Bogdanova, S.Belousov, I.Valuev, A.Zakirov et al

material properties of an organic layer are being calculated with the atomistic modules mentioned in
Section 3. We obtain the density of states for charge carriers directly fro m the molecular dynamics
calculation (b lue arro w), the energy and disorder parameters of HOMO and LUMO levels (rose arrow)
are the result of the quantum chemistry calculation with the layer microstructure (dark brown arrow)
obtained from the molecular dynamics. The material parameters (black arro ws) are collected in the
device geometry module (the third one fro m the right in the chain). This unit allows constructing the
device with any number of layers with co mp lex geomet ry. Then the constructed geometry with
material parameters (brown arrow) is transferred to the charge transport calculation module which
provides the drift-d iffusion simulation o f a device. The results of this calculat ion are processed by the
last unit wh ich performs the plotting of the voltage-current cu rve, the charge carriers and field
distributions.
As an example we p resent the results for a single calculation of this chain for α-NPD material. On
the first stage we obtained the microstructure of the material with the average density U 1.16 g/cm3
(experimentally estimated value is 1.19 g/cm3 (28)), the average distance between the centers of
mo lecules is 5.9 Å. On the second stage we calculated the density of states g(E) for electrons and holes
in the bulk material and defined HOM O and LUM O energ ies and disorder parameters:
ELUMO 1.24 eV, V e 0.07 eV, EHOMO 5.18 eV, V h 0.1 eV . These material parameters
were used in the drift -diffusion simu lations together with the mobility values estimated in the
experiment. As electrodes we used PEDOT:PSS ( W = 5.15 eV) and ITO (W = 5.05 eV). The plots of
the current-voltage curve J(V) and carrier densities along the device n(x) for electrons and p(x) for
holes as displayed in the platform interface are shown in Figure 5.

Figure 5 Voltage-current curve (left) and carriers’ concentration distribution along the device (right).

In the single-carrier (hole only) device the electron concentrations are negligible as expected. The
current-voltage curve is the macroscopic characteristics of the device that may be directly used for
comparison with the experiment. Charge densities inside the layer can usually be not measured
experimentally, but their analysis allows one to understand the charge transfer mechanis ms and
limitations predicted by the model.

751

Simulation platform for modeling OLEDs

M.Bogdanova, S.Belousov, I.Valuev, A.Zakirov et al

8 Conclusions and Future Work
In this work we presented a simu lation p latform which serves as an integrated framework for
mu ltiscale and mult iphysics modeling of Organic Light Emitting Diodes (OLEDs) and their
components. This product is aimed to provide and facilitate several aspects of scientific work which
are listed below.
Nu merical simu lation: the platform includes different nu merical methods to calculate ato mistic
properties of organic molecu les, organic layer microstructure and energy properties of layers, charge
carrier and excitation transport and kinetics, optical p roperties of mult ilayer devices and integrated
properties of a device;
Task management: ability to work with remote h igh performance co mputing (HPC) resources, and
to manage multiple independent parallel tasks;
Data exchange and data storage: automatic data exchange between different physical models, data
storage in a dedicated database;
Graphical user interface: desktop with different co mputational modules and blocks provides an
obvious way to construct computational chains. Starting from constructing an arbitrary OLED device
and specifying its properties, one can comb ine modules at different scales in a variety of flexib le
computational chains, aimed at the full characterization of the considered OLED device, fro m the
atomistic level, through transport and optical properties to the integral device characteristics.
In summary, the proposed platform is a powerful tool for the predict ive modeling and design of
OLEDs and their components.
The future work will be focused on the validation of complex co mputational chains featuring
several physical levels; sensitivity analysis of OLED device properties with respect to different
material parameters at atomistic and mesoscopic level; develop ment of optimization tools for arb itrary
figures of merit (device efficiency etc.); develop ment and integration of various computational
methods, including parameter fitting, extending the set of available simulation tools.
Acknowledgements
This work is partially supported by The Ministry of Science and Education of Russia un der
contract No. 16.523.11.3004 and Presidium of RAS programs 14 and 15.

References
1. W. Brütting et al. 2013, Phys. Status Solidi A 210, pp. 44–65.
2. Efficiency and rate of spontaneous emission in organic electroluminescent devices. M. Furno et
al. 2012, Phys. Rev. B 85, p. 115205.
3. Mensfoort, S. L. M. Effects of disorder on the charge transport and recombinationin organic
light-emitting diodes. Ensched : Gildeprint drukkerijen B.V., 2009.
4. Taflove, A., and Hagness, S. H. Computational Electrodynamics: The Finite Difference TimeDomain Method. Boston : Artech House, 2005.
5. Simplified calculation of dipole energy transport in a multilayer stack using dyadic Green’s
functions. K. Celebi, T. D. Heidel, and M. A. Baldo. 2007, Opt. Express 15, p. 1762.
6. GAMESS (US). [Online] http://www.msg.ameslab.gov/gamess/.
7. Quantum Espresso. [Online] http://www.quantum-espresso.org/.
8. MD-kMC. [Online] http://www.kintechlab.com/products/md-kmc/applications/.
9. GROMACS. [Online] http://www.gromacs.org/)..
10. Long-time behavior of PML absorbing boundaries for layered periodic structures. A. Deinega,
I. Valuev. 2011, Computer Physics Communications, pp. 149-151.

752

Simulation platform for modeling OLEDs

M.Bogdanova, S.Belousov, I.Valuev, A.Zakirov et al

11. Antireflective properties of pyramidally textured surfaces. A. Deinega, I. Valuev, B.
Potapkin, Yu. Lozovik. 2010, Optics Letters 35, pp. 106-108.
12. Bienstman, Peter. CAMFR. [Online] http://camfr.sourceforge.net/.
13. A new finite element realization of the perfectly matched layer method for Helmholtz scattering
problems on polygonal domains in 2D. L. Zschiedrich, R. Kl ose, A. Sch¨adle, and F. Schmi dt.
2006, J. Comput. Appl.188, pp. 12–32.
14. Light Extraction from Organic Light Emitting Diode Substrates: Simulation and Experiment.
Greiner, H. 2007, J. J. Appl. Phys. 46, p. 4125.
15. Quasi-equilibrium hopping drift and field-stimulated diffusion in very thin layers of organic
materials. N.A. Korolev, V.R. Nikitenko, D.V. Ivanov. 2011, Physica i technika poluprovodnikov
45, p. 235.
16. B. Ruhstaller et al. Advanced Numerical Simu lation of Organic Light-emitting Devices.
[book auth.] Oleg Sergiyenko. Optoelectronic Devices and Properties. s.l. : InTech, 2011, pp. 433458.
17. Automatic Distributed Workflow Generation with GridMD Library. I.V. Morozov, I.A.
Valuev. 2011, Computer Physics Communications V. 182, pp. 2052–2058.
18. Bässler, H. 1993, Phys. Status Solidi B 175, p. 15.
19. Effects of disorder on the current density and recombination profile in organic. S. L. M.
Mensfoort, R. Coehoorn. 2009, PHYSICAL REVIEW B, p. 085302.
20. Generalized Einstein relation for disordered semiconductors—implications for device
performance. N.Tessler, Y. Roichman. 2002, Appl. Phys. Lett. 80, p. 1948.
21. Design of high-contrast OLEDs with microcavity effect. D. Poi tras, C.-C. Kuo, and C. Py.
2008, Opt. Express 16, pp. 8003-8015.
22. Light extraction from organic light-emitting diodes enhanced by spontaneously formed
buckles. W.H. Koo et al. 2010, Nat. Photon. 4, p. 222.
23. Light extraction from surface plasmons and waveguide modes in an organic light -emitting
layer by nanoimprinted gratings”,. J. Frischeisen et al. 2011, Opt. Express 19, p. A7.
24. A high-extraction-efficiency nanopatterned organic light-emitting diode. Y.-J. Lee et al. 2003,
Appl. Phys. Lett. 82, p. 3779.
25. Experimental demonstration of increased organic light emitting device output via volumetric
light scattering. J. J. Shiang, T. J. Faircloth, and A. R. Duggal. 2004, J. Appl. Phys. 95, p. 2889.
26. White organic light-emitting diodes with fluorescent tube efficiency. S. Reineke et al. 2009,
Nature 459, pp. 234-238.
27. P. Yeh, A. Yariv. Propagation and control of laser radiation. New York : Wiley, 1984.
28. IM3OLED. [Online] http://www.im3oled.eu/.

753

