Procedia Computer Science
Volume 29, 2014, Pages 1590–1599
ICCS 2014. 14th International Conference on Computational Science

Analysing the Eﬀectiveness of Wearable Wireless Sensors in
Controlling Crowd Disasters
Teo Yu Hui Angela1 , Vaisagh Viswanathan1 , Michael Lees2 , and Wentong Cai1
1
2

School of Computer Engineering, Nanyang Technological University,
Singapore
Computational Science, University of Amsterdam, Science Park 904,
Amsterdam, the Netherlands

Abstract
The Love Parade disaster in Duisberg, Germany lead to several deaths and injuries. Disasters
like this occur due to the existence of high densities in a limited area. We propose a wearable
electronic device that helps reduce such disasters by directing people and thus controlling the
density of the crowd. We investigate the design and eﬀectiveness of such a device through
an agent based simulation using social force. We also investigate the eﬀect of device failure
and participants not paying attention in order to determine the critical number of devices and
attentive participants required for the device to be eﬀective.
Keywords: Crowd Simulation, Disaster Management, Wearable Electronics, Wireless Sensors, Agent
Based Simulation

1

Introduction

The Love Parade was a popular festival and parade in Germany that used to be held periodically
till 2010. In 2010 a crowd rush in the festival area lead to 21 deaths and injuries to more than 500
people resulting in the cancellation of all further Love Parade events. Helbing and Mukerji [5]
concluded that the major reason for the death and destruction was the inadequate capacity of
the holding area and the fact that the parade area could only be entered and exited through
one tunnel. This lead to highly dangerous levels of crowding which in turn lead to high crowd
pressures and eventually death and injuries.
The Love Parade disaster may have been preventable if the people entering through the
tunnel had some way of knowing that it was too crowded in the festival area. In the case of
a tunnel, or the entrance to most major auditoriums this is diﬃcult because the participants
generally have limited visibility because of crowding and structural design. One way to solve
this problem is by providing an indication of global safety (or density) to the relevant individuals
so they can take appropriate action. Low power wearable sensors with basic communication
facilities (as in wireless sensor networks) could be one way of automatically estimating density
1590

Selection and peer-review under responsibility of the Scientiﬁc Programme Committee of ICCS 2014
c The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V.

doi:10.1016/j.procs.2014.05.144

Controlling Crowds through Wearable Wireless Sensors

Angela, Viswanathan, Lees and Wentong

of the surroundings and then provide a means of relaying information back to people. We
assume that it would be possible to develop a simple device that individuals would wear (i.e.,
a small wristband). This device would be able to communicate with other devices within a
ﬁxed distance and then change colour based on the information received. Given such a device
it would, in principle, be possible to develop local information algorithms that would guide
individual’s behavior, e.g., to stop moving. Finally, assuming that it is possible to manufacture
a device and given an eﬀective algorithm for density measurement and information propagation,
there is still an open question regarding how many devices are necessary (i.e., fraction of the
crowd wearing the device) and a further question regarding the impact of people’s attention
(i.e., whether they follow the instructions from the device).
There are several possible algorithms and settings that could be used for such a device,
and to evaluate these in the real world would be prohibitively costly and possibly dangerous.
Thus, we choose to investigate the design and eﬀectiveness of such a device through an agent
based simulation of the crowd [11]. In this paper, we develop a model of a device which is built
into an existing agent based crowd simulation [9, 10] system. Using the model we evaluate
diﬀerent algorithms to gauge the eﬀectiveness that such a system might have in real world
crowd scenarios. We go on to understand the impact that the fraction of individuals wearing
the device has on the system and also the role that a person’s perception has on the overall
safety.
The organization of paper is as follows: Section 2 starts with a review of the relevant
literature. Following this, Section 3 describes the models used for implementation and Section 5
presents the results and analysis of the designed simulation models for a number of diﬀerent
scenarios. Finally we conclude the paper and propose directions for future work.

2

Literature Review

Still [7] studied several crowd disasters and analyzed the eﬀects of crowd densities in moving
crowds. He determined that more than 4 people per square meter for a moving crowd is
dangerous and likely to cause some disaster. Wireless sensors have been used before as a means
of estimating crowd density. In [12], the authors develop a system which uses wireless sensors
and k-means clustering to provide good estimation of density. The authors also highlight issues
related to signal strength and the critical role it plays in obtaining accurate density measures.
Others have used wireless devices and human crowds to create interactive art pieces; in [2] the
authors use wireless sensors to create a crowd generated interactive musical environment.
Zia et al. [3] proposed the LifeBelt which is a wearable navigation and directional guidance
system. This device aims at improving the eﬃciency of evacuation by using its ability to sense
its neighbourhood, extract the spatial relationship of detected neighbours and instructing the
person wearing the LifeBelt on the recommended best course of action. This device has two
mechanisms for working: At the local level, it helps the wearer move according to neighbour
locations to reduce congestions; At a global level, the LifeBelt is controlled by a central control
unit that directs each LifeBelt to an appropriate exit. However, the details of how the global
control is done aren’t explained. Also the testing of the LifeBelt was done using a CA model
whose discrete space inherently limits the analysis that can be done. By using a continuous 2
dimensional space we believe the situation can be studied more accurately. We also use a local
decision mechanism instead of a global one since we believe this is a more practical approach.
1591

Controlling Crowds through Wearable Wireless Sensors

3

Angela, Viswanathan, Lees and Wentong

Device

The basic premise in our modeling of the device is that each device is able to send simple
messages to other devices that are within the device’s sensing range. We assume that the devices
are reliable and have a ﬁxed communication range r. We also assume that devices have some
basic processing power and are able to aggregate incoming messages and that information can be
relayed to other devices through broadcasting to devices within range. With the information
that is received the devices can change into one of two states: green indicating it is safe to
proceed and red indicating stop. We divide the working of device into three distinct phases:
Neighbour Counting, Density Propagation and Information Display.

3.1

Neighbour counting

The ﬁrst way in which a device determines the density around it is by simply counting the
number of devices that it can directly sense around it. If this is greater than a predetermined
threshold (Nτ ) it concludes that it is in an unsafe situation. In principle there are a number
of ways that the device may fail during this phase. If the sensing range of the device isn’t
consistent, e.g., decays with power or has a large error, the device will not be reliable in its
density estimation. In this paper, for all experiments, we assume that the device is reliable and
has a ﬁxed sensor range. In practice, it should be possible to reduce the range of communication
by eﬀectively limiting it below the maximum possible range. This should in principle reduce
error and negate any eﬀect due to battery discharge.

3.2

Density propagation

By a device only knowing about its own density situation we do not gain much more than
a human could do alone, so it is vital that there is a method of message propagation among
the devices. When a device determines it is a unsafe (dense) situation, a device broadcasts an
unsafe message to all other devices in range. The message m is a tuple (i, h) where i is the
unique device ID (where the message originated) and h is a hop count indicating how many
devices have relayed this particular message (initialised to 1).
When a device receives an unsafe message m = (i, h), the receiver relays a new message
m = (i, h + 1) to all its own neighbours. If a device receives a message ma = (i, ha ) the
device will ignore any another incoming message mb = (i, hb ) if hb >= ha . This eﬀectively
provides a shortest path from the unsafe device to all other devices in the environment. This
in turn means that a device will know all reachable (via hops) unsafe devices and the shortest
distance to those devices. Thus each device knows approximately how far it is from a dense
situation through both the number of reachable devices and the total (or average) hop counts.
A transmission threshold is deﬁned hτ which speciﬁes the maximum number of hops that a
message is transmitted. In the simulation this is done by simply not relaying any message
mf = (i, hf ) such that hf = hτ . In reality this could be ignored and all devices would receive
all information. This would require more logic on the receiver to determine how close is close
enough when considering nearby unsafe devices. However, by adding this logic in the relay
process we reduce the power used during the message propagation phase. In all experiments
of this paper we deﬁne hτ = 3, so each unsafe message can reach a maximum of three hops
away. Figure 1 illustrates the situation with hτ = 2 where device 4 does not receive the unsafe
message from device 1, but devices 2 and 3 do.
At any point in time we can consider that the devices form a propagation network, where
nodes are devices and an edge between two nodes indicates the devices are within range of
1592

Controlling Crowds through Wearable Wireless Sensors

Angela, Viswanathan, Lees and Wentong

r
1

1
2

3
4

Figure 1: Information propagation of 2 hops: device 4 does not receive the unsafe message
emanating from device 1, but devices 2 and 3 do.
one another. As the devices (or humans) move, the size of this network, speciﬁcally the giant
component will change, and clearly as the density of people increases the fraction of individuals
inside that giant component will also increase. The fraction of individuals inside the giant
component will also depend on the communication range (see r in Figure 1) of the devices. In
the limit of r → ∞, the propagation network will be a fully connected network (i.e., it will have
N (N −1)
edges) and the fraction of devices in the giant component will be one. An important
2
issue, in respect to the system, is understanding the fraction of individuals in the crowd that
must wear working devices in order to ensure safety. In order for information to propagate
throughout the crowd the giant component must cover a suﬃcient fraction of the entire crowd.
This type of question is well studied in the wireless sensor network literature [8]. However,
the giant component of the network, while important, does not address the issue of suﬃciency.
We do not need the density information to propagate to all members of the crowd, only to
the correct group of individuals, with the correct group being those that are in danger. To
understand this we analyse how the fraction of users wearing the device1 impacts the size of
the giant component and how that in turn leads to the emergence of dangerous densities.

3.3

Information display

Once the density propagation phase completes each device in the system will know if it is in
an unsafe situation or if it is close to a number of other devices that are in an unsafe situation.
1 The

idea of failed devices we consider the same as an individual not wearing a device

1593

Controlling Crowds through Wearable Wireless Sensors

Angela, Viswanathan, Lees and Wentong

Critical to the entire system is how a device determines when the wearer is safe to proceed, i.e.,
once it receives all the information from other devices how it should calculate the danger level.
If the device detects some notion of danger it then needs to instruct the wearer, in some simple
way, how to change their behaviour.
In this paper, we model a device that simply instructs the user to stop moving when it
detects a dense situation and instructs the user to start moving again when the situation clears
up. This device would work in relatively simple environments (e.g., a tunnel like in the Love
parade disaster [5]). The beneﬁt of such a device is that it requires a very simple design where
an LED can switch on or oﬀ (or change colour) depending on the device state- safe or unsafe.
Our hypothesis is that even with a simple and relatively inexpensive device we can signiﬁcantly reduce the number and magnitude of dangerous situations. Each device can appear in
two states safe or unsafe. As described in Section 3.1 this can be done locally by a device simply counting the number of devices it sees and determining if this is greater than the threshold
Ntau . A device can also become unsafe if it receives a number of unsafe messages as described
in Section 3.2. We again use a parameter to specify a threshold Mτ that speciﬁes the number of
unique unsafe messages (i.e., messages emanating from diﬀerent devices) a device must receive
to mark itself as unsafe. The key distinction here is when a device becomes unsafe via message
receipt it does not broadcast this fact to its neighbours. For the experiments here we deﬁne
Mτ = 5 and Nτ = 7.

4

Experiments

In this paper we present two sets of experiments that are intended to investigate the ability of
the device to prevent overcrowding and dangerous situations. In the ﬁrst set of experiments
(Experiment 1 and 2) we assume a perfect device and complete coverage (i.e., all individuals
are wearing a device). We look at two diﬀerent scenarios, a simple single room exit situation
(see Figure 2a) and a corridor (narrowing) scenario (see Figure 2b).
The second set of experiments (experiments 3 and 4) is intended to show how the propagation
network, and overall system performance, is aﬀected by the fraction of individuals wearing the
device and the fraction of individuals listening (or paying attention to the device). Note that
experiment 3 and 4 assess two very diﬀerent aspects of the system. With fewer people wearing
working devices the underlying propagation network is impacted and so this can severely impact
the level of information transmitted through the crowd. If some portion of people ignore the
device (i.e., don’t stop when told) then this doesn’t impact the information that is transmitted,
only the behavior of individuals.
The simulation was implemented in Java using the popular MASON [6] library which provides most of the tools necessary for agent-based discrete event simulation. A continuous 2D
environment is used for the simulation with the area being divided into open areas and polygonal obstacles that deﬁne the boundaries of rooms or tunnels to simulate diﬀerent scenarios.
A pre-speciﬁed exit path is created for each scenario such that from every point in the environment, at least one waypoint is visible. Each waypoint is numbered with the starting point
having the lowest and the ﬁnal destination the highest value. Each autonomous agent has a
simple behavior whereby they proceed towards the highest value waypoint that is currently
visible. In proceeding to this point each agent must avoid collisions with the other agents. The
simulation uses the Social Force model [4] to avoid collisions with other moving human agents
and any obstacles. The social force model was chosen because it is one of the most popular and
has been calibrated [1] and shown to agree best with real world data [10]. All experiments are
repeated twenty times using diﬀerent initial conﬁgurations of the agents. Each experiment ends
1594

Controlling Crowds through Wearable Wireless Sensors

(a) Layout for Scenario 1

Angela, Viswanathan, Lees and Wentong

(b) Layout for Scenario 2

Figure 2: The layouts used for the two scenarios in the experiments

when all agents exit the environment. At each time step the agents and devices are executed.
Executing the agent involves, ﬁrst the agent choosing the appropriate way point, and secondly
determining a velocity using the social force model (with a preferred velocity towards the next
way point). Once the agent has calculated it’s new velocity, and prior to actually moving, the
agent checks its device. If the agent’s device indicates unsafe (e.g., turns red) then the agent
tries to stop moving by setting its preferred velocity to zero; the eﬀective velocity is decided by
the social force calculation. Once all the agents are executed, the devices are updated. This
involves the density calculation and propagation procedures described in sections 3.1 and 3.2.
The time step δt , of the simulation is chosen based on the requirements for the Social Force
model, for all experiments δt = 0.05s. Currently we assume that all the device procedures (i.e.,
density calculation and propagation) can occur within a single timestep. This may be somewhat
unrealistic, but we aim for a best case scenario in the paper, fully aware that extra latency may
perturb the information distribution, which in turn may limit the eﬀectiveness of the device.
The number of agents holding a device is determined by a device holding probability ph and
the number of agents following the device they wear is determined by a follow probability pf .
To assess safety we measure the density distribution of individuals in the environment,
this forms a longitudinal density distribution of the entire environment. This density map is
obtained over a 1m x 1m grid across the entire environment. From this density distribution we
can calculate, along time, the number of unsafe regions. A region (a 1m x 1m cell) is deﬁned
as unsafe if the density reaches a certain density threshold ρτ in terms of the number of people
in that region. We currently deﬁne ρτ = 5 [7], so a 1m x 1m space is unsafe (or dangerous) if
it contains 5 or more people. We then calculate the number of unsafe regions that develop as a
function of simulation time, we can also measure the average number of unsafe regions across
an entire simulation.
1595

Controlling Crowds through Wearable Wireless Sensors

(a) Without Device

Angela, Viswanathan, Lees and Wentong

(b) With Device

Figure 3: Density Maps for Scenario 1

(a) Without Device

(b) With Device

Figure 4: Density Maps for Scenario 2

5
5.1

Results
Experiment 1: density map

In the ﬁrst experiment, we calculate the maximum density map for each scenario. We record
the maximum density map for a particular run, that is each cell in the density map stores the
maximum density seen at that cell over during the entire (single) simulation run. The density
maps in Figure 3 and Figure 4 show the maximum density map averaged over all twenty
repititions.
Figure 3 shows that for scenario one the device manages to reduce the maximum density
seen in the simulation. This is most noticeable around the door way, where most people are
pushing to the exit. Figure 4 also shows that the device manages to reduce the unsafe regions
in scenario two, especially near the corridor entrance and along the corridor itself. These
results indicate that the device would provide a feasible approach to reducing risk in crowded
1596

Controlling Crowds through Wearable Wireless Sensors

Angela, Viswanathan, Lees and Wentong

(a) Scenario 1

(b) Scenario 2

Figure 5: unsafe regions as a function of time

(a) Scenario 1

(b) Scenario 2

Figure 6: Eﬀect of ph on safety
situations. Scenario two is perhaps the most interesting of the two as this closely reﬂects the
types of scenarios we had described in the introduction, where many of the individuals would
be unable to see the congestion ahead.

5.2

Experiment 2: unsafe regions as a function time

In the next experiment, we measure the number of unsafe regions (areas with more than 5
people per square meter) as a function of time. These are areas which could lead to dangerous
conditions and so should be avoided. Figure 5 shows this for both scenarios. There are almost
no unsafe regions in either scenario when the device is used.

5.3

Experiment 3: eﬀect of more participants than devices

Next we measure the number of devices that are required for the device to have an eﬀect on
safety. We do this by plotting the total number of unsafe regions that develop as a function of
the probability that an agent holds a device (ph ) in Figure 6.
Figure 6a shows that in scenario one the relationship between the fraction of individuals
wearing a device and the number of unsafe regions follows a reverse sigmoid function. The
graph also shows that with less than half of the individuals wearing a device the reduction
in the number of unsafe regions is negligible. Once 70% of individuals wear the device we
see the number of unsafe regions dropping to around 30% of the no device case (960 to 320).
With all individuals wearing the device the number of unsafe regions reduces to almost zero.
1597

Controlling Crowds through Wearable Wireless Sensors

(a) Scenario 1

Angela, Viswanathan, Lees and Wentong

(b) Scenario 2

Figure 7: Eﬀect of attention on safety
Figure 6a shows that scenario two generates fewer unsafe regions, but also that is necessary
to have a higher number of individuals wearing the device in order to reduce the number of
unsafe regions. In this case to reduce the number of unsafe regions to around 30% we need
approximately 85% of individuals to wear a device. This makes sense when one considers the
critical places of information transmission. It is important that the devices in the corridor
can transmit information back along the corridor to the entrance ensuring people wait before
entering the corridor. As we randomly assign the devices to individuals we need a high fraction
of ph in order to ensure suﬃcient density along the corridor, which in turn ensures that suﬃcient
hops can be made to transmit the information.

5.4

Experiment 4: eﬀect of attention

Finally, we measure the eﬀect of attention (or following) on safety. Figure 7 shows how the
fraction of people that pay attention to their device (follow the device instructions) aﬀects
overall safety, with safety again measured as the number of unsafe regions. Recall that despite
individuals not paying attention to their devices, the devices can still act as a repeater in the
wireless sensor network and therefore still contribute to safety. The relationship between the
fraction of users following the device and unsafe regions seems to be much more linear (slight
exponential decay) than the fraction of individuals wearing the device. In both scenarios as
long as 50% of individuals pay attention to the device we see the number of unsafe regions drop
to around 30% of the no device case (see Figure 7a and see Figure 7b).

6

Conclusions And Future Work

In this paper we have investigated the feasibility of using low power wearable sensors with
basic communication facilities (as in wireless sensor networks) as a means of ensuring crowd
safety in high density situations. We have shown that in principle such devices could reduce the
frequency at which dangerous situations occur. Our approach was to use known models from
crowd simulation to investigate the interplay between the human dynamics and the propagation
of information between devices. We identiﬁed two critical issues that would determine the
success of such a system, ﬁrstly the number of individuals that must wear the device in order to
have some impact and secondly how important it is that individuals follow the instructions of
the device. For the two scenarios we investigated it is clear that it is necessary to ensure a high
number of individuals wear the device (more that 50%), this was especially the case in situations
1598

Controlling Crowds through Wearable Wireless Sensors

Angela, Viswanathan, Lees and Wentong

where bottlenecks occur (e.g., corridors). Perhaps less critical, but sill important, is the need
for individuals to follow the guidance of the device. If such devices could be manufactured
cheaply, a system such as this could be integrated into event wristbands (often used at events
like the Love Parade) that could be given to every individual. With carefully designed lighting
(or vibrations) the device should provide an excellent warning system for crowd members.
In future it may be possible to investigate a second device that is slightly more sophisticated
and instructs the user to avoid a particular direction. This would be particularly helpful for
indoor scenarios where multiple exits may exist. The user could use this information to avoid
the dense region and move towards a safer exit. To do so each device would divide its sensor
range into quadrants. When a device receives a valid unsafe message (i.e., with minimum
hop count) it can mark that message, indicating which neighbour it came from and in which
quadrant that neighbour resides. The quadrant(s) with a high number of devices indicating
an unsafe situation are assumed to be forbidden These forbidden quadrants will be displayed
clearly to the user, so as to inﬂuence them to avoid the dense region.

References
[1] D. Bauer. Comparing pedestrian movement simulation models for a crossing area based on real
world data. In Richard D. Peacock, Erica D. Kuligowski, and Jason D. Averill, editors, Pedestrian
and Evacuation Dynamics, pages 547–556. Springer US, 2011.
[2] Mark Feldmeier and Joseph A. Paradiso. An interactive music environment for large groups with
giveaway wireless motion sensors. Comput. Music J., 31(1):50–67, March 2007.
[3] Alois Ferscha and Kashif Zia. Lifebelt: Silent directional guidance for crowd evacuation. International Symposium on Wearable Computers, pages 1–8, 2009.
[4] Dirk Helbing and Peter Molnar. Social Force Model for Pedestrian Dynamics. Physical Review E,
cond-mat.stat-mech:4282–4286, May 1995.
[5] Dirk Helbing and P. Mukerji. Crowd disasters as systemic failures: analysis of the love parade
disaster. EPJ Data Science, 2012.
[6] Sean Luke, Claudio Cioﬃ-Revilla, Liviu Panait, Keith Sullivan, and Gabrial Balan. MASON: A
Multi-Agent Simulation Environment. Simulation : Transactions of the society for Modeling and
Simulation International, 82(7):517–527, 2005.
[7] G Keith Still. Crowd density, November 2013.
[8] Xiaoyuan Ta, Guoqiang Mao, and B. D O Anderson. On the giant component in wireless multi-hop
networks. In Wireless Communications and Networking Conference, 2009. WCNC 2009. IEEE,
pages 1–6, 2009.
[9] Vaisagh Viswanathan, Chong Eu Lee, Michael Harold Lees, Siew Ann Cheong, and Peter M. A.
Sloot. Quantitative comparison between crowd models for evacuation planning and evaluation.
European Physical Journal B, 2014. preprint, http://arxiv.org/abs/1401.0366v1.
[10] Vaisagh Viswanathan and Michael Lees. Modeling and Analyzing the Human Cognitive Limits for
Perception in Crowd Simulation. In Marina L Gavrilova, Keneth CJ Tan, and Cong-Vinh Phan,
editors, Transactions on Computational Science, pages 1–20. Springer.
[11] Yongwei Wang, Michael Lees, Wentong Cai, Suiping Zhou, and Malcolm Yoke Hean Low. Cluster
based partitioning for agent-based crowd simulations. In Winter Simulation Conference, WSC ’09,
pages 1047–1058. Winter Simulation Conference, 2009.
[12] Yaoxuan Yuan, Chen Qiu, Wei Xi, and Jizhong Zhao. Crowd density estimation using wireless
sensor networks. In Mobile Ad-hoc and Sensor Networks (MSN), 2011 Seventh International
Conference on, pages 138–145, 2011.

1599

