Available online at www.sciencedirect.com

Procedia Computer Science 4 (2011) 1048–1057

International Conference on Computational Science, ICCS 2011

Lattice Boltzmann Simulation of non-Darcy Flow in Porous Media
Manuel Haserta,∗, J¨org Bernsdorfa , Sabine Rollera
a German

Research School for Simulation Sciences GmbH and RWTH Aachen University, Schinkelstr. 2a, 52062 Aachen, Germany

Abstract
Flow through porous media at low Reynolds numbers has been studied in detail with the Lattice Boltzmann
Method (LBM) for applications such as groundwater ﬂow, pollution transport or adsorption processes. In contrast
to that, medium to high Reynolds number ﬂow through porous media, which occurs in many areas of industrial
engineering, has not yet widely been investigated on a microscopic level by detailed numerical simulations.
In this paper, we focus on air ﬂow through a porous medium, because our far goal entails the simulation of acoustic
excitations from the turbulent ﬂow leaving the porous medium. We validate the LBM at Reynolds numbers beyond
the limit of Darcy’s law, and compare the results of direct numerical simulation with those achieved by applying a
Smagorinsky-type large eddy turbulence model. For this, we performed ﬂow simulations through a generic (periodic)
porous medium at a variety of resolutions to investigate the eﬀect of LES modelling at lower mesh sizes, where the
subgrid scale eﬀects become important.
Keywords: Lattice Boltzmann Method, non-Darcy ﬂow, porous medium, turbulence, aeroacoustics, TRT, LES
Smagorinsky

1. Introduction
The ﬂow behaviour through porous media has long been of interest to scientists and engineers due to the importance of its applications [1]. We focus on an industrial application, namely the noise emission of a pneumatic device
with a porous medium acting as a silencer. Our far goal is to simulate the sound generation from the exhaust process,
which results from the air ﬂow being forced through the porous medium silencer. The porous medium ﬂow and the
fact that aeroacoustics is a weakly compressible phenomenon makes the Lattice Boltzmann Method (LBM) an ideal
candidate for solving this problem. In this paper however, we will only address the pore scale ﬂow and recapture, that
the aeroacoustics are reproduced accurately. We will not show the actual acoustic emission of the turbulent outﬂow.
When solving aeroacoustic problems, one is confronted with the notion of scale separation. The main ﬂow regime is
dominated by convective forces which transport ﬂuid ﬂuctuations at an average velocity corresponding to the main
ﬂow. This regime is characterised by small length scales O(mm) and a large amount of energy. The structures are
dissipated and diﬀused and have little inﬂuence on the ﬂuid behaviour at a long distance. The acoustic regime captures
the pressure ﬂuctuations with little energy which are transported with the speed of sound. The dissipation is low, so
the transport can occur over a large distance and the acoustic far ﬁeld is calculated in the range of O(meters).
∗ Corresponding

author
Email address: m.hasert@grs-sim.de (Manuel Hasert)

1877–0509 © 2011 Published by Elsevier Ltd. Open access under CC BY-NC-ND license.
Selection and/or peer-review under responsibility of Prof. Mitsuhisa Sato and Prof. Satoshi Matsuoka
doi:10.1016/j.procs.2011.04.111

Manuel Hasert et al. / Procedia Computer Science 4 (2011) 1048–1057

1049

The acoustic and main ﬂow ﬁeld can either be solved separately, or coupled as in direct acoustic simulations (DAS).
In a separate solution of the scales, the ﬂow of information is modelled such that it only occurs from the main ﬂow
ﬁeld to the acoustic ﬁeld. We focus on the direct resolution of both scales in order to model eventual responses of the
acoustic to the main ﬂow ﬁeld.
The ﬂuid is pressed through the porous structure of the silencer, where energy is dissipated. The turbulent vortical
outﬂow is the main cause of acoustic noise. This micro-pore scale adds a third regime in the order of O(10μm). We
try to solve this discrepancy between the length scales by modelling the ﬂow through the porous medium with underresolved channels of just three grid points.
The validity of Darcy’s law, which relates the pressure drop in a porous medium linearly to an average velocity, is
widely accepted for low pressure drop diﬀerences or ﬂow velocities. This relation however, is only valid for very low
Reynolds numbers Re < 1. Velocity terms of higher order have been added to Darcy’s equation in Forchheimer’s formulation to account for the non-linear relation between pressure drop and velocity, that dominates at higher Reynolds
numbers. These higher order terms can be seen as an extension of Darcy’s law for inertial eﬀects, vanishing for lower
velocities, where viscous eﬀects dominate. The eﬀects in these non-Darcian regimes are recognized in many ﬁelds of
applications [2], such as ground water movement[3] or oil recovery [4] and also for chemical or combustion processes.
The LBM has been widely used for ﬂow calculations through porous media. However, high Reynolds number ﬂows
in these media still remains a relatively open ﬁeld, especially when it comes to turbulence aﬀected ﬂows. The goal of
this paper is to identify the required resolution and the accuracy of the LBM extended with a turbulence model, when
the porous medium is under-resolved.
The remainder of this paper is structured as followed. Section 2 serves as an overview over the literature and gives
a description of ﬂow regimes occurring in porous media, Section 3 introduces the numerical method and the used
turbulence model and boundary conditions. An overview over aeroacoustic considerations is given in Section 4 and
turbulence description and modelling is introduced in Section 5. Validations of porous media ﬂow for various resolutions and Reynolds numbers for a generic porous medium are presented in Section 6 and the engineering application
is described in detail in Section 7. An outlook on future work is given in Section 8.
2. Overview over porous media ﬂows
In porous media, the Reynolds number ReD is expressed with the following speciﬁc quantities. In consolidated
media, the characteristic length lD takes the size of a characteristic pore size. The characteristic velocity uD is taken to
q
with the ﬂow rate q and the porosity φ.
be an average velocity inside the pores, the so-called seepage velocity uD = 1−φ
The porosity φ denotes the ratio of ﬂuid or pore volume V f to total volume Vtot in the porous medium as φ = V f /Vtot .
The Reynolds number then takes the form
uD · lD
ReD =
(1)
ν
with the kinematic viscosity ν of the ﬂuid.
The classiﬁcation of ﬂow regimes inside consolidated media depends on a microscopic or macroscopic point of view
and diﬀers in the literature [5]. On the microscopic scale, Dybbs and Edwards [6] observed four ﬂow regimes: a
laminar regime, which can be subdivided into a steady and unsteady part, a transitional and a fully turbulent part. On
the macroscopic scale, there is the linear, or Darcy regime, the quadratic or Forchheimer regime and the fully turbulent
regime.
1 Viscous, linear regime. In small Reynolds number ﬂows Re < 1, the inertial forces are small compared to the
viscous forces and can be neglected. The Navier-Stokes equations reduce to a pressure gradient and skin friction, i.e.
shear stress inside the pores. Shear stress is proportional to the velocity gradient inside a pore, which macroscopically
yields a linear relation of ﬂuid velocity and pressure drop. This leads to the law of Darcy
−

∂p μ
= u¯ D
∂x
k

(2)

with the superﬁcial average (seepage) velocity u¯ D , the dynamic viscosity of the ﬂuid μ and the permeability k of the
porous medium. As stated above, this relation is only valid for low Reynolds numbers. On the macroscopic view, this
regime equals the Darcy regime, because Darcy’s law is valid.

1050

Manuel Hasert et al. / Procedia Computer Science 4 (2011) 1048–1057

Flows with higher Re are dominated by non-linear interactions between the inertial, viscous and pressure forces,
leading to a non-linear relation between velocity and pressure drop.
2 Weakly inertial, laminar steady regime. In this regime, the ﬂow is still laminar and steady. With increasing Reynolds
number 1 < Re < 10, the inertial forces, which are non-linear in the Navier-Stokes equations, aﬀect the momentum
conservation. Macroscopically, a non-linear relation between the pressure drop and the ﬂow velocity can be observed,
which was ﬁrst described by Forchheimer as [7]
−

∂p μ
= uD + βρuD 2
∂x
k

(3)

The constant factor β is known to be mainly dependent on the ﬂow path tortuosity and is usually recovered from
experiments. In this regime, the boundary layer starts to develop while an intertial core ﬂow grows with the Reynolds
number. This core ﬂow is responsible for the non-linearity. The core ﬂow increases and takes a greater inﬂuence on
the ﬂow with increasing Re. This regime can persist until Re < 150.
3 Inertial, transitional, unsteady regime. Inertial forces grow with the Reynolds number and cause instabilities.
Dybbs and Edwards [6] observed regular ﬂuctuations and found the regime 150 < Re < 300 and transitions to
turbulence may occur.
4 Fully turbulent regime. At Reynolds numbers Re > 300, the inertial forces dominate over the viscous terms and
create random, unsteady ﬂow patterns and turbulence. The turbulent ﬂow occurs with higher permeability only.
Friction coeﬃcient. The friction factor is a dimensionless number for quantifying the pressure loss in porous media
ﬂow. It is a function of the pressure drop and the porosity φ
f =

∂p dP φ3
.
∂x ρ0 u2D 1 − φ

(4)

The friction coeﬃcient Λ is calculated from the friction factor by multiplication with the Reynolds number ReD as
Λ = f · ReD . It can be seen as a kind of dimensionless permeability and will be used throughout this paper.
3. Numerical Method
The Boltzmann equation [8] describes the time evolution of a particle distribution function f , which deﬁnes the
probability to ﬁnd a particle at a given time t at a certain position in space x with a given velocity e. The Lattice
Boltzmann equation is a special discretisation hereof, working on a discrete set of directions, which form the lattice
for the propagation of the discrete distribution functions fi (x, t) at each time step. For the typically used D3Q19 lattice,
q = 19 discrete velocities ei are chosen. The simpliﬁed LBM equation without a forcing term reads
⎧
eq
δ
⎪
⎪
⎨ τt ( fi (x, ei , t) − fi (ρ, u)) for BGK
(5)
fi (x + ei δt , ei , t + δt ) = fi (x, ei , t) − C, C = ⎪
δ
δ
⎪
2τ−1
⎩− t n+i − t n−i
for TRT with τev = τ, τod = 58 8τ−1
.
τev
τod
The collision operator C is in the simplest form approximated with the Bhatnagar Gross Krook (BGK) model, where
the distribution functions are relaxed towards the thermodynamic equilibrium distributions f eq with the relaxation
time τ. The Navier-Stokes equations are recovered in the small Knudsen number limit by the application of the
Chapman-Enskog procedure. The viscosity of ﬂuid is expressed via the collision frequency τ as
ν = c2s τ −

1 δ2x
.
2 δt

(6)

The model is valid for isothermal and weakly compressible assumptions. The isothermal assumption relates pressure
and density with the speed of sound as p = ρc2s .

Manuel Hasert et al. / Procedia Computer Science 4 (2011) 1048–1057

1051

3.1. BGK incompressible collision model
For the single-relaxation time BGK model, He and Luo [9] introduced an incompressible formulation. A local
pressure distribution function pi = c2s fi serves as an independent variable with a slightly altered local equilibrium
distribution function
u2
(ei · u) (ei · u)2
=
w
+
−
δp
+
p
(7)
peq
i
0
i
c2s
2c4s
2c2s
using a pressure ﬂuctuation δp around the mean pressure p0 . In contrary to the standard BGK formulation, this model
does not include the ﬁxed relation between pressure and density. With the standard formulation a ﬂow rate increase can
be observed under strong pressure gradients. The incompressible model, pressure and density are primarily deﬁned
by the constant rate p0 and the ﬂow rate is kept constant over the computational domain[10].
3.2. Two relaxation time collision model
An alternative relaxation model using two relaxation times (TRT) was proposed by Ginzburg [11]. The TRT
model performs the collision on a symmetric (even) n+i and anti-symmetric (odd) part n−i of the collision operator C
with two distinct relaxation times τev and τod , of which τev can be selected freely as in the BGK model and τod is
chosen for the wall positions to be independent of τ according to Eq. 5. The TRT model can be seen as a sub-class
of the Multiple Relaxation Time (MRT) model [12]. The explicit transformation to the moment space as in the MRT
model is not necessary, which decreases the computational eﬀort comparable to BGK models. With this model, we
also use an incompressible formulation, simulating the pressure variance δp about a mean reference value of p0 as in
the BGK incompressible model.
3.3. Boundary conditions
Due to the high superﬁcial area in porous media, the inﬂuence of boundary condition eﬀects has to be considered.
Diﬀerent wall boundary conditions have been developed [13] which diﬀer in accuracy, mass conservation properties
and the computational eﬀort. Pan [14] has emphasized the importance of a careful choice of wall boundaries and
showed the dependence of the wall position on the relaxation parameter, especially for SRT models. For the TRT
model, we choose the set of relaxation parameters τev , τod according to the Magic parameters in [11] which cures
the dependency of the wall position. The non-slip wall boundaries which are incorporated as half way bounceback boundaries. For the inﬂow we use velocity boundaries and at the outﬂow the corresponding pressure boundary
conditions as proposed by Bouzidi [15]. These boundary conditions yield a second order accuracy, which corresponds
to the order of the numerical scheme.
4. Aeroacoustic sound generation
Since Lighthill’s works [16] it is well known, that the sound created by turbulent shear ﬂows resembles an acoustic
quadrupole source. In this section we give a short overview of the validation of the numerical scheme for aeroacoustic phenomena of such type. Acoustic waves are small pressure ﬂuctuations which are several orders of magnitude
smaller than the ﬂuctuations of the ﬂow ﬁeld, propagated with the speed of sound c s . Several authors have shown the
validity of the LBM for acoustic wave propagation processes[17]. It was found to be a low dispersion and dissipation
scheme which has comparable accuracy to a higher order ﬁnite diﬀerence scheme in space and time by Mari´e et al.
[18]. The aeroacoustic capabilities of the LBM have also been shown in Wilde [19], Crouse et al. [20], Li et al. [21]
and Hasert et al. [22] and will quickly be revised here.
A well studied standard test case for which resembles a quadrupole involves a pair of vortices spinning around a common center while emitting acoustic waves. The behaviour of the system is equivalent to a spinning acoustic quadrupole
which is the typical sound production mechanism of turbulent shear ﬂow. The vortices have equal circulation Γ and
spin on a circle with radius r0 at angular speed ω = Γ/(4πr02 ) and a rotating Mach number Marot = u/c s = Γ/(4πr0 c s ).
M¨uller & Obermeier [23] derived an analytical solution for the acoustic far ﬁeld, where the vortices are considered as
point sources in an inviscid ﬂuid. One solution for the incompressible near ﬂow ﬁeld and one for the acoustic far ﬁeld
are matched asymptotically in an intermediate domain to give an asymptotically valid solution expressed by a ﬂow
potential Φ with ∇Φ = u as
Γk2 r02 (2)
H2 (kr)ei2(ωt−θ)
(8)
Φ(z, t) =
8

1052

Manuel Hasert et al. / Procedia Computer Science 4 (2011) 1048–1057

with k = 2ω/c s and H2(2) being the second kind Hankel function of order two. The acoustic pressure ﬂuctuations in the
far ﬁeld solution can be extracted from the equation above as the real part of the complex potential Φ and the initial
velocity ﬁeld can be obtained by diﬀerentiating with respect to z.
4.1. Simulation setup and numerical results
The simulation is performed on an equidistant grid with a total size of (400r0 )2 with the rotational radius r0
resolved with δ x = 10 grid points. The initial Mach number at the core radius rc was MaRot,ini = 5.196 · 10−2 and the
viscosity ν = 4.168 · 10−5 was chosen. The initial velocity ﬁeld is derived from Eq. 8 and a constant pressure is set.
This introduces errors, which dissolve after some vortex revolutions.
The analytical solution described above is compared to a temporal and spatial distribution of the acoustic pressure
from the simulation results. As a direct acoustic simulation is performed, the sum of the incompressible and acoustic
pressure is calculated. The acoustic pressure is obtained by subtracting the incompressible solution from the total
pressure level. We use dimensionless parameters for pressure p /(c2s ρ0 ), radius r/r0 and time tc s /r0 .
Spatial pressure behaviour. Figure 1(a) shows a snapshot at time step t = 750 of the acoustic pressure, from the center
of rotation through a vortex center to the domain limit. Near the vortex center, the amplitude error εα is around 30%
but decreases when advancing outside from the center of spinning motion. The error near the vortex centers might
be due to errors in the analytical solution [22]. In the acoustic near ﬁeld, the amplitude is slightly underpredicted,
whereas the phase shifts slightly.
4

analytical solution
numerical solution

50

r/r0

100

150

200

-2

p‘/ρ0∙cS2∙10-5

p‘/ρ0∙cS2∙10-5

0

analytical solution
numerical solution

4

2

2
0
-2

-4

800

(a) Spatial acoustic pressure plot at t = 750

900

1000

1100

t/c0∙r0

(b) Temporal acoustic pressure

Figure 1: Comparison of analytical solution and numerical results of spatial and temporal acoustic pressure distribution

Temporal pressure behaviour. In Figure 1(b) the temporal acoustic pressure at a distance r = 150 r0 from the center
is shown. Due to initial perturbations from the constant pressure initialization, the phase had to be matched to the
analytical solution. The amplitude is slightly lower than predicted in the analytical solution. The phase matches
well at t = 800 but then the wave periods increase. The reason for this increase is considered to be due to the
neglected viscosity in the analytical solution. In the simulation however, the vortex revolution speed is decreased over
time by the inclusion of viscosity. This results in an oscillation frequency that decreases over time in the numerical
experiments. The decreased amplitude can also be attributed to the viscosity eﬀects as the dissipation is added to the
spatial energy distribution of the spreading waves.
5. Turbulent ﬂow simulation in porous media
It is nowadays widely accepted that ﬂow through porous media is prone to develop a turbulent behaviour under
certain conditions (see e.g., [24]). The Reynolds number for the laminar-turbulent transition can be assumed signiﬁcantly below Re ≈ 2300, the starting point of transition for pipe ﬂow. A reason for this is the ﬂow disturbance caused
by the porous media, which can trigger any kind of irregular behaviour such as vortex shedding at Reynolds numbers
in the order of below Re = 100.
When assuming a turbulent ﬂow regime, the mesh resolution of a numerical simulation must be suﬃciently ﬁne to
capture all scales of turbulent structures. A good rule of thumb is the estimation of Kolmogorov for the ratio of largest
to smallest vortices for with the Reynolds number
L 4/3
∝ Re
η

(9)

Manuel Hasert et al. / Procedia Computer Science 4 (2011) 1048–1057

1053

For the considered medium Reynolds numbers of Re ≈ 200 this estimation predicts that a mesh resolution must be
able to cover about one order of magnitude from smallest to largest vortex structures.
The LBM enables us to perform direct numerical simulations (DNS) at suﬃciently high resolution in complex geometries. This allows us to gain insight into the development of complex transient ﬂow structures at the onset of
turbulence as demonstrated in the following chapter 6.
5.1. Turbulence modelling
From the large set of turbulence models the subgrid models are particularly suitable for implementation into an
LBM ﬂow solver. A widely used approach is the Smagorinsky subgrid model [25]. For this model, one assumes the
existence of turbulent ﬂow structures of diﬀerent orders of magnitude in size. Due to limited mesh resolution, the
smallest vortices are not resolved by the mesh applied in the numerical simulation, therefore their dissipative eﬀect is
captured by a locally increased ﬂow viscosity.
This so called turbulent viscosity νturb results from additional dissipation caused by the turbulent eddy motion and
decay. The turbulent eddy viscosity is deﬁned as
νturb = C 2s Δx2 Q¯

(10)

where C s is a constant deﬁned by Smagorinsky [26] and usually takes the values C s = 0.05...0.2. A variety of subgrid
models exist, whereas the quality of the results depend on the application and the implementations [27].
The model operator Q¯ depends on the employed model [28], and is in the Smagorinsky model a function of the stress
tensor S i, j . These subgrid scale based turbulence models can naturally be incorporated into the LBM by altering the
relaxation time τ0 , which deﬁnes the viscosity as deﬁned in Eq. 6 and hence, the resulting viscosity reads
νtotal = ν0 + νturb =
τturb = 3νturb =

1
2

2τ0 − 1 τturb
+
,
6
3

τtotal = 3νtotal +

τ0 + 18C 2s Δx2 Q¯ − τ0 ,

Q¯ =

1
2

Qi j · Q i j

2

(11)
(12)

i, j

We implemented the Smagorinsky model for the TRT model by additionally calculating the equilibrium distributions
as in the BGK model. The strain rate calculation is then analoguous to the BGK implementation.
A secondary highly welcome eﬀect of the Smagorinsky model is the stabilization of the LBM simulation, because
higher viscosity is realized via local increase of the relaxation time τ.
To the best knowledge of the authors, very few has been published concerning LES turbulence modelling with the
LBM for ﬂow through porous media. Kuwahara et al. [29] have investigated turbulence in a regular, periodic array of
square cylinders with the usage of LES simulations.
A careful comparison of a properly resolved DNS with LES simulations at reduced mesh resolutions is therefore
performed in the following chapter. Besides a qualitative comparison of ﬂow patterns, the dimensionless pressure loss
(friction factor) for the ﬂow through the porous structure is taken as a measure. Ideally, an LES simulation should
recover the same friction factor as the DNS, but at a much lower resolution.
6. Porous media simulations with the Lattice Boltzmann Method
There has been a vast amount of studies about ﬂow simulations using the LBM for porous media geometries.
The simple marker-and-cell method in combination with bounce-back wall boundary conditions (or more advanced
approaches) easily allows setting up highly complex geometric boundaries, and therefore makes LBM a natural choice
for porous media ﬂow. Alas, high Reynolds number ﬂow simulation are prone to instabilities with the LBM [30] and
the choice of the simulation parameters is restricted:
1. The viscosity can be tuned by the relaxation time τ. Low viscosities are modelled by converging the τ towards
its stability limit, namely τ → 0.5. Especially when a larger amount of the ﬂow area is occupied by solid
fraction, simulations have a tendency to become unstable.
2. The compressibility error increases with the ﬂow velocity with an order of O(Ma2 ).

1054

Manuel Hasert et al. / Procedia Computer Science 4 (2011) 1048–1057

3. Resolution. The characteristic length of Re is given in terms of lattice units. A higher resolution leads to a
higher Reynolds number by O(n), and relaxation times closer to the stability limit can be used. However, the
computational eﬀort increases with an order higher than O(n3 ).
Considering these facts, one is severely restricted in achieving a possibly high Reynolds number. MRT models can
help to increase the achievable Re about a factor of 4 [31]. Subgrid turbulence models like the LES Smagorinsky
model locally increase the viscosity in areas where the ﬂuid undergoes large strain rates, which helps in stabilizing
the numerical scheme.
6.1. Simulation setup
We employ a scalable generic porous geometry to study the behaviour of the ﬂow and the dependency on simulation parameters such as the resolution. The concept of unit cells is commonly used in mineralogy and describes
the arrangement of atoms in the smallest regular structure. The porous array is made up of alternating body-centered
(bcc) and face-centered (fcc) cells in the x-direction, where the domain size gy = gz takes the dimension of the unit
cell. We then set the center of cubes with edge length dC = 0.6 · gy to the atom positions. The domain is extend in yand z-direction into inﬁnity by applying periodicity. This leads to a porosity of φ = 0.5148 with a pore channel height
of dP = 0.4gy . For the calculation of the Reynolds number ReD we use the channel height dP , the average velocity
inside the porous medium uD = q/(1 − φ) and the ﬂuid viscosity ν.
B

A
Inlet
Velocity Boundary
Block profile uin

dP

Periodic boundary

Outlet
Pressure Boundary p0

gy

dC

Y
X

bcc

fcc

bcc

fcc

gx

Figure 2: Generic porous medium setup consisting of arrays of unit cells with cubes, cut through middle z-plane

Before and after the porous medium, the computational domain is extended to account for inﬂow and outﬂow eﬀects.
Especially at higher Reynolds numbers, recirculation and vortex shedding occurs after the porous medium, which is
why the free ﬂow domain behind the medium is extended to around 0.4g x . An inlet velocity uin is assigned with a
constant velocity proﬁle, whereas at the outlet, a reference pressure of p0 is set.
6.2. Friction coeﬃcient and stability
The purpose of these initial simulations is the validation of our LBM implementation for ﬂow through the generic
porous media at a wide range of Reynolds numbers, as well as investigations concerning the stability. We performed
simulations for a set of Reynolds numbers (0.001 ≤ Re ≤ 100) at three diﬀerent mesh resolutions.
At ﬁrst, we investigate the dependency of the friction coeﬃcient Λ from the Reynolds number. As can be seen
in Figure 3(a), the linear ﬂow regime (1) can be observed up to a Reynolds number of Re < 1. In the range of
1 < Re < 10 the Forchheimer-regime (2) starts, developing into a quadratic dependency of the friction coeﬃcient on
the Reynolds number. According to Dybbs[6], the transition towards turbulent ﬂow occurs at 150 < Re < 300 (3).
Our simulation results correspond qualitatively well to those from other comparable LBM simulations [32].
For a given resolution of the generic porous medium, the maximum achievable Reynolds number for a direct
numerical simulation (DNS) is limited by stability issues, as stated above. In order to estimate the minimum required
resolution for each model, we perform studies on the stability of the LBM with various inlet velocities uin , resolutions
dP and viscosities ν.
The maximum Reynolds number we were able to achieve with DNS increased with the channel diameter dP of the
porous media, as shown in Figure 3(b). The highest Reynolds number we could reach with DNS, ReDNS ,max = 182 at
the resolution of dP = 40, is used as the reference solution for our further studies. This Reynolds number corresponds
to the porous ﬂow regime 3, where transition to turbulent ﬂow can be observed.

1055

Manuel Hasert et al. / Procedia Computer Science 4 (2011) 1048–1057

1000
BGK-DNS 80
BGK-DNS 40
BGK-LES 40
BGK-DNS 20

1

2

3

4

100

Max. achieved Re

friction coefficient ȁ

1000

100

10
0.001

0.01

0.1

Re

1

10

100

(a) Friction coeﬃcient as a function of the Reynolds number

TRT DNS

1
10
Porous channel resolution dP

100

(b) Maximum Re with each resolution

Figure 3: Reynolds number studies with various resolutions

6.3. LES-DNS comparison for non-Darcy ﬂow
In a next step, we investigated the quality of the LES simulations at diﬀerent mesh resolutions in comparison with
the high-resolution DNS reference result at Re = 182. The resolution in terms of the porous channel height is varied
from dP = 4 . . . 40 grid points. All simulations were done using the TRT collision operator, since it is known that
for the BGK-scheme the exact wall position is dependent on the relaxation parameter τ [14]. For comparison, BGK
results were produced as well.

/ DNS

6.4. Numerical results
The TRT-LES model shows good agreement of the friction coeﬃcient with the DNS solution for all resolutions
(see Figure 4), with a maximum error of below 15%. Even at the coarsest resolution of dP = 4, the deviation is as
small as 11%, whereas a general trend for better results at higher resolutions can only roughly be identiﬁed from our
data. This is probably due to an overlie of mesh convergence and LES modelling eﬀects, which will be investigated in
a future study. At the highest resolution of dP = 40, the friction coeﬃcient of the DNS and LES simulation only diﬀer
about 0.15%. The BGK model leads to a large discrepancy of Λ for low resolutions, the coarsest resolution of dP = 4
has a deviation from the reference friction coeﬃcient of 156%. With increasing resolution, also the BGK simulation
converges towards the reference value, due to an increasingly smaller contribution of the non-correct wall position
at higher resolutions. In Figure 6.4 we compare the ﬂow pattern for LES and DNS in terms of velocity vectors at
an x-y-plane above the central bcc cube (illustrated in Figure 2 as cutting plane A). The DNS solution at the high
resolution dP = 40 is characterised by an irregular distribution of vortices of diﬀerent size, as expected at the onset
of turbulence for the given Reynolds number of Re =
3
TRT-LES
182. Larger eddies of around 20 grid points and
BGK-LES
smaller ones of around 5 grid points are clearly visiTRT-DNS
2.5
ble. The velocity proﬁle of the low resolution LES
simulation at dP = 12 only shows larger vortices
2
and exhibits a symmetric ﬂow proﬁle. As expected,
small and irregular vortex structures are either not re1.5
solved by the coarse mesh or damped out by the LES
scheme. As can be seen in Figure 5(c), the eddy vis1
cosity is increased especially near walls and at the
cube edges. It is worth mentioning that for the given
0.5
0
10
20
30
40
50
Reynolds number, DNS simulations for lower resoPorous channel height dP
lutions than d p = 40 were not stable and results could
Figure 4: Λ for various resolutions, LES and DNS runs with TRT and
only be produced with the help of LES.
BGK model.

1056

Manuel Hasert et al. / Procedia Computer Science 4 (2011) 1048–1057

Visc
3.22
2.67
2.11
1.56
1.00

Y

X

(a) TRT-DNS with dP = 40

(b) TRT-LES with dP = 12

(c) TRT-LES viscosity increase

Figure 5: Tangent x- and y-velocity vectors above the central bcc cube in a xy-plane

6.5. Discussion
For porous media ﬂow at the onset of turbulence, at suﬃciently high mesh resolution all schemes (BGK, TRTDNS and TRT-LES) converge towards the same result for the friction coeﬃcient. The DNS simulation resolves all
vortex scales and shows an irregular, turbulence-alike ﬂow pattern. For coarser meshes, the dissipative eﬀects of
the small vortices (which cannot be resolved) are correctly modelled by the Smagorinsky approach, leading to a
comparable friction coeﬃcient as given by the high-resolution DNS. The good match between DNS and LES requires
further investigation, since for our LES simulation no wall function has been applied. Such a wall function is usually
employed to determine the slip velocity at the ﬂuid nodes adjacent to the porous structure, in case the laminar boundary
layer is not resolved by the computational mesh. Concerning turbulent ﬂow in porous media, very little is known about
the dimension of a laminar boundary layer, and if the established models to determine the slip velocity can be applied.
A secondary welcome eﬀect of employing LES comes from the local increase in viscosity, especially at positions
where high velocity gradients are present. This leads to a stabilising eﬀect for the whole simulation and allows
computations at coarse mesh resolutions, which otherwise cannot be achieved with DNS.
7. Engineering application
We perform a preliminary study of the porous geometry in a diverging channel without recording acoustic signals. The air release through the exhaust of the valve terminal emits noise, which is being reduced by placing a
porous medium silencer. Energy in the ﬂuid is dissipated induced by the consumption of larger turbulent ﬂow structures from inside the terminal by the small scaled pores, resulting in a decreased sound pressure level of ≈ 80dB
at 1m distance which we hope to reduce even further. The aluminium made silencer originally has the size of
10x5x0.5cm, of which we retrieved a μCT scan with a volume of 69.59mm3 at a resolution of 6.3μm. Based on
the CT scan data, a surface mesh is exwall
wall
tracted, from which in turn the voxel
mesh is created for the simulation. For
the preliminary study, a volume fraction
channel
of only (0.96mm)3 is used. The porous
channel
inlet
outlet
structure is placed at the edge of the diverging channel, to model the outﬂow
to the surrounding. The computational
porous medium
domain consists of 70 Mio. ﬂuid cells.
The Reynolds number ranges from Re =
1.9 · 104 . . . 105 depending on the operating pressure of 1 . . . 8 bar. We choose the
Figure 6: Vorticity iso-surfaces for a simpliﬁed ﬂow through porous medium in a channel
inlet velocity uin = 0.01, channel height
hin = 155δ x and viscosity ν = 8, 4 · 10−5 resulting in Re = 18590 and use a BGK-LES model with CS = 0.17.
In future studies, the solid walls of the channel behind the porous medium will be replaced by non-reﬂective open
boundaries [33]. In Figure 6 the vorticity is plotted and the strongly vortical ﬂow at the outﬂow after the porous
medium is clearly visible. We are aware that the employed turbulence model without wall functions possibly does not
model wall-bounded ﬂow velocities correctly. The goal of this study was to qualitatively estimate the feasibility of

Manuel Hasert et al. / Procedia Computer Science 4 (2011) 1048–1057

1057

such simulations with the ﬂow through under-resolved geometries with the usage of an LES-Smagorinsky turbulence
model.
8. Conclusions and outlook
In this paper, we described steps towards the calculation of aeroacoustic sound creation by ﬂow through a porous
medium. The generation of acoustic waves was successfully demonstrated with a spinning vortex pair. Further, we
evaluated the Lattice Boltzmann Method for non-Darcy ﬂow through a generic porous structure. Lower-resolution
simulations employing a Smagorinsky LES turbulence model were validated successfully against a direct numerical
simulation with high mesh resolution. The TRT-LES model showed an almost mesh independent friction coeﬃcient
even for very coarse grid resolutions.
9. References
[1]
[2]
[3]
[4]
[5]
[6]
[7]
[8]
[9]
[10]
[11]
[12]
[13]
[14]
[15]
[16]
[17]
[18]
[19]
[20]
[21]
[22]
[23]
[24]
[25]
[26]
[27]
[28]
[29]
[30]
[31]
[32]
[33]

A. E. Scheidegger, The physics of ﬂow through porous media, University of Toronto Press, 1974.
S. Whitaker, The Forchheimer equation: a theoretical development, Transport Porous Med. 25 (1996) 27–61.
P. Polubarinova-Kochina, Theory of ground water movement, Princeton University Press, 1962.
J. Miskimins, H. Lopez-Hernandez, Non-Darcy ﬂow in hydraulic fractures, SPE Annual Tech. Conf., 9-12.10.2005, Dallas, USA.
N. A. Horton, D. Pokrajac, Onset of turbulence in a regular porous medium: An experimental study, Phys. Fl. 21 (4) (2009) 045104.
A. Dybbs, R. V. Edwards, A new look at porous media ﬂuid mechanics Darcy to turbulent, Fund. Transp. Phen. Porous Media 1 (1984)
199–256.
Forchheimer, Wasserbewegung durch Boden, Z. Ver. Dsch. Ing. 49 (1901) 1736/1749.
C. Cercignani, Theory and application of the Boltzmann equation, Elsevier Science, 1975.
X. He, L. S. Luo, Lattice Boltzmann model for the incompressible Navier–Stokes equation, J. Stat. Phys. 88 (3).
T. Zeiser, Analysis of the ﬂow ﬁeld and pressure drop in ﬁxed bed reactors with help of lattice Boltzmann simulations, Phil. Trans. R. Soc.
Lond. A 360 (2002) 507–520.
I. Ginzburg, F. Verhaeghe, D. d’Humi`eres, Two-relaxation-time lattice Boltzmann scheme: About parametrization, velocity, pressure and
mixed boundary conditions, Comm. Comp. Phys. 3 (2) (2008) 427–478.
P. Lallemand, L. Luo, Theory of the lattice Boltzmann method: Acoustic and thermal properties in two and three dimensions, Phys. Rev. E
68 (036706).
I. Ginzburg, D. d’Humi`eres, Multireﬂection boundary conditions for lattice Boltzmann models, Phys. Rev. E 68.
C. Pan, L. Luo, C. Miller, An evaluation of lattice Boltzmann schemes for porous medium ﬂow simulation, Comput. Fluids 35 (8-9) (2006)
898–909.
M. Bouzidi, M. Firdaouss, P. Lallemand, Momentum transfer of a Boltzmann-lattice ﬂuid with boundaries, Phys. Fl. 13 (11) (2001) 3452–
3459.
M. J. Lighthill, On sound generated aerodynamically I General theory, Proc. Roy. Soc. A Math. Phy. 211 (1107) (1952) 564–587.
G. A. Br`es, F. P´erot, D. Freed, Properties of the lattice Boltzmann method for acoustics, Proc. 15. AIAA/CEAS Aeroac. Conf. 30.
S. Marie, D. Ricot, P. Sagaut, Comparison between lattice Boltzmann method and Navier–Stokes high order schemes for computational
aeroacoustics, J. Comp. Phys. 228 (4) (2009) 1056–1070.
A. Wilde, Calculation of sound generation and radiation from instationary ﬂows, Comput. Fluids 35 (2006) 986–993.
B. Crouse, D. Freed, G. Balasubramanian, S. Senthooran, P.-T. Lew, L. Mongeau, Fundamental aeroacoustic capabilities of the latticeBoltzmann method, Proc. 12. AIAA/CEAS Aeroac. Conf. (2006) 1–17.
X. M. Li, R. C. K. Leung, R. M. C. So, One-step aeroacoustics simulation using lattice Boltzmann method, AIAA J. 44 (1) (2006) 78–89.
M. Hasert, J. Bernsdorf, S. Roller, Towards aeroacoustic sound generation by ﬂow through porous media, Phil. Trans. R. Soc. Lond. A.
E. A. M¨uller, F. Obermeier, The spinning vortices as a source of sound, AGARD CP 2 (1967) 1–7.
M. J. S. de Lemos, Turbulence in porous media: Modeling and Applications, Elsevier Science, 2006.
S. Hou, J. Sterling, S. Chen, G. D. Doolen, A lattice Boltzmann subgrid model for high Reynolds number ﬂows, Fields Inst. Comm. 6 (151).
J. Smagorinsky, General circulation experiments with the primitive equations, Mon. Weather Rev. 91 (3).
I. Wendling, Dynamische Large-Eddy Simulation turbulenter Str¨omungen in komplexen Geometrien, Diss. 1 (2007) 1–107.
M. Weickert, G. Teike, O. Schmidt, M. Sommerfeld, Investigation of the LES WALE turbulence model within the lattice Boltzmann framework, Comput. Math. Applications 59 (7) (2010) 2200–2214.
F. Kuwahara, T. Yamane, A. Nakayama, Large eddy simulation of turbulent ﬂow in porous media, Int. Comm. Heat Mass Tran. 33 (2006)
411–418.
Z. Chai, B. Shi, J. Lu, Z. Guo, Non-Darcy ﬂow in disordered porous media: A lattice Boltzmann study, Comput. Fluids 39 (10) (2010)
2069–2077.
K. Premnath, M. Pattison, S. Banerjee, Generalized lattice Boltzmann equation with forcing term for computation of wall-bounded turbulent
ﬂows, Phys. Rev. E 79 (2) (2009) 026703.
J. Bernsdorf, G. Brenner, F. Durst, Numerical analysis of the pressure drop in porous media ﬂow with lattice Boltzmann (BGK) automata,
Comput. Phys. Comm. 129 (2000) 247–255.
S. Izquierdo, N. Fueyo, Characteristic nonreﬂecting boundary conditions for open boundaries in lattice Boltzmann methods, Phys. Rev. E
78 (046707).

