Available online at www.sciencedirect.com

Procedia Computer Science 4 (2011) 1058–1061

International Conference on Computational Science, ICCS 2011

Biomedical and Bioinformatics Challenges to Computer Science:
Bioinformatics, Modeling of Biomedical Systems and Clinical
Applications
Mario Cannataroa,∗, Rodrigo Weber dos Santosb , Joakim Sundnesc
a Department

of Experimental Medicine and Clinic, University ”Magna Græcia” of Catanzaro, Catanzaro, Italy, and ICAR-CNR, Rende, Italy
b Department of Computer Science, Universidade Federal de Juiz de Fora, Juiz de Fora, Brazil
c Center for Biomedical Computing, Simula Research Laboratory, Lysaker, Norway

Abstract
This is the fourth edition of the workshop on Biomedical and Bioinformatics Challenges to Computer Science.
The purpose of the workshop series is to bring together scientists from computer science and life sciences, to discuss
current challenges in this inter-disciplinary ﬁeld. A wide range of life science applications will be addressed, ranging
from classical bioinformatics to mathematical models of systems physiology.
Keywords: Bioinformatics, modeling and simulation of biological systems, biomedical data management and
integration, clinical applications

1. Introduction
Computers and computational methods play an increasingly important role in the life sciences, and currently form
an indispensable tool for a wide range of scientiﬁc applications. These range from classical bioinformatics, which
concerns with the use of computer methods in molecular biology, to numerical models of complex physiological
systems. To this date, these scientiﬁc ﬁelds have been fairly disconnected, but the situation is changing with the
increasing availability of high performance computing tools, which allows system physiology models to be developed
with more detail and realism. Existing computer models have already demonstrated direct links between gene data
and organ function, and the current development will inevitably narrow the gap between classical bioinformatics and
systems physiology modeling. The successful combination of these two ﬁelds holds a huge potential for scientiﬁc
progress, as it may represent a mechanistic link from knowledge and exploration on a molecular scale, to the function
of biological tissues, organs and organ systems. However, this large potential is paired with substantial challenges,
many of which are directly related to computer science. These include the management and integration of huge
data banks, computational resources required for solving complex multiscale mathematical models, and software
engineering issues related to development and validation of increasingly complicated software systems.
∗ Corresponding

author: cannataro@unicz.it

1877–0509 © 2011 Published by Elsevier Ltd. Open access under CC BY-NC-ND license.
Selection and/or peer-review under responsibility of Prof. Mitsuhisa Sato and Prof. Satoshi Matsuoka
doi:10.1016/j.procs.2011.04.112

Mario Cannataro et al. / Procedia Computer Science 4 (2011) 1058–1061

1059

The purpose of the fourth workshop on Biomedical and Bioinformatics Challenges to Computer Science is to
bring together scientists from computer science, applied mathematics and a variety of branches of life sciences, to
discuss important computer science challenges.
2. Workshop summary
The papers of the present workshop cover a broad range of applications and solutions in Bioinformatics, Modeling
of Biomedical Systems and Clinical Applications.
The ﬁrst session contains four papers devoted to Bioinformatics. Three papers are devoted to modeling and
analysis of genomics data: one paper describes novel approaches to solve applications of strings that are useful in
genomics studies; one paper discusses methods to improve the prediction of protein interaction from gene expression
data; and one paper presents a stochastic model for the micro RNA (miRNA) - messenger RNA (mRNA) network.
The last paper of the session describes how bioinformatics services can be modelled and queried using the novel
Search Computing paradigm.
The paper by Kelsey and Kotthoﬀ proposes the Constraint Satisfaction paradigm as a computational framework for
solving the closest string problem. A Constraint Satisfaction Problem speciﬁes a set of constraints on discrete values
variables and a solution to such a problem is an assignment of values to variables such that no constraint is violated.
Given a set of strings of equal length over a ﬁxed alphabet, the closest string problem consists on ﬁnding the string with
the smallest possible maximum Hamming distance from any input string. When the input strings consist of nucleotide
sequences over the letters A, C, G and T, the closest string has important applications in computational biology. The
authors propose search heuristics based on Constraint Satisfaction that provide several orders of magnitude speed-up
at and above the optimal distance.
The paper by Yano evaluates diﬀerent methods to measure correlation among gene expression levels. In microarray data analysis, measuring correlation among gene expression levels is a common practice to predict interactions
among gene products. Correlated expression of a group of genes implies that the genes are involved in the same
biological process or form a protein complex, and correlation measures have been used to predict disease markers
and protein-interaction partners. The paper evaluates the performance (sensitivity and speciﬁcity) of three correlation
methods: Pearson correlation, rank (Spearman) correlation, and Mutual Information, for the detection of proteinprotein interactions, and proposes a new correlation measure, termed asymmetric correlation (AC), which outperforms
the other measures, particularly when high speciﬁcity is required.
The paper by Arpag et al proposes a stochastic model for the micro RNA (miRNA) - messenger RNA (mRNA) network. miRNAs are 20-22 nucleotide long strands produced from non-coding RNA, and interfere with the translation
of mRNA by binding their untranslated regions (UTR) at the 3” end of mature mRNA. While existing computational
methods predict target sequences that are likely to be bound by particular miRNA, the paper investigates the overall
statistical properties of the mRNA-miRNA network under the assumption that all the sequences are stochastic. The
obtained analytical and simulation results for the distribution of the number of miRNA regulating any given mRNA,
compare very well with the empirical data. Authors conclude that a major portion of the miRNA-mRNA interactions
can be accounted for purely on the basis of combinatorics, even though some elements of this regulatory mechanism
are highly conserved.
The paper by Masseroli et al addresses the problem of answering complex biomedical questions that require the
querying and integration of diﬀerent distributed bioinformatics services, that frequently are inherently ordered, or
are associated with ranked conﬁdence values. To solve such problems they propose to use the Search Computing,
an emerging paradigm for integrating and querying web services. Search Computing aims to answer complex questions by combining data extracted from distinct sources, ordered based on local rankings, into result combinations,
with an associated global ranking, which represents the solution of the complex query. The authors discusses how
bioinformatics web service can be described in the search computing framework and present a bioinformatics search
computing (Bio-SeCo) application based on diﬀerent bioinformatics web service described and registered using the
Search Computing paradigm.
The second session contains four papers, which are all devoted to the computational modeling and to computer
systems related to medical research. Two papers address multinational infrastructures for integrating, sharing and
processing information in cancer research; one paper describes a system for acquisition and automatic analysis of

1060

Mario Cannataro et al. / Procedia Computer Science 4 (2011) 1058–1061

snoring signals for diagnosing sleep apnoea syndrome (SAS); and another paper describes an adaptive time stepping
scheme for models of cardiac cell electrophysiology.
The paper by Bucur et al addresses lessons learned from the ACGT project (www.eu.acgt.org). This project
was an EU funded Integrated Project (IP), that was launched in 2006 to develop new and improved infrastructure
for combining information from genetic and clinical trials, and utilize the potentially vast amounts of information
for improved, individualized cancer therapy. Important conclusions from the project were that although some lowlevel technical decisions may have been suboptimal or have later been superseeded by technological development,
the overall methodology and core design principles remain valid today. The ontology driven approach, focus on
patient data security, and constant emphasis on simplifying the users’ daily work are critical for the success of similar
endeavors in the future.
Sinnott and co-workers also address cancer research, and describe a recently established EU funded project
ENS@T-CANCER, which aims to establish a Virtual Research Environment (VRE) for the study of adrenal cancer. The plan is for the VRE to comprise a number of clinical databases for various types of adrenal tumors, and oﬀer
advanced services for accessing and integrating information on adrenal tumors across organizational and national borders. The project is currently being established, and many of the goals and methodologies of the project are likely to
change on the way. However, the ENS@T-CANCER registry already includes records of 183 patients with diﬀerent
forms of adrenal cancer, many of which include biosamples that can be exchanged.
The paper by Calabrese et al describes a system for analysis of snore signals, which is intended to support medical
doctors in the diagnosis of sleep apnoea syndrome (SAS) and subsequent follow-up. The system is based on sound
recording, and on segmenting sound signals into snoring and regular breathing. The extracted snoring intervals are
analyzed in LabView, to detect and characterize events of sleep apnoea. The existing prototype system enables
clinicians to record, collect and analyze snoring signals from possible SAS patients. The prototype includes a simple
graphical user interface, to facilitate easy use by clinicians in daily diagnosis and follow-up of SAS.
Campos and co-workers present an adaptive time-stepping scheme for numerical solution of models of cardiac
cell electrophysiology. These models are typically formulated as systems of non-linear ODEs, with solutions that
typically consist of one very rapid change (depolarization) followed by a more smooth restoration of the normal state
(repolarization). These characteristics favor adaptive time stepping schemes, which can capture the rapid variations
with small time steps and use longer time steps through the smoother intervals. The authors present adaptive methods
based on the Euler method and a second order Runge-Kutta method, and preliminary results indicate speed-up of up
to 25 times compared with ﬁxed time step methods.
3. Conclusion and outlook
The topics addressed in this workshop represent a wide range of scientiﬁc ﬁelds, but the contributions can largely
be divided into two groups. These groups can be related to the physical scales considered; classical bioinformatics
applications concerning the molecular scale, and systems physiology models operating on the scale of organs and
organ systems. Although the physiology models typically link down to the cell level, there is still a gap between this
ﬁeld and the classical bioinformatics ﬁeld, both in physical scales and in scientiﬁc tools and modeling approaches.
As noted in the previous editions of the workshop [1, 2, 3], a goal for the present workshop series is to increase the
interactions between these two branches of science, potentially leading to extremely promising collaborative research
projects.
Acknowledgements
We would like to thank the members of the program committee for the invaluable assistance on reviewing the
papers and the organizers of ICCS for promoting this workshop.
References
[1] M. Cannataro, M. Romberg, J. Sundnes, R. W. dos Santos, Bioinformatics’ challenges to computer science, in: M. Bubak, G. D. van Albada,
J. Dongarra, P. M. A. Sloot (Eds.), ICCS (3), Vol. 5103 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, Springer, 2008, pp. 67–69.

Mario Cannataro et al. / Procedia Computer Science 4 (2011) 1058–1061

1061

[2] M. Cannataro, R. W. dos Santos, J. Sundnes, Bioinformatics’ challenges to computer science: Bioinformatics tools and biomedical modeling,
in: G. Allen, J. Nabrzyski, E. Seidel, G. D. van Albada, J. Dongarra, P. M. A. Sloot (Eds.), ICCS (1), Vol. 5544 of Lecture Notes in Computer
Science, Springer, 2009, pp. 807–809.
[3] M. Cannataro, R. W. dos Santos, J. Sundnes, Biomedical and bioinformatics challenges to computer science, Procedia Computer Science 1 (1)
(2010) 931 – 933, iCCS 2010. doi:DOI: 10.1016/j.procs.2010.04.102.
URL http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/B9865-506HM1Y-3K/2/84767eaa9ec3557e0ee4926693ed895f

