Available online at www.sciencedirect.com

Procedia Computer Science 4 (2011) 726–731

International Conference on Computational Science, ICCS 2011

Linked Open Science—Communicating, Sharing and Evaluating
Data, Methods and Results for Executable Papers
Tomi Kauppinena , Giovana Mira de Espindolab
a Institute

for Geoinformatics (ifgi), University of Muenster, Germany
Institute for Space Research (INPE), Brazil

b National

Abstract
Linked Open Science is an approach to solve challenges of an executable paper. It is a combination of four “silver
bullets”: 1) publication of scientiﬁc data, metadata, results, and provenance information using Linked Data principles,
2) open source and web-based environments for executing, validating and exploring research, 3) Cloud Computing
for eﬃcient and distributed computing, and 4) Creative Commons for the legal infrastructure. We will use a realistic
scientiﬁc research setting related to research on deforestation of the Brazilian Amazon rainforest to provide scenarios
to illustrate the application of Linked Open Science.
Keywords:
Academic publishing, Computation, Web of Data, Linked Data, Semantic Web, Open Source, R-project, Cloud
Computing, Creative Commons, The Brazilian Amazon Rainforest
2010 MSC: 68U35

1. Introduction
Currently, it is diﬃcult and time-consuming to validate results of any particular scientiﬁc eﬀort. The problem is
that either or both the implementation of methods and the data behind a scientiﬁc paper is not openly available to
assist a reviewer in her task. Thus, a review is most often—if not always—a blend of unique ingredients. To validate,
and also to enhance scientiﬁc results it is thus necessary to try and reproduce a research setting. An executable paper1
is an idea to solve these challenges.
Linked Open Science2 —or short Linked Science—is our approach to provide the realization for an executable
paper as a combination of Linked Data3 [1, 2], Semantic Web [3] and Web standards, open source and web-based
Email addresses: tomi.kauppinen@uni-muenster.de (Tomi Kauppinen), giovana@dpi.inpe.br (Giovana Mira de Espindola)
URL: http://ifgi.uni-muenster.de/~kauppinen (Tomi Kauppinen), http://www.dpi.inpe.br/~giovana/ (Giovana Mira de
Espindola)
1 http://www.executablepapers.com/
2 http://linkedscience.org
3 http://linkeddata.org

1877–0509 © 2011 Published by Elsevier Ltd. Open access under CC BY-NC-ND license.
Selection and/or peer-review under responsibility of Prof. Mitsuhisa Sato and Prof. Satoshi Matsuoka
doi:10.1016/j.procs.2011.04.076

Tomi Kauppinen et al. / Procedia Computer Science 4 (2011) 726–731

727

online environments, Cloud Computing4 , the legal and technical infrastructure by Creative Commons5 , and naturally
also a joint eﬀort by the scientiﬁc community and academic publishers.
The remainder of this paper is structured as follows. In Section 2 we describe the Linked Open Science approach
for executable papers. In Section 3 the approach is demonstrated by using a real scientiﬁc research setting for research about deforestation in the Brazilian Amazon rainforest. We discuss the related work in Section 4 and provide
concluding remarks in Section 5.
2. Linked Open Science for Sharing and Validating Research
Linked Open Science aims to be a standardized and generic recipe for executable papers. First of all, the solution
is built using the following four “silver bullets”:
(i) Linked Data Input data, results and provenance information are published and archived using the Linked Data
principles.
(ii) Open Source and Web-based Environments Methods are written for publication in an open source environment
such as R-project6 or using web-based techniques, and exactly the same methods are outlined to the LATEXversion of the paper by using automated tools.
(iii) Cloud Computing The execution of methods and access to various resources are provided using the Cloud
Computing approach.
(iv) Creative Commons Creative Commons Licensing is in use to provide the legal and technical infrastructure for
assigning noncommercial licenses and commercial licenses, and public domain statements to scientiﬁc work,
including data, methods, results and publications.
These ideas are illustrated in Table 1 in relation with the important features of an executable paper. The following
subsections discuss them in more detail, and show how these four silver bullets of Linked Open Science enable
diﬀerent features.
2.1. Using Linked Data for Distributing, Sharing and Archiving Data
Linked Open Science relies heavily on Linked Data technologies. In brief, Linked Data is about “using the web to
create typed links between data from diﬀerent sources” [2]. It allows sharing and use of data, ontologies and various
metadata standards: in fact, a common envision is that it will be de facto standard for providing metadata, and the data
itself on the Web.
Linked Data is based on principles7 that include the following:
1.
2.
3.
4.

Use URIs as names for things
Use HTTP URIs so that people can look up those names
When someone looks up an URI, provide useful information, using the standards (RDF, SPARQL)
Include links to other URIs, so that they can discover additional information

In Linked Data all information is encoded using Resource Description Framework (RDF)8 as triples of form
<subject,predicate,object>. This allows to link diﬀerent resources together using predicates, and also deﬁne
literal values, such as names, for the resources. All resources in Linked Data are identiﬁed using URIs. This allows for
requesting more information using the URIs in a machine-processable manner. In practice this means that if a software
agent requests a URI, then e.g. all the triples where this URI is as a subject could be returned, or alternatively even all
4 http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cloud_computing
5 http://creativecommons.org/
6 http://www.r-project.org/
7 http://www.w3.org/DesignIssues/LinkedData
8 http://www.w3.org/RDF/

Detecting plagiarism

Viruses and code contamination

Provenance

Size

Systems

Copyright/licensing

Validation

Short and long-term compatibility

Tomi Kauppinen et al. / Procedia Computer Science 4 (2011) 726–731

Executability

728

Linked Data
Open Source Environment
Cloud Computing
Creative Commons
Table 1: Linked Open Science vs. crucial issues of an executable paper.

triples where this URI is either a subject, predicate or object. In the Linked Open Science this means that everything
is identiﬁed via URIs: researchers, research institutes, publications, and research datasets.
Linked Data thus allows for eﬃcient distribution of data using the Web standards. Scientists can make links from
their data to existing datasets, thus connecting scientiﬁc resources. There are several beneﬁts of this approach. First
of all, distribution of data over the web reduces the space needed to store data in a single, local environment. For
example, if a scientist is using geographic information—places with their coordinates and polygonal boundaries and
so on—she just links to existing datasets providing this information rather than downloading everything into her local
environment.
Thus, with the Linked Data approach the size of the data is a smaller issue because most of the data is already
on the Web, somewhere, and served automatically by URIs on demand. Linked Data also allows for executing and
validating methods on real data on the (Semantic) Web. Because it is based on WWW-standards, it clearly helps
to achieve compatibility, in both short- and long-term. In Linked Open Science provenance [4, 5] information is
published as Linked Data, using for example Open Provenance Model Vocabulary9 . For example, for datasets this
means that it is recorded who has created the data, or has encoded or transformed it, who has published it, and also
who has used it. For each piece it is also recorded when the actions were performed at. In addition, the published
paper serves as a documentation for data and methods. Note that the scientiﬁc data as itself can become a publication,
and can be referred and linked upon. All this allows to use methods from the ﬁelds of Semantic Computing10 and
Machine Learning11 in order to analyze semantic and statistical similarities of Linked Data sets and other research
resources and thus detect plagiarism and copyright issues.
2.2. Executing Research in Open Source Environments and on the Web
The idea of using open source environments enables for anyone to not just contribute to the code base but also to execute and validate the existing implementations of methods and techniques. In Linked Open Science this means using
established open source environments—that support many operating systems for compatibility—such as R-project12 ,
or various web-based techniques to implement the methods with. Similarly as today researchers submit LATEX-source
9 http://purl.org/net/opmv/ns
10 http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Semantic_computing
11 http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Machine_learning
12 see

e.g. [6]

Tomi Kauppinen et al. / Procedia Computer Science 4 (2011) 726–731

729

ﬁles of an article together with ﬁgures, they will in Linked Open Science submit also methods as R-scripts or as online
implementations, and links to datasets. The article versions of the methods are outlined automatically using tools such
as Sweave [7] which for R-scripts allow to “create dynamic reports, which can be updated automatically if data or
analysis change”.
A crucial part of executing research in Linked Open Science is the ability to query data in a distributed manner.
Linked Data is served in an increasing manner using SPARQL-endpoints. This means that a SPARQL query [8] can be
sent to an endpoint, and the result is RDF. When multiple endpoints are combined together the processing of queries
is inherently distributed and lowers the need for local computing power. In Linked Open Science the vision is that
scientists may test their hypothesis by building methods using the distributed infrastructure of the Link Data. This
makes the whole process transparent.
First of all, in Linked Open Science all the data is on the web for anyone—not just for reviewers—to check
and verify the quality, origin, copyrights, and licenses. Secondly, also the implementations of methods are openly
accessible, including not just the direct contribution of the author of a paper, but also the more generic methods, e.g.
those used for evaluation. For example, it is common in information retrieval literature to report the performance of
a method using metrics such as precision and recall. However, the traditional way of reporting these results is error
prone: it is not always known how metrics have been implemented for a paper. In Linked Open Science reviewers
can see which implementation has been used to verify the results, and if in doubt, can suggest for an alternative one.
The vision is that over time this will lead to de facto library of evaluation measurement metrics, thus improving the
quality of information retrieval research. Similar should then happen to other branches of science.
2.3. Low-cost Computing in the Cloud
Cloud Computing (see e.g. [9]) is an idea to execute code on machines around the Web, without the user knowing
on which machine(s) the execution actually happens—thus the term “Cloud Computing”. It is low-cost because
machines are in an eﬃcient use. Cloud Computing also enables to handle datasets of large size, as the user does
not have to handle them in their own environments. Furthermore, user does not have to maintain all diﬀerent kinds
of systems herself: it is likely and also easier to ﬁnd a needed system environment in the Cloud than setting it up
from scratch in a local environment. Furthermore, viruses cannot make that much harm when run in controlled
environments oﬀered by the Cloud.
The access to data in Linked Open Science is provided also visually by services in the Cloud. When all the predicates for describing the data are given unique URIs it enables for creating more generic visualization and browsing
facilities. For example, there are already numerous online applications capable of putting data on a map, if the data
uses those URIs for latitude and longitude proposed by W3C. Similarly, data in Linked Open Science can be explored
on a timeline, and by using other facets like theme, origin, author and usage history.
2.4. Managing Licenses and Copyrights using the Creative Commons Infrastructure
In Linked Open Science- approach Creative Commons allow for assigning explicit license statements and copyright terms to methods, datasets, results, and to publications. It enables assigning diﬀerent terms to all these scientiﬁc
pieces in diﬀerent phases of their provenance. For example, a scientiﬁc work could be initially licensed—e.g. when
submitted for review—under the license CC BY-NC-ND 3.013 but after a successful publication the methods and data
could be released to the public domain under the statement CC0 1.014 . Stating clearly copyright and license issues
enables to reduce plagiarism.
Thus, in Linked Open Science all the research data, copyright and license information, and the paper itself, and
actions taken on them and their provenance information will be opened and represented as Linked Data. In addition to
checking copyright and license issues of certain datasets, this approach also allows for querying and ﬁltering datasets
using the references to copyright schemes and licenses. Hence, this enables also for ﬁnding out interesting datasets
which fullﬁll the usage permission criteria of a planned research setting.
13 http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/3.0
14 http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0

730

Tomi Kauppinen et al. / Procedia Computer Science 4 (2011) 726–731

3. Evaluation and Demonstration
3.1. Scenario
We illustrate the application of the Linked Open Science approach for an executable paper by two scenarios: (i)
a research scenario for an analysis of the Brazilian Amazon rainforest data, and (ii) a review scenario. The scenarios
are as follows.
(i) Scenario for conducting research and submission of the work
Maria makes research about the deforestation process in the Brazilian Amazon rainforest. She has just
completed a study of this area of more than ﬁve million square kilometers. The data she has used in the
study is partially provided as Linked Data by existing sources such as GeoNames15 and partially generated
from other data sources by methods that Maria has developed during the research, and implemented in R.
Maria decides to submit her work for evaluation to a journal. For this she signs in the journal submission
system, registers a new paper, and receives a URI for it. She uploads the article as a PDF, each of the
LATEXsource ﬁles, scripts that implement the methods of her study, additional ﬁgures, URIs of datasets
she has used, and selects Creative Commons licenses for each of the resources. Some of the Linked Data
datasets created by others are already online. And some of them she has created during the study, they
get now published in the Cloud provided by the publisher.
(ii) Scenario for review and validation of the work
John has accepted to review a paper on analysis of deforestation process in the Brazilian Amazon rainforest. He opens up the review environment, and can see not just the ﬁnal article, but also all the related
datasets and methods the author (Maria) had used in the study. He can see that exactly the same methods
that are reported in the paper are also in the scripts that manipulate the datasets. John executes the methods one by one, and sees how they use and manipulate the datasets in order to produce the results. Results
can be depicted as ﬁgures, and can also be interacted with by the help of a visualization library provided
by the environment. John quickly sees that the research is a novel one, and provides new methods for
ﬁnding out a new understanding about the deforestation process. He can also look up terms he was not
aware of from the Wikipedia16 , automatically linked from the paper. After several other sessions to explore and visualize the datasets and methods, and to read the documentation John decides to accept the
paper with minor modiﬁcations. He suggests to include more related work to the article. This decision is
published to Maria who takes actions, after which the article is accepted, published and archived together
with all its datasets, methods, results, provenance, and license information.
4. Discussion and Related Work
There are numerous approaches already in the direction of sharing and communicating science with novel techniques and practices. Linked Open Data University of Muenster (LODUM)17 is an initiative of the University of
Muenster to publish as Linked Data all their data about publications, people, patents, projects, and prizes with references to places and time periods, and deﬁned using properties. Similar attempts are made increasingly, e.g. at the
University of Southampton18 or at the Open University19 for extracting, interlinking and exposing university content
and publishing them online as Linked Data. DataCite20 is a community-driven eﬀort for enabling citations of datasets
using Digital Object Identiﬁers (DOIs), and to help archiving and accessing research data. The Semantic Publishing
and Referencing Ontologies (SPAR)21 are meant for semantic publishing and referencing. One of them is the Citation
15 http://geonames.org/
16 http://www.wikipedia.org/
17 http://lodum.de/
18 http://data.southampton.ac.uk/
19 http://data.open.ac.uk/
20 http://datacite.org/
21 http://purl.org/spar/

Tomi Kauppinen et al. / Procedia Computer Science 4 (2011) 726–731

731

Typing Ontology (CiTO)22 [10], meant for characterizing citations by diﬀerent citation types (explicit, implicit or
indirect). Semantic Web Journal23 provides an open review process, meaning that submitted papers are online, enabling anyone to comment them. Moreover, also the reviews are published online, with the reviewer names exposed.
Utopia24 is another related approach for 1) interacting with data, 2) exploring metadata and contents of articles, 3) and
for commenting articles online.
5. Conclusions
In this paper we described Linked Open Science for solving the challenges of an executable paper. This includes
publishing of data, methods, resources, results, license, rights assertions and provenance information together with
the documentation, and to help establishing trust related to them. Thus Linked Open Science seeks to help authors,
reviewers, publishers and the whole scientiﬁc community in their challenging tasks, and be the key if not the future
form of academic publishing.
Acknowledgments
This research has been partially funded by the International Research Training Group on Semantic Integration
of Geospatial Information (DFG GRK 1498, see http://irtg-sigi.uni-muenster.de). We also acknowledge
Carsten Keßler for his valuable feedback.
6. References
[1] T. Berners-Lee, Linked Data, Personal view available from http://www.w3.org/DesignIssues/LinkedData.html (2009).
[2] C. Bizer, T. Heath, T. Berners-Lee, Linked Data – The Story So Far, International Journal on Semantic Web and Information Systems 5 (3)
(2009) 1–22.
[3] T. Berners-Lee, J. Hendler, O. Lassila, The Semantic Web, Scientiﬁc American 284 (5) (2001) 34–43.
[4] O. Hartig, Provenance Information in the Web of Data, in: Proceedings of the Linked Data on the Web (LDOW) Workshop at the World Wide
Web Conference (WWW), Madrid, Spain, 2009.
[5] O. Hartig, J. Zhao, Publishing and consuming provenance metadata on the web of linked data, in: Proceedings of The third International
Provenance and Annotation Workshop, Troy, NY, U.S.A, 2010.
[6] B. D. Ripley, The R project in statistical computing, MSOR Connections. The newsletter of the LTSN Maths, Stats & OR Network. 1 (1)
(2001) 23–25.
[7] F. Leisch, Sweave, part I: Mixing R and LATEX, R News 2 (3) (2002) 28–31.
[8] E. Prud’hommeaux, A. Seaborne, SPARQL Query Language for RDF, W3C Recommendation, available from http://w3.org/TR/rdf-sparqlquery (January 2008).
[9] M. Armbrust, A. Fox, R. Griﬃth, A. D. Joseph, R. Katz, A. Konwinski, G. Lee, D. Patterson, A. Rabkin, I. Stoica, M. Zaharia, A view of
cloud computing, Commun. ACM 53 (2010) 50–58. doi:10.1145/1721654.1721672.
[10] D. Shotton, CiTO, the Citation Typing Ontology, Journal of Biomedical Semantics 1 (Suppl 1) (2010) S6+. doi:10.1186/
2041-1480-1-S1-S6.

22 http://purl.org/spar/cito/
23 http://www.semantic-web-journal.net/
24 http://getutopia.com/

