Available online at www.sciencedirect.com

Procedia Computer Science 4 (2011) 1898–1900

The Fifth Workshop on Teaching Computational Science
(WTCS 2011)
Alfredo Tirado-Ramos1 and Angela B. Shiflet2
1

Emory University
Atlanta, GA, USA
2
Wofford College
Spartanburg, SC, USA
atirado@emory.edu, shifletab@wofford.edu

Abstract. The Fifth Workshop on Teaching Computational Science, within the
International Conference on Computational Science, provides a platform for
discussing innovations in teaching computational sciences at all levels and
contexts of higher education. This editorial provides an introduction to the work
presented during the sessions.
Keywords: computational science, teaching, parallel computing, e-Learning,
collaborative environments.

1 Introduction
Scientific computing is commonly associated with the development of
mathematical models and quantitative analysis techniques to solve scientific problems
using high performance or high throughput computational power. Until recently,
scientific computing or computational science education was too costly and
impractical for most academic institutions of higher learning. Now, however, such
institutions can integrate methods from computer science, mathematical modeling,
simulation, and scientific visualization, among others, to create virtual laboratories for
in-silico experimentation and learning. The interaction of computational methods
allows teachers and students to pose more intriguing questions in lower cost
experimental settings. Thus, higher education is currently witnessing the rapid
adoption of computational tools and methods by science teachers around the world. In
the past few years, many teachers have shared experiences on the use of high
performance, as well as not-so-high performance, computing facilities in order to
promote the benefits and importance of computational science instruction in science
classrooms. The Fifth Workshop on Teaching Computational Science (WTCS2011),
held in Singapore's Nanyang Technological University in conjunction with the
International Conference on Computational Science (ICCS 2011) offers a technical
program consisting of presentations dealing with the state of the art in the field,
following the successful 2010 WTCS in Amsterdam, The Netherlands [1].

1877–0509 © 2011 Published by Elsevier Ltd. Open access under CC BY-NC-ND license.
Selection and/or peer-review under responsibility of Prof. Mitsuhisa Sato and Prof. Satoshi Matsuoka
doi:10.1016/j.procs.2011.04.206

Alfredo Tirado-Ramos and Angela B. Shiflet / Procedia Computer Science 4 (2011) 1898–1900

2 The Workshop
The workshop was organized in two sessions, with three and four presentations
accordingly. During the first session, chaired by Tirado-Ramos, Shiflet et al discussed
their experiences with modeling epidemiological networks in Mathematical Modeling
and HPC courses, for which they developed a module as an Undergraduate Petascale
Education Program (UPEP) Curriculum Module, used for instruction in two course
and evaluated by class participants which provides the biological background
necessary to understand the application, the mathematical background needed to
develop models, example solutions in Mathematica to help with implementation,
quick review questions with answers to provide immediate feedback, and projects for
further exploration. Georgi et al next discussed their approach for teaching cluster
computing based on the Intel Atom Platform, for which they developed and
introduced a course on Linux clusters and analyze the current variety of courses in the
area of parallel computing systems, describe the structure and implementation of their
own course and provide first conclusions and an outlook on possible further
developments. Lastly, Hamada et al discussed a game-based learning system for
Theory of Computation, using Lego NXT Robot; to this end they introduce a finite
state automata simulator and a robot-based game associated with it for active learning
in theory of computation related courses, where learners can build their own
automaton graphically in the simulator interface, and then pass it to the robot, which
can then simulate the automaton transitions.
During the second session, chaired by Shiflet, G.D. Allen et al elaborated on
their experiences with developing a comprehensive graduate course for preparing
students for research involving scientific computing at Louisiana State University,
including a modularized team-teaching approach and the integration of national cyber
infrastucture with teaching. V. Maxville et al next introduced a white paper on
eScience, from the point of view of educators, focusing on the definition of a Body of
Knowledge with domain-specific and technological aspects to be addressed. H. Chi et
al moved the discussion to the field of scientific visualization, discussing teaching
computing to students via visualization tools, elaborating on computation projects
within existing courses using visualization computational tools to increase the number
of students who graduate with discipline specific computational skills. Finally, R. del
Vado Virseda discussed a teaching Tool based on semantic tableaux for verification
and debugging of Imperative Programs, stressing the fact that most educational
software developed for teaching logic is not suitable to be used directly in large
portions of the computational science education domain where the application of
logical notions is required, and present the results of the evaluation of this tool by
means of several educational experiences during the academic year 2009/2010.

3 Conclusions
The presentations in ICCS 2011's Fifth Workshop on Teaching
Computational Science (WTCS2009) illustrate the variety and depth of computational

1899

1900

Alfredo Tirado-Ramos and Angela B. Shiflet / Procedia Computer Science 4 (2011) 1898–1900

science education around the world. Moreover, the growing success of the workshop
attests to the increasing interest in this important interdisciplinary area.
Acknowledgments. We would like to acknowledge P.M.A. Sloot and D. van Albada
for their continuous support and commitment to the success of this workshop.

References
1.
Alfredo Tirado-Ramos, Angela B. Shiflet: Fourth Workshop on Teaching
Computational Science (WTCS 2010).Procedia CS 1(1): 855-856 (2010)

