Available online at www.sciencedirect.com

Procedia Computer Science 4 (2011) 1167–1176

International Conference on Computational Science, ICCS 2011

DFT Study on mechanochemical bond breaking in
COGEF and Molecular Dynamics simulations.
Bartłomiej Szyjaa,*, Evgeny Pidkoa, Ramon Grootea, Emiel Hensena and Rint Sijbesmaa
a

Department of Chemical Engineering and Chemistry, Eindhoven University of Technology, Den Dolech 2, 5612AZ Eindhoven, The Netherlands

Abstract
We present a method for studying mechanochemical bond breaking (i.e. induced by the external mechanical force) by means of
Molecular Dynamics simulations. The method is based on application of artificial force acting in desired direction particular
atoms, which is known as the Steered Molecular Dynamics method. We have applied SMD formalism to the DFT Molecular
Dynamics, opposite to classical force-field potential in original SMD method. We have applied this method to the example
system consisting of silver cation coordinated by two imidazole rings in order to study the bond breaking phenomenon under the
external force. Moreover, the method allowed us to evaluate the force necessary to break the bond and observe different
phenomena accompanying the bond rupture such as stretching of the bond and changes in potential energy surface. Evaluated
breaking force gives the results which are in good agreement with experimental value. We intend to use the method for other
systems that we investigate experimentally in our group.

Keywords: mechanochemistry; COGEF; Molecular Dynamics; artificial force; bond rupture

1. Introduction
Mechanochemical activation of chemical reaction (i.e activation by the external mechanical force) is usually less
known than thermochemical, electrochemical or photochemical. The history of mechanochemistry is however very
long and reaches the ancient Greek [1]. It extends to present times with Atomic Force Microscopy technique and
Quantum Chemical simulations [2]. Although the phenomenon is less known, it does not mean it is less important.
The range of applications of mechanochemistry is quite broad, and is not limited to activating the covalent bonds
mechanically. Mechanochemically induced phase transitions under high pressure [3] magnetization upon milling [4]
or unbinding and unfolding pathways for biomolecules are barely the few examples. For more references see the
review paper of Beyer and Claussen-Schaumann [2] or Kaupp [5].
Molecular modeling of mechanochemical bond breaking is usually accomplished in on of two ways. First group
of methods consists of the series of constrained geometry optimizations. The method has been first proposed in 2000
by Beyer [6] together with the acronym COGEF (Constrained Geometries for simulating External Force). The

* Corresponding author. Tel.: +31-40-247-2124; fax: +31-40-245-5054.
E-mail address: b.m.szyja@tue.nl.
1877–0509 © 2011 Published by Elsevier Ltd. Open access under CC BY-NC-ND license.
Selection and/or peer-review under responsibility of Prof. Mitsuhisa Sato and Prof. Satoshi Matsuoka
doi:10.1016/j.procs.2011.04.125

1168

Bartłomiej Szyja et al. / Procedia Computer Science 4 (2011) 1167–1176

author proposed a scan of Potential Energy Surface (PES) and relaxation of the system with the exception of atoms
the external force is acting on. As a result he obtained potential curves that contributed to the weakening of the bond
and to the deformations of the investigated molecule.
The other group consists of the variations of the Steered Molecular Dynamics (SMD) simulations [7], which has
been originally developed for large molecules to help understanding the folding and unfolding of proteins. It was
developed on top of the empirical, force-field based potentials, and the external force was applied to overcome
weak, non-bonded interactions.
Saitta and Klein [8] used SMD on top of the CPMD method to simulate knitted chains of hydrocarbons. They
described the system in a following manner: one of the atoms in chain have been kept in its initial position, the other
atom has been attached to the virtual spring, which acted as the source of the external force. The advantage of this
technique was the possibility of simulating continuous process rather than discreet series of constrained
optimizations.
Another variation of first-principle SMD technique, utilizing complete active space SCF in a modified version of
MolPro code, was proposed by Ong et al. [9]. The force that was acting on particular atoms was not directed along
any reference axis; instead it was directed towards the pulling points defined arbitrarily in space.
A technique presented in this study is based on the SMD formalism, but instead of molecular mechanical
description of the potential, we have based the description of system’s energy on DFT. The technique has proven to
be powerful, as it can be applied for either Molecular Dynamics simulation or a series of constrained optimizations.
We have successfully carried out the calculations of Molecular Dynamics with artificial force directed along the
reference axis in order to observe the bond breaking phenomenon and changes in the geometry of the active
complex. We have also scanned the Potential Energy Surface using geometry constraints, to obtain the curves of the
potential energy and identify the magnitude of bind rupture force.
2. Method description
2.1. Source code modifications and description of input file
For the purpose of the study we have used a modified version of SIESTA code [10, 11]. SIESTA can refer to
both: a method and its implementation to perform electronic structure simulations for molecules and solids. The
choice has been made for several reasons. Besides its ability to provide the total/partial energies and forces, SIESTA
offers fast and robust Molecular Dynamics calculations which lie at the basis of our method. Moreover, SIESTA is
available with a source code (written in Fortran90 and parallelized with MPI) to allow necessary modifications.
Last, but not least, the license forbids only redistribution of the code, but allows free modifications and use of the
modified version.
All modifications have been done to the constr.f file, which is a routine especially designed for writing own
constraints in calculation of the atomic coordinates and forces. Modifications done for the purpose of the present
study consisted of reading the forces assigned to particular atoms, and increasing them by the constant force of
specific magnitude in the direction along the z axis of the simulated system.
To allow easy use of the modified code, we have also added a few calls to the standard routines to access
parameters from the input file. One can consider this as the extension of the capabilities of SIESTA, which
originally does not recognize (i.e. ignores) keywords concerning external force, but after compilation of the
modified source, new features become available to the user. In order to use an artificially added force in the
calculations, user needs to add following lines to the input file:
MD.AF
0.01
MD.AFAtom1 30
MD.AFAtom2 34
%block GeometryConstraints
routine constr
%endblock GeometryConstraints

Bartłomiej Szyja et al. / Procedia Computer Science 4 (2011) 1167–1176

1169

First directive (MD.AF) defines the magnitude of the artificial forces that are going to be added to existing forces
acting on the specified atoms. The value is defined in internal units of SIESTA code, which are Ry/Bohr in this case.
It is followed by two directives that define the atoms the forces are assigned to (MD.AFAtom1 and MD.AFAtom2).
Last block informs SIESTA to use the modified constr routine when performing constrained dynamics and
optimizations simulations.
This approach is consistent with general rules of the molecular simulations. Firstly, it does not create the
velocities on the atoms that could cause the translation of the whole system in space. The forces are acting along the
same reference axis but in opposite directions, with the same magnitude, and therefore they cancel each other out
and their contribution is only to pull the opposite ends of the investigated system.
The modification does not interfere with other constraints that could be applied to the system, as the routine
constr can be coupled with other directives allowing for example to fix the atomic position or cell side.
There is however a drawback of this approach, which becomes apparent after the bond is broken. If the system’s
weakest link is broken as a result of artificial force the system can break into two parts. The atoms that are being
influenced by the artificial force would then belong to separated parts, which as a consequence would fly away from
each other, as there is nothing to hold both parts together. SIESTA treats all systems as the periodic ones, and
therefore the “flying parts” would cross the periodic box boundaries at some point and most likely collide with
artificial force pushing them towards each other instead of pulling them away.
There are several solutions possible. One of them would be assigning specific positions in the periodic box, to act
as the pulling points. Artificial force would then pull atoms, which it is attached to, towards these points. This
approach however has other drawbacks – one of them has been mentioned before. Under some circumstances it can
cause the system to start translating in space. Moreover, specific pulling points can take away some degrees of
freedom of the system by the enforcing some particular orientation with respect to pulling points.
The other possibility is the cancellation of the artificial force upon the specific condition (bond has been cleaved,
atoms with the forces assigned have crossed the arbitrary designed points in space, etc.), but as we are only
interested in what happens before the bond is broken, it was not necessary to implement these features for the needs
of present work and we have decided to leave them unanswered.
2.2. Model used as an example
The model we have used as the example in this work is consistent with the systems being investigated
experimentally in our group. Besides the obvious interest of studying these systems, the other reason of this choice
was the availability of experimental data on the force necessary to break the coordination bond. The model is shown
in Figure 1.

Fig. 1. Model used in present study. Brown sphere represents Ag atom, silver cylinders – C, blue cylinders – N, white cylinders – H, brown
cylinders – F and yellow cylinder – P atoms.

1170

Bartłomiej Szyja et al. / Procedia Computer Science 4 (2011) 1167–1176

Central position in the system is occupied by silver (II) cation. Its role is to coordinate two lone electron pairs of
C2 carbon atoms belonging to imidazole rings. Coordination bond is weaker than covalent one, and therefore it is
expected to be the weakest link in the chain and break upon the external force. Ethyl groups are attached to the N1
atoms of imidazole rings. The PF6 anion is compensating the charge on the silver cation.
The artificial force is acting on hydrogen atoms at the end of ethyl groups. It does not matter which hydrogen
atoms are being pulled because the terminal CH3 group can easily rotate under the influence of the force, and
rearranges accordingly.
2.3. Computational procedure
As the method is capable of simulating both SMD and COGEF techniques, it was necessary to test the quality of
the results of both types of simulations. Ideally, we would expect the rupture force evaluated by both techniques to
be comparable, and consistent with the value obtained from the experiments.
The system has been initially optimized using the SIESTA code. GGA approximation has been applied, with
PBE functional describing the exchange-correlation term. DZP basis set shipped together with SIESTA has been
used. Same parameters have been used for all subsequent calculations. The system has been put into the 30 Å cubic
periodic box, to provide enough space to stretch and to prevent the interaction of the system with its periodic image
in neighboring boxes.
Optimized geometries have then been used as initial geometries for the NVT Molecular Dynamics runs. The runs
lasted for 20 000 steps, 0.5 fs each, which means we have simulated 10 ps of the life of the system. The time step
was short enough to ensure the system was simulated properly – energy of the system has been conserved during the
run and the motion of atoms did not show any signs of too large time step. Temperature has been set for 298 K and
it was controlled by Nose thermostat. We have carried out 5 simulations, with the artificial force magnitude
increasing from 0.4 nN to 2.0 nN.
Constrained geometry optimizations have been done using the same initial geometry of the system. The
constraint put upon the system was the distance between the Ag and C atoms. The distance has been fixed between
on C2 atom and Ag cation. We have carried out the series of the geometry optimizations with the distance varying
from 2.0 to 4.0 Å with the step of 0.2 Å. The purpose of these simulations was to determine the influence of the
artificial force on the lowering of the reaction barrier, with the bond rupture possible when the work done by the
external force overcomes the increase of the system’s potential energy along the reaction coordinate.
3. Analysis of the results
3.1. MD simulations
After initial reorganization of the geometry with respect to the acting forces, system stabilizes with deformed
geometry. Deformation differs depending on the forces acting on hydrogen atoms. The average bond lengths
between silver and carbon atoms increase from 2.10 Å for the 0.4 nN force, through 2.13 Å for 0.8 nN, 2.16 Å for
1.2 nN, to reach 2.22 Å for the 1.6 nN force (The bond length equals to 2.06 Å in the optimized system without
artificial force acting on any atoms). The bond length in the system simulated with 2.0 nN force cannot be measured
because Ag-C bond has been broken due to the excessive force.
In the systems where the magnitude of the force is too low to allow the bond rupture, we can observe the initial
rotation of the whole system to avoid stretching the bonds due to the acting force. Bonds are only stretching once the
rotation has stopped. This rotation occurs around the silver cation as the heaviest atom of the system.

Bartłomiej Szyja et al. / Procedia Computer Science 4 (2011) 1167–1176

(a)

1171

(b)

(c)
Fig. 2. Stages of bond rupture in MD simulation with artificial force of 2.0 nN. (a) initial structure with relaxed coordinates (b) stretched
conformation as a result of force acting on hydrogen atoms (c) structure after the rupture, with one imidazole separated from the rest of the
system.

Structure shown in Fig. 2(a) is the relaxed geometry structure from initial energy minimization procedure. There
is no distortion resulting from artificial force yet. The Ag-C bond length is at not stretched and the planes of
imidazole rings are oriented perpendicularly to each other.
Structure shown in Fig. 2(b) is a snapshot geometry from 0.2 ps time of the simulation when the force of 2.0 nN
is applied. The deformation of this structure due to the force applied is clearly visible. The angles between silver
cation, C2 carbon of imidazole ring and methyl group which were approximately 90° at the initial stage are now
acute angles. The distances between Ag and C atoms have increased to 2.3 Å.
Figure 2(c) shows the structure after the bond rupture. One imidazole ring has separated from the rest of the
system. Once the distance between Ag and C atom has increased over the threshold value of approximately 3.0 Å, it
only grows until the end of the simulation, as the bond should be considered broken. PF6 counter-ion starts
occupying the position opposite to the imidazole ring with silver cation in between. The distance between silver and
C2 carbon from the other imidazole ring has decreased back to the initial value of 2.1 Å.

1172

Bartłomiej Szyja et al. / Procedia Computer Science 4 (2011) 1167–1176

The analysis of geometries can be supported by the analysis of the energies and bond lengths. This is shown in
Figure 3.The system stabilizes in first 100 fs, the electronic energy drops to the lowest value during the run. At this
stage, the system reorients and aligns itself with respect to the acting forces. The distances between silver cation and
carbon atoms are not increasing during this stage.
The next stage is the increase of the bond lengths, until approximately 350 fs time. Energy is increasing together
with the bond lengths, which are equal up to this moment. The total energy is increasing faster with time than the
electronic energy – this is because the kinetic part of total energy is also increasing due to the translation and
rotation of the system.

Fig. 3. Distances and energies from the run of bond rupture with force of 2.0 nN. Potential energy (dark blue) and total energy (light blue) have
values on the left y axis. Distances between Ag and two C atoms are shown as purple and orange colors and have values on the right y axis.

From 400 fs to 600 fs the bond rupture occurs – distance between the silver cation and one carbon atom (Bond 1)
is increasing, while the distance to the other C atom (Bond 2) starts decreasing. Bond 2 returns to the same position
as in the initial (optimized) geometry. This stabilizes the system, as the potential energy decreases to a local
minimum. The length of Bond 1 continues increasing together with the total energy, or – more precisely – its kinetic
part, as from this point the system is separated into two parts that move away from each other due to the external
force. Kinetic energy continues increasing until the end of the system due to second Newton’s law of motion –
acceleration due to the unbalanced force.
3.2. Energetics of Ag-C bond stretching
Bond strength is usually considered in the terms of bond energy. When it comes to mechanical force, it is
however more the bond length that if more important than the bond energy [2]. This is due to the fact, that the force
can be expressed as the energy change per unit length. In order to study the relationship between the bond length
and the energy we have analyzed the energy of the system during the MD runs.
The distance/energy correlation plots resulting from simulations with the force 0.4 nN and 1.6 nN are shown in
Fig. 4. They have been constructed in the following manner – for each simulation step we have extracted the
distance between Ag and C atoms and assigned the potential energy in this step to the Ag-C distance. Although the
plots do not show directly the Ag-C bond energy, but the potential energy of the whole system – the strength of the
correlation indicates that total energy of the system is depending mostly on the Ag-C bond.

Bartłomiej Szyja et al. / Procedia Computer Science 4 (2011) 1167–1176

1173

(a)

(b)
Fig. 4. Potential energies of the system as a function of Ag-C distance for artificial force of 0.4 nN (a) and 1.6 nN (b). The approximated curve of
the potential energy is shown as a purple line. Histograms on the right hand side show the occurrence of particular bond length.

The plots show the evolution of the system during the MD simulations, which can be traced by following a blue
line. Initially, the system starts from equilibration phase, and therefore it is located away from the potential energy
surface in the simulation conditions (not shown in the plots). After equilibration, the system falls into a minimum
well. Obviously the system does not stay in the minimum, but oscillates around it. The thermal vibrations, even
increased by the artificial force are not sufficient though to escape from this minimum well.

1174

Bartłomiej Szyja et al. / Procedia Computer Science 4 (2011) 1167–1176

Another important observation is the position of the minimum, which shifts from a value smaller than 2.1 Å for
the force of 0.4 nN, to the value of approximately 2.2 Å for the force of 1.6 nN. The asymmetry of the potential
curve is the more visible the stronger force is applied to the atoms. The longest value of the Ag-C bond length
observed in the simulation with 0.4 nN force reaches 2.35 Å, but the barrier of bond rupture at this point was still to
high for the system to overcome, and it was pulled back towards the minimum. In case of the force of 1.6 nN, the
bond stretches much more and reaches the value of 2.6 Å. The bond length of 2.35 Å which was the maximum value
observed for 0.4 nN force, is nothing unusual for the 1.6 nN force.
The shape of the curve is also very characteristic to the simulations with the artificial force. Comparison with the
curve of 0.4 nN force leads to the conclusion, that for small forces, the system most frequently assumes the position
on the PES near the minimum. When the force is pulling the system apart, system very frequently assumes the
configuration “on the right” from the minimum. The energy of this configuration is higher than the minimum, which
means the system climbs uphill towards the barrier.
3.3. COGEF analysis
Analysis of constrained geometries optimizations can provide some useful insights as well. In order to
accomplish this we have carried out a series of geometry optimizations starting from the same initial geometry.
After initial preoptimization without any constraints, we have carried out another geometry optimization with the
maximum external force of 2.0 nN. The bond is not broken in this optimization, most probably because the kinetic
energy is not calculated at this phase and there are no thermal motions that could help in overcoming the barrier.
The purpose of this optimization is to cause the system to reorient with respect to the acting forces. Then, we have
optimized the system one more time without constraints to relax the geometry, but the system was aligned as if there
were still external forces applied. The geometry obtained in this stage became the initial geometry to the constrained
optimization. This way we could save computational time that would be spent for reorientation of the system in
each subsequent constrained optimization.
We have carried out 5 series of constrained optimizations with the external forces of the same magnitude as in the
MD runs, that is: 0.4 nN, 0.8 nN, 1.2 nN, 1.6 nN and 2.0 nN. Each of these forces has been applied for the system
with increasing Ag-C bond length: we have started with the distance of 2.0 Å and increased to the value of 4.0 Å
with the step of 0.2 Å. At each step we have calculated the energies and the work done by the external force from
the equation W = Fǻx, where W is the work fone by the force, F is the external force acting on atoms and ǻx is the
displacement of these atoms from their optimal position along with the direction of the force acting.
The plot of mechanochemical bond activation is shown in Figure 5. As it can be expected, the stronger the force,
the more significant is the lowering of the barrier. Initial increasing of the barrier, for the distance of 2.2 Å is related
to the optimal bond length of 2.06 Å and is purely the artifact of calculations, as we have not started the PES scan
from this value, but 2.0 Å instead. If we neglect this, the results fall into the scheme of the COGEF technique. The
growth of the energy in the distance range of 2.2 to 2.4 Å is related to the distortion of the system from the optimum
geometry, while the work done by the external force is still to small to overcome that distortion – note that for the
forces of 1.6 and 2.0 nN we do not observe this growth of the potential energy.
The minimum for each series of optimizations have been found at 3.0 – 3.2 Å which is intuitively correct value.
The distance where the bond is broken is approximately 3.0 Å, which falls into the other side of the saddle point,
where the system would have optimized to another minimum. At this point the system is split into parts, which are
pulled apart not only by the external force, but also the energy gradient pulling them towards the geometry optimal
for long Ag-C distance.

Bartłomiej Szyja et al. / Procedia Computer Science 4 (2011) 1167–1176

1175

Fig. 5 Potential energies of the system with Ag-C bond length increasing from 2.0 to 4.0 Å. Each curve represents the barrier of the bond
activated by external force.

This observation is supported by the graph showing only the work done by the external force shown in Figure 6.
If the distance is small, the force needs to do more work to draw the system out of the minimum, as the potential
curve is steep close to the local energy minimum. Within the range of 3.0 – 3.2 Å the work is decreasing for the
same reason as it have been already explained before: the gradient of potential energy surface if flatter, until the
bond is broken. Bond rupture itself does not require much work, as the value does not change significantly between
3.0 and 3.2 Å; it is the pulling the system out of the minimum energy well requires the external force.
In the next phase, the system is already separated, and the work done by the external force is used to translate the
parts of the system in space. This can be seen on the Fig. 6 as the increase of the force for the distances bigger than
3.2 Å.

Fig. 6. Work done by the external force acting on parts of the system as a function of constrained Ag-C distance.

1176

Bartłomiej Szyja et al. / Procedia Computer Science 4 (2011) 1167–1176

3.4. Evaluation of the rupture force
We may now speculate on the magnitude of the force necessary to break the Ag-C bond in the investigated
system. From the MD calculations it turns out, that force of 2.0 nN is sufficient to break the Ag-C bond in the very
early stage, even before the system stabilizes. First pull caused by the force applied is excessive to overcome the
barrier, as the system is very inert with geometry initially optimized. Destabilization of the whole system caused by
the force is very sudden.
In the simulation with the force of 1.6 nN applied, we can observe that the system remains intact during the run.
Hence we can conclude that the force necessary to break the Ag-C bond would be in between 1.6 and 2.0 nN. This
calculated value is close to experimentally observed for similar system: less than 1 nN. On the other hand - the
COGEF simulations show better agreement with the experiment. The barrier still exists for the force of 0.4 nN, but
the potential energy drops below the initial value even for the force of 0.8 nN, meaning the rupture force is between
0.4 and 0.8 nN.
This discrepancy between the MD and COGEF simulations can be explained by the time scale of the simulation
with respect to the experiment. As we mentioned before, we have simulated only 10 ps of the life of the system,
whereas 1 µs is the timescale of the experiment, which is 5 orders of magnitude longer. Literature sources provide
some more details on the value of the force vs. timescale for different types of bonds [4]. Although there is no Ag-C
type of bond mentioned in the reference, we may assume that the trend will be continued, and we could expect the
force to be lowered by approximately 15-25%. This value is even closer to the experiment, nevertheless our model is
not fully consistent with real structure, i.e. simulations have been done in gas phase, not in the solvent; the aliphatic
chains at N1 position of imidazole are shorter [12].
4. Conclusions
The method presented in the paper is useful for studying the covalent bond activation by the external force. The
modifications done in the SIESTA software allowed us to carry out the Steered DFT Molecular Dynamics
calculations for as long as 10 ps time. The software is very effective with this kind of simulations, as it took
approximately 24 hrs to generate the trajectory of 20000 steps on 32 CPUs of the IBM pSeries 575 machine. The
application of artificial force does not interfere with other constraints that might still be applied on the system, as in
the second part of our study we have followed a COGEF scheme with a series of constrained geometry
optimizations. The results obtained in the present, when compared with experimental value give a reasonable value,
having in mind that the model used in simulations is not fully consistent with the real system in the experiments.
The method is able to represent the physics very well, as all other phenomena connected to the bond rupture can be
seen from the results – the bond stretching has been observed, as well as the correlation between the bond lengths
and the energies of the system.

References
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.

V.V. Boldyrev and K.J. Tkacova, J. Mater. Synth. Proc. 8 (2000) 121.
M.K. Beyer and H. Claussen-Schaumann Chem. Rev. 105 (2005) 2921.
H. Heegn, Chem. Ing. Technol. 73 (2001) 1529.
J.P.M. Mendoza, O.E.A. Valenzuela, V.C. Flores, J.M. Aquino, A.D. De la Torre, J. Alloys Compd. 369 (2004) 144.
G. Kaupp, Cryst. Eng. Comm, 11 (2009) 388.
M.K. Beyer, J. Chem. Phys., 112 (2000) 7307.
H. Grubmuller, B. Heymann and P. Tavan Science, 271 (1996) 997.
A.M. Saitta and M.L. Klein J. Phys. Chem. B 105 (2001) 6495.
M.T. Ong, J. Leiding, H. Tao, A.M. Virshup and T.J. Martínez J. Am. Chem. Soc. 131 (2009) 6377.
P. Ordejón, E. Artacho and J. M. Soler, Phys. Rev. B 53(1996) R10441.
J.M. Soler, E. Artacho, J.D. Gale, A. García, J. Junquera, P. Ordejón and D. Sánchez-Portal, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter 14 (2002)
2745.
12. R. Groote, B.M. Szyja, E. Pidko, E.J.M. Hensen, R. Sijbesma – in preparation.

