Available online at www.sciencedirect.com

Procedia Computer Science 4 (2011) 740–749

Harnessing the Scientiﬁc Data Produced by the Experimental Evaluation of
Search Engines and Information Access Systems
Nicola Ferroa,∗, Allan Hanburyb , Henning M¨ullerc , Giuseppe Santuccid
a University

of Padua, Italy
Retrieval Facility (IRF), Austria
c University of Applied Sciences Western Switzerland, Switzerland
d Sapienza University of Rome, Italy
b Information

Abstract
Measuring is a key to scientiﬁc progress. This is particularly true for research concerning complex systems,
whether natural or human-built. Multilingual and multimedia information systems are increasingly complex: they
need to satisfy diverse user needs and support challenging tasks. Their development calls for proper evaluation
methodologies to ensure that they meet the expected user requirements and provide the desired eﬀectiveness. In the
process, vast amounts of experimental data are generated that beg for analysis tools to enable interpretation and thereby
facilitate scientiﬁc and technological progress. These scientiﬁc data are at the basis of the research and publications
in the ﬁeld and can be better exploited and linked to the scientiﬁc literature and production.
We are building a software infrastructure, called Distributed Information Retrieval Evaluation Campaign Tool
(DIRECT), to manage, curate, enrich, and make these scientiﬁc data online accessible and we discuss how this
infrastructure can be exploited to directly link the experimental data into papers and publications describing them.
Keywords: information retrieval, multilingual information access, experimental evaluation, large-scale evaluation
campaigns, scientiﬁc data, DIRECT

1. Motivation and Objectives
Search Engines (SEs) and, more in general, Information Retrieval Systems (IRSs) are key systems (or components
of wider information systems) in the today’s information society to provide access to pertinent and relevant information and to overcome the information overload each of us is exposed to nowadays. Information access systems are
becoming increasingly complex: they need to satisfy user needs and carry out tasks that require to cross language
and media barriers; moreover, they have to manage increasing amounts of information which is often heterogeneous
and demands insightful access to it. If we are to continue advancing the state-of-the-art in information access technologies, we need to understand a new breed of users who need to be able to co-operate and communicate in a way
which crosses language and media boundaries and goes beyond separate search in diverse media/languages, but which
exploits the interactions between diﬀerent languages and media [1].
∗ corresponding

author
Email addresses: ferro@dei.unipd.it (Nicola Ferro), a.hanbury@ir-facility.org (Allan Hanbury), henning.mueller@hevs.ch
(Henning M¨uller), santucci@dis.uniroma1.it (Giuseppe Santucci)

1877–0509 © 2011 Published by Elsevier Ltd. Open access under CC BY-NC-ND license.
Selection and/or peer-review under responsibility of Prof. Mitsuhisa Sato and Prof. Satoshi Matsuoka doi:10.1016/j.procs.2011.04.078

Nicola Ferro et al. / Procedia Computer Science 4 (2011) 740–749

741

We consider experimental evaluation – both laboratory and interactive – a key means for supporting and fostering
the development of multilingual and multimedia information retrieval systems which are more adherent to the new
user needs in order to ensure that they meet the expected user requirements, provide the desired eﬀectiveness and
eﬃciency, guarantee the required robustness and reliability, and operate with the necessary scalability.
Moreover, experimental evaluation is an essential part of scientiﬁc work and scientiﬁc publishing. Relying on the
same data sets and same evaluation scenarios, systems can be compared and performances can be better understood.
Such evaluation can make publications comparable as well and allows new systems to be compared to the best state
of the art and not outdated techniques. This can also be on a component level and not only for entire systems [2, 3].
In this context, large-scale evaluation initiatives provide a signiﬁcant contribution to the advancement in research
and state-of-the-art, industrial innovation in a given domain, and building of strong research communities. They rely
mainly on the traditional Cranﬁeld methodology [4] which makes use of shared experimental collections in order to
create comparable experiments and evaluate their performance. Experimental collections are made up of documents,
topics simulating user information needs, and relevance judgements specifying which documents are relevant to which
topics. Relevant and long-lived examples from the information retrieval ﬁeld are the Text REtrieval Conference
(TREC) 1 in the United States, the Cross-Language Evaluation Forum (CLEF) 2 in Europe, and the NII-NACSIS Test
Collection for IR Systems (NTCIR) 3 in Japan and Asia. Moreover, new initiatives are growing to support emerging
communities and address speciﬁc issues, such as the Forum for Information Retrieval Evaluation (FIRE) 4 in India.
Over the years, they provided qualitative and quantitative evidence as to which methods give the best results in certain
key areas, such as indexing techniques, relevance feedback, multilingual querying, and results merging, and so on.
Moreover, as reported by [5, p. ES-9], “for every $1 that NIST and its partners invested in TREC, at least $3.35
to $5.07 in beneﬁts accrued to IR researchers. The internal rate of return (IRR) was estimated to be over 250% for
extrapolated beneﬁts and over 130% for unextrapolated beneﬁts”.
Figure 1 shows the typical cycle of an evaluation campaign: organizers and assessors prepare document collections
and topics; then, researchers and developers run their systems on the provided documents and topics and produce their
experiments and result lists which are then sampled and pooled in order to produce the relevance judgments; at this
point, performance measures, descriptive statistics, and statistical analyses are computed to evaluate the performances
of each system and compare the proposed solutions. All of this information is then used for feeding the scientiﬁc
production and the design and development of next generation systems.
During their life-span, large-scale evaluation campaigns have produced a huge amount of scientiﬁc data which are
extremely valuable. These experimental and scientiﬁc data provide the foundations for all the subsequent scientiﬁc
production and system development and constitute an essential reference for all the produced literature in the ﬁeld.
Moreover, these data are valuable also from an economic point of view, due the great amount of eﬀort devoted to their
production: [5, p. ES-10] estimates in about 30 million dollars the overall investment in TREC.
Nevertheless, much less attention has been paid over the years to the modelling, management, curation, and access
to the produced scientiﬁc data, even if the importance of scientiﬁc data in general has been highlighted also by many
diﬀerent institutional organizations, such the European Commission [6], the US National Scientiﬁc Board [7], and the
Australian Working Group on Data for Science [8].
Therefore, the overall goal of our work is to deliver a uniﬁed infrastructure and environment collecting data,
knowledge, tools, methodologies, and the user community in order to advance the experimental evaluation of complex
multimedia and multilingual information systems and support individuals, commercial entities, and communities who
design, develop, employ, and improve such complex systems. Part of this wider goal and especially relevant to the
executable paper grand challenge, is the possibility of relying on the developed infrastructure to improve the link and
the exploitation of the performance measure and analyses in the related scientiﬁc literature and production.
1.1. Show Case: Intellectual Property Search
A patent is a complex legal document which is granted by a state to allow an inventor a monopoly in exploiting an
invention for a ﬁxed period of time in return for public disclosure of the invention. The number of patent applications
1 http://trec.nist.gov/
2 http://www.clef-campaign.org/
3 http://research.nii.ac.jp/ntcir/
4 http://www.isical.ac.in/

~clia/

742

Nicola Ferro et al. / Procedia Computer Science 4 (2011) 740–749

$



#





Wisdom

ta

&


$


 

Da

Improved Exploitation of Measures
and Analyses in Scientic Production

Knowle
dge



 

&


$


"

 

ation
Inform
&


$


 

$






	!


Figure 1: Typical evaluation campaign cycle and objectives of the proposal.

and granted patents is continually increasing. The World Intellectual Property Organisation (WIPO) estimates5 that
the number of patent applications worldwide increased from 926.000 in 1985 to 1.9 million in 2008, and the number
of granted patents increased from 395.000 in 1985 to 778.000 in 2008. The increasing number of patent applications creates an increasing workload for patent examiners at patent oﬃces, who have the task of deciding if a patent
application meets the requirements for patentability, which are in general that the invention described must be new,
non-obvious, and useful or industrially applicable. The WIPO estimates that the total number of pending applications
undergoing examination across the world is 3.45 million [9]. Beyond the patent examiners, patent searches are an
important tool for companies involved in research and development and for inventors.The following are examples of
the types of patent search carried out [10]:
Patentability: The aim is to ﬁnd prior art to enable a decision on the patentability of an invention. It is similar to the
search carried out by a patent examiner at a patent oﬃce.
Validity/Invalidity: This search is done to invalidate the claims of an issued patent. It is done if a company is sued
for patent infringement or to ensure that royalty payments are justiﬁed.
State of the Art: A comprehensive search of all available patent and non-patent literature related to a deﬁned technical ﬁeld. It may be done to determine research activities or to assist in licensing existing technologies.
A patent document has a well deﬁned structure that can be exploited by search applications. It consists of four
parts:
Front page: This contains standard information, including title, patent number, inventor, ﬁling date and patent classiﬁcation — patents are classiﬁed according to areas of technology using hierarchical schemes such as the
International Patent Classiﬁcation (IPC). An example patent front page is shown in Figure 2.
Abstract: Brief summary of the invention.
Description: A lengthy description of the proposed invention.
Claims: The claims deﬁne the extent of the protection oﬀered by a patent. They are written in a precise legal style.
Patent searches are diﬀerent in a number of ways to the operation of Internet search engines:
• To validate a patent all information that has been made available to the public in any form before a given date
that might be relevant to a patent’s claims of originality has to be investigated. This has to cover not only recent
publications but more or less the whole documented developments from the last centuries; although practically
the search concentrates on issued patents.
5 http://www.wipo.int/ipstats/en/statistics/patents/

Nicola Ferro et al. / Procedia Computer Science 4 (2011) 740–749

743

Figure 2: Example patent front page.

• Searches tend to be based on lengthy search sessions rather than single queries: result review and query reﬁnement may take several days of work.
• Very high recall is required: not a single relevant document should be missed by the search.
This contrasts with Web search where the aim is high precision: few or no irrelevant documents shall appear among
the top ranking Web pages.
The huge and increasing number of documents, the complexity of the searches done and the potential legal and
economic repercussions of missing a key document in a search make improving patent search an area of increasing
research interest in information retrieval. Patent search also extends beyond patent documents, as a State of the Art
search also includes documents from the scientiﬁc literature. Boolean search is still the dominant paradigm used by
patent professionals, although commercial tools are beginning to oﬀer ranked retrieval. An aspect of patent search
that is poorly covered in current systems is searching based on drawings [11].
Information Retrieval evaluation campaigns have recognised the importance of improving techniques for patent
search, and have oﬀered a number of tracks in recent years. The ﬁrst campaign to introduce a patent retrieval task
was the NTCIR (NII Test Collection for IR Systems) Project in the NTCIR-3 in 2001–2002. All subsequent NTCIR
campaigns have had tasks focused on patents, such as the patent mining and patent translation tasks in the recent
NTCIR-7 and NTCIR-8 iterations. The ease of doing research on patent information retrieval was increased by the
release of the Matrixware Research Collection (MAREC) in 2009. MAREC consists of 19 million patents from the
European Patent Oﬃce (EPO), United States Patent and Trademark Oﬃce (USPTO), Japan Patent Oﬃce (JPO) and
the World Intellectual Property Organization (WIPO), stored in a standardised format. Work is underway to include
the corresponding patent images in MAREC. The availability of MAREC lead to the ﬁrst patent search evaluation
task in Europe, organised as a task of the Cross language Evaluation Forum (CLEF) 2009, with a prior art search task
for patents in English, French and German using a subset of MAREC. This task has continued, with the addition of a
patent classiﬁcation task in 2010, and the addition of a drawing retrieval task in 2011. In 2009, patents and scientiﬁc
publications in the chemical domain were used in the ﬁrst TREC Chemistry track. The 2009 and 2010 tracks included
Prior Art Search and Technology Survey Search tasks, and a chemical structure recognition task is included in 2011.
These evaluation campaigns have had an impact on the number of groups working on patent retrieval challenges
and on the development and evaluation of new solutions, such as solutions for image search in patents (see Figure 3).
However, the infrastructure described in this paper will allow even more rapid development in this important area by
simplifying access to a realistic dataset of patents and corresponding queries, allowing evaluations to be conducted at
any time and allowing results of diﬀerent search systems to be compared and visualised in an interactive way.

744

Nicola Ferro et al. / Procedia Computer Science 4 (2011) 740–749

Figure 3: Image similarity search in patents.

2. Approach
As part of recent eﬀorts to shape the future of large-scale evaluation campaigns [12, 13], more attention has been
paid to evaluation infrastructures, meant as the information management systems that have to take care of the diﬀerent
steps and outcomes of an evaluation campaign. In this context, we have proposed an extension to the traditional
evaluation methodology in order to explicitly take into consideration and model the valuable scientiﬁc data produced
during an evaluation campaign [14, 15], the creation of which is often expensive and not easily reproducible. Indeed,
researchers not only beneﬁt from having comparable experiments and a reliable assessment of their performances,
but they also take advantage of the possibility of having an integrated vision of the scientiﬁc data produced, together
with their analyses and interpretations, as well as beneﬁting from the possibility of keeping, re-using, preserving,
and curating them. Moreover, the way in which experimental results are managed, made accessible, exchanged,
visualized, interpreted, enriched and referenced is therefore an integral part of the process of knowledge transfer
and sharing towards relevant application communities, such as the Digital Library (DL) community, which needs to
properly understand these experimental results in order to create and assess their own systems.
Therefore, we have undertaken the design of an evaluation infrastructure for large-scale evaluation campaigns and
we have chosen to rely on DL systems in order to develop it, since they oﬀer content management, access, curation,
and enrichment functionalities. The outcome is a DL system, called Distributed Information Retrieval Evaluation
Campaign Tool (DIRECT) 6 , which manages the scientiﬁc data produced during a large-scale evaluation campaign, as
well as supports the archiving, access, citation, dissemination, and sharing of the experimental results [16, 17, 18], as
shown in Figure 4. DIRECT has been used, developed and tested in the course of the annual CLEF campaigns since
2005.
Note that this is per se an innovative and valuable eﬀort since, diﬀerently from other ﬁelds such as bio-engineering,
there is no equivalent in the information retrieval ﬁeld of genome databases or other kind of curated databases and
this kind of infrastructures is a pre-requisite for having the possibility of creating “executable papers”.
DIRECT now manages the data produced over ten years of CLEF in some of its core tracks, such as the ad-hoc
track, which amounts to about 130 million tuples [19]. Table 1 summarizes all the data that can be accessed through
the DIRECT system and which are now available to the research and developer communities.
The future challenges for the evaluation campaigns will require an increased attention for the knowledge process
entailed by an evaluation campaign. The complexity of the tasks and the interactions to be studied and evaluated
will produce, as usual, valuable scientiﬁc data, which will provide the basis for the analyses and need to be properly
managed, curated, enriched, and accessed. Nevertheless, to eﬀectively investigate these new domains, not only the
scientiﬁc data but also the information and knowledge derived from them will need to be appropriately treated and
managed, as well as the cooperation, communication, discussion, and exchange of ideas among researchers in the
ﬁeld. As a consequence, we have to further advance the evaluation methodologies in order to support the whole
6 http://direct.dei.unipd.it/

Nicola Ferro et al. / Procedia Computer Science 4 (2011) 740–749

745

Figure 4: Example of DIRECT functionalities.

Table 1: Summary of the data available in DIRECT.

Documents
Topics
Experiments
Pools
Measures
Statistics
Plots

Number of items
7,205,576
1,195
3,574
128
4,246,372
5,407,428
34,841

Number of tuples
–
20,843
166,933,261
3,170,678
–
–
–

Size
36.0 GB
0.0 GB
29.0 GB
0.6 GB
1.5 GB
1.5 GB
0.8 GB

knowledge creation process entailed by a large-scale evaluation campaign and to deal with the increasing complexity
of the tasks to be evaluated. This requires the design and development of evaluation infrastructures which oﬀer better
support for and facilitate the research activities related to an evaluation campaign.
In the perspective of the upcoming challenges, our ﬁnal goal is to turn the DIRECT system from a DL for scientiﬁc data into a virtual research environment, where the whole process which leads to the creation, maintenance,
dissemination, and sharing of the knowledge produced during an evaluation campaign is taken into consideration and
fostered. The boundaries between content producers – evaluation campaign organizers who provide experimental collections, participants who submit experiments and perform analyses, and so on – and content consumers – students,
researchers, industries and practitioners who use the experimental data to conduct their own research or business, and
to develop their own systems – are lowered by the current technologies: considering that we aim at making DIRECT
an active communication vehicle for the communities interested in the experimental evaluation. This can be achieved
by extending the DL for scientiﬁc data with advanced annotation, collaboration, and information visualization functionalities in order to become not only the place where storing and accessing the experimental results take place,
but also an active communication tool for studying, discussing, comparing the evaluation results, where people can
enrich the information managed through it with their own annotations, tags, etc. and share them in a social evaluation
community [20, 21].
This eﬀort is being undertaken by the Participative Research labOratory for Multimedia and Multilingual Infor-

746

Nicola Ferro et al. / Procedia Computer Science 4 (2011) 740–749

mation Systems Evaluation (PROMISE) network of excellence7 which will provide a virtual and open laboratory for
conducting participative research and experimentation in which it will be possible to carry out, advance and bring
automation into the evaluation and benchmarking of complex multimedia and multilingual information systems, by
facilitating management and oﬀering access, curation, preservation, re-use, analysis, visualisation, and mining of the
collected experimental data [22, 23].
3. Relevance to the Executable Paper Grand Challenge
Executability. DIRECT already assigns persistent identiﬁers to the main entities involved in the experimental evaluation, such as document collections, topics, experiments and their performance measures, statistical analyses and so on.
In particular, we have experimented with the use of the Digital Object Identiﬁer (DOI) [24]: for example, resolving
the DOI 10.2415/AH-BILI-X2BG-CLEF2007.JHU-APL.APLBIENBGTD4 gives online access to the corresponding
experiments and all the data and plots related to it.
This provides the opportunity for making a paper executable and two possibilities are foreseen:
• paper authors can directly link the experiments and statistical analyses they are describing by using the provided
persistent identiﬁers; they can even directly reference and cite them, making the experimental data ﬁrst-class
citizens in their scientiﬁc production;
• it is possible to develop a light-weight browser plug-in, written in Javascript and actionable, e.g., by means
of a bookmarklet, that scans papers opened in a Web browser, recognizes persistent identiﬁers associated with
experiments, statistical analyses, etc., and opens a pop-up window with all the pertinent information from which
it will be possible to start the navigation and access further resources and information.
It is worth noting that the novel Visual Analytics techniques that the PROMISE project is introducing in the system
allow for a high degree of interactivity, both in data management and visual data exploration. As an example, the Web
based prototypical system described in [25], designed for assessing the quality of the ranking of retrieved results
according to the estimation of their relevance to the query, allows for loading an experiment result, visualizing it, and
interactively locating and inspecting the misplaced elements (see Figure 5).
Moreover, the PROMISE project is going to improve the DIRECT system and make its resources further accessible
also as a REpresentational State Transfer (REST) Web services [26]. This will open-up the possibility of further
integration of the scientiﬁc data into the papers concerning them. For example, it will become possible to make
focused Asynchronous JavaScript Technology and XML (AJAX) calls, to receive small fragments of data represented
in eXtensible Markup Language (XML) and/or JavaScript Object Notation (JSON), and to contextually render those
data in the Web browser while the user is reading a paper.
Overall, the proposed approach allows for a loosely-coupled integration of existing editorial systems with DIRECT
which basically happens by means of HyperText Transfer Protocol (HTTP) calls to give direct access to the pertinent
scientiﬁc data in the papers describing them. The proposed approach also has a low impact on existing editorial
systems since it does not require to re-design them but it can be achieved by means of lightweight browser plug-ins.
Short and long-term compatibility. The proposed solution relies on standard Web technologies, such as HTTP [27],
Uniform Resource Identiﬁer (URI) [28], XML [29], AJAX [30] which are inherently cross-platform, scalable, open,
and durable over the time. As a consequence, we do not need to develop ad-hoc models for executable ﬁles, maybe
tied to a speciﬁc operating system or platform. Moreover, we can rely on tools already available for the end-users
without requesting him to install and use new software, speciﬁcally developed for accessing the given executable ﬁle
format.
Indeed, as discussed above, in the case of papers and documents accessed via a Web browser, it is possible to
make the paper executable via a browser plugin or a bookmarklet which opens additional windows with the pertinent
and linked information. In the case of other formats, as for example PDF documents, it is possible to insert hypertext
links in the PDF source which will turn out to be opened in the Web browser showing the pertinent information.
7 PROMISE is co-funded by the 7th Framework Program of the European Commission, grant agreement no. 258191; more information are
available at: http://www.promise-noe.eu/

Nicola Ferro et al. / Procedia Computer Science 4 (2011) 740–749

747

Figure 5: The ﬁgure shows a screenshot prototype. Moving the mouse over the vectors’ elements triggers a windows with a summary of the relevant
metrics, highlighting the document position on the discounted cumulated gain graphs on the right. Moreover, through the input panel below the
graphs it is possible to change the logarithm base for modeling diﬀerent discount function according to diﬀerent class of users

As a ﬁnal consideration, all the scientiﬁc data will be made available as REST resources; this mean that diﬀerent
representations of the same resource can be transferred upon request by specifying the proper Multipurpose Internet
Mail Extensions (MIME) [31] in the Accept HTTP header. This gives the possibility of transferring not only XML
but also JSON, PDF, or other formats that are more suitable for embedding and integration in diﬀerent platforms of
the relevant information to be actioned.
Validation. Data validation is ensured by the rigorous experimental methodology adopted by large-scale evaluation
campaigns, by the continuous check that organizers and the community performs on the data, by the automatic checks
that DIRECT performs every time a piece of information comes into the system, and by the lively discussions that are
carried out when the community meets in the workshops and events organized by large-scale evaluation campaigns
where the results are publicly presented.
To increase the collaboration among users, the PROMISE project is going to improve DIRECT by giving users the
possibility of annotating the experimental results, as discussed above. This will provide a further and continuous check
and turn DIRECT into a curated database. Moreover, the PROMISE project is explicitly addressing the challenging
idea of integrating a Visual Analytics component in the system [21], in order to provide reviewers with algorithms
and visualizations that allow for managing the overwhelming set of data stored within DIRECT. We foresee to to
design both a set of predeﬁned visual exploration patterns, useful for dealing with standard and repetitive evaluation
activities, and an interactive visualization environment that provides the means for designing ad-hoc views of the data
for exploring novel analysis patterns.
Copyright/licensing. Evaluation resources are usually regulated by speciﬁc copyright agreements managed by the
organizations which run the large-scale evaluation campaigns that ensure the possibility of using such resources for
research purposes.
Speciﬁc metadata formats are under development, for example in the META-NET Network of Excellence8 which
cooperates with PROMISE, and the DIRECT system has already the possibility to attach any format of metadata to
8 http://www.meta-net.eu/

748

Nicola Ferro et al. / Procedia Computer Science 4 (2011) 740–749

the managed resources. Moreover, there is a general agreement on trying to make language and evaluation resources
available under Creative Commons9 alike licenses.
Systems. Experiments submitted at large-scale evaluation campaigns usually represent the outcomes of computations
made on large-scale computers. Therefore, they are often not easy to reproduce because of the time and costs needed
to produce them. Nevertheless, infrastructures such as the DIRECT system where these experimental results are
collected, curated, and made accessible online alleviates the problem. Indeed, researchers and developers have the
possibility of both directly comparing their own experiments with these costly-to-reproduce data and downloading
these data to make them part of their own experiments, e.g. for data fusion.
While this is a longer term development, initial design of component-based evaluation systems is underway [3].
The aim is to give researchers access to palettes of search system components that can be combined in workﬂows
to build full systems. The development of cloud computing is making large amounts of processing power and storage space available for an ever falling cost. It is foreseeable that the speciﬁcation of a search system in terms of
components can be stored with the results, and can be recreated when requested in a cloud computing environment.
Size. Collections on which information retrieval evaluation experiments are run are often huge, with the largest example being a billion web pages in the ClueWeb collection10 . In contrast, the results of runs in evaluation campaigns
usually only contain lists of references to the documents in the collection, and hence do not present diﬃculties in
terms of ﬁle size even if, as you can note from table 1, the amount of managed data is certainly not negligible . Also
in this case the Visual Analytics component can provide algorithms and visualizations able to reduce the size of the
analyzed data (e.g., through ad-hoc sampling techniques) producing decluttered images that can be used in the visual
analysis.
Provenance. The DIRECT system contains a logging infrastructure which ﬁne traces both system and user events. It
captures information such as the user name, the Internet Protocol (IP) address of the connecting host, the action that
has been invoked by the user, the messages exchanged among the components of the system in order to carry out the
requested action, any error condition, and so on. This is logging infrastructure is further paired with an infrastructure
for keeping the provenance of the managed resources which keeps trace of provenance events, explaining what actions
(e.g. create, read, update, delete) have been performed when and by whom on what items and why.
In the scenario envisaged above in the executability paragraph, these logging and provenance infrastructures trace
everything that happens to the “scientiﬁc data side” while what happens to the “paper side” is related to what is already
available in the editorial system which manages such papers.
Other issues. The speciﬁc goals and data managed by the DIRECT system and foreseen in the PROMISE project are
not aﬀected by risks such as viruses and plagiarism. In fact, the data stored in the system does not contain executable
ﬁles, and plagiarism is not an issue: one of the main objectives of the project is to encourage the reuse and the sharing
of both data and evaluation strategies.
Acknowledgements
The authors would like to thank Emanuele Di Buccio for his help in the preparation of the ﬁnal version of this
paper. The work reported in this paper has be partially supported by the PROMISE network of excellence11 (contract
n. 258191) projects, as part of the 7th Framework Program of the European Commission.
References
[1] M. Dussin, N. Ferro, Managing the Knowledge Creation Process of Large-Scale Evaluation Campaigns, in: M. Agosti, J. Borbinha, S. Kapidakis, C. Papatheodorou, G. Tsakonas (Eds.), Proc. 13th European Conference on Research and Advanced Technology for Digital Libraries
(ECDL 2009), Lecture Notes in Computer Science (LNCS) 5714, Springer, Heidelberg, Germany, 2009, pp. 63–74.

9 http://creativecommons.org/
10 http://boston.lti.cs.cmu.edu/Data/clueweb09/
11 http://www.promise-noe.eu/

Nicola Ferro et al. / Procedia Computer Science 4 (2011) 740–749

749

[2] N. Ferro, D. Harman, CLEF 2009: Grid@CLEF Pilot Track Overview, in: C. Peters, G. M. Di Nunzio, M. Kurimo, T. Mandl, D. Mostefa,
A. Pe˜nas, G. Roda (Eds.), Multilingual Information Access Evaluation Vol. I Text Retrieval Experiments – Tenth Workshop of the Cross–
Language Evaluation Forum (CLEF 2009). Revised Selected Papers, Lecture Notes in Computer Science (LNCS) 6241, Springer, Heidelberg,
Germany, 2010, pp. 552–565.
[3] A. Hanbury, H. M¨uller, Automated Component-Level Evaluation: Present and Future, in: Agosti et al. [32], pp. 124–135.
[4] C. W. Cleverdon, The Cranﬁeld Tests on Index Languages Devices, in: K. Sp¨arck Jones, P. Willett (Eds.), Readings in Information Retrieval,
Morgan Kaufmann Publisher, Inc., San Francisco, CA, USA, 1997, pp. 47–60.
[5] B. R. Rowe, D. W. Wood, A. L. Link, D. A. Simoni, Economic Impact Assessment of NIST’s Text REtrieval Conference (TREC) Program,
RTI Project Number 0211875, RTI International, USA. http://trec.nist.gov/pubs/2010.economic.impact.pdf, 2010.
[6] Commission of the European Communities, Communication from the Commission to the European Parliament, the Council and the European
Economic and Social Committee on scientiﬁc information in the digital age: access, dissemination and preservation, COMM(2008) 56 Final.
[7] National Science Board, Long-Lived Digital Data Collections: Enabling Research and Education in the 21st Century (NSB-05-40), National
Science Foundation (NSF). http://www.nsf.gov/pubs/2005/nsb0540/, 2005.
[8] Working Group on Data for Science, FROM DATA TO WISDOM: Pathways to Successful Data Management for Australian Science,
Report to Minister´ıs Science, Engineering and Innovation Council (PMSEIC), http://www.innovation.gov.au/Science/PMSEIC/
Documents/FromDatatoWisdom.pdf, 2006.
[9] Economics and Statistics Division, WIPO, World intellectual property indicators 2010, Tech. Rep. 941, WIPO (September 2010).
[10] D. Hunt, L. B. Nguyen, M. Rodgers (Eds.), Patent searching: tools & techniques, John Wiley & Sons, 2007.
[11] J. List, How drawings could enhance retrieval in mechanical and device patent searching, World Patent Information 29 (3) (2007) 210–218.
[12] M. Agosti, G. M. Di Nunzio, N. Ferro, D. Harman, C. Peters, The Future of Large-scale Evaluation Campaigns for Information Retrieval
in Europe, in: N. Fuhr, L. Kov´acs, C. Meghini (Eds.), Proc. 11th European Conference on Research and Advanced Technology for Digital
Libraries (ECDL 2007), Lecture Notes in Computer Science (LNCS) 4675, Springer, Heidelberg, Germany, 2007, pp. 509–512.
[13] N. Ferro, CLEF, CLEF 2010, and PROMISEs: Perspectives for the Cross-Language Evaluation Forum, in: N. Kando, K. Kishida (Eds.),
Proc. 8th NTCIR Workshop Meeting on Evaluation of Information Access Technologies: Information Retrieval, Question Answering and
Cross-Lingual Information Access, National Institute of Informatics, Tokyo, Japan, 2010, pp. 2–12.
[14] M. Agosti, G. M. Di Nunzio, N. Ferro, A Proposal to Extend and Enrich the Scientiﬁc Data Curation of Evaluation Campaigns, in: T. Sakay,
M. Sanderson, D. K. Evans (Eds.), Proc. 1st International Workshop on Evaluating Information Access (EVIA 2007), National Institute of
Informatics, Tokyo, Japan, 2007, pp. 62–73.
[15] M. Agosti, N. Ferro, Towards an Evaluation Infrastructure for DL Performance Evaluation, in: G. Tsakonas, C. Papatheodorou (Eds.),
Evaluation of Digital Libraries: An insight into useful applications and methods, Chandos Publishing, Oxford, UK, 2009, pp. 93–120.
[16] G. M. Di Nunzio, N. Ferro, DIRECT: a System for Evaluating Information Access Components of Digital Libraries, in: A. Rauber,
S. Christodoulakis, A. Min Tjoa (Eds.), Proc. 9th European Conference on Research and Advanced Technology for Digital Libraries (ECDL
2005), Lecture Notes in Computer Science (LNCS) 3652, Springer, Heidelberg, Germany, 2005, pp. 483–484.
[17] M. Dussin, N. Ferro, Design of a Digital Library System for Large-Scale Evaluation Campaigns, in: B. Christensen-Dalsgaard, D. Castelli,
J. K. Lippincott, B. Ammitzbøll Jurik (Eds.), Proc. 12th European Conference on Research and Advanced Technology for Digital Libraries
(ECDL 2008), Lecture Notes in Computer Science (LNCS) 5173, Springer, Heidelberg, Germany, 2008, pp. 400–401.
[18] M. Dussin, N. Ferro, The Role of the DIKW Hierarchy in the Design of a Digital Library System for the Scientiﬁc Data of Large-Scale
Evaluation Campaigns, in: R. Larsen, A. Paepcke, J. L. Borbinha, M. Naaman (Eds.), Proc. 8th ACM/IEEE-CS Joint Conference on Digital
Libraries (JCDL 2008), ACM Press, New York, USA, 2008, p. 450.
[19] M. Agosti, G. M. Di Nunzio, M. Dussin, N. Ferro, 10 Years of CLEF Data in DIRECT: Where We Are and Where We Can Go, in: T. Sakay,
M. Sanderson, W. Webber (Eds.), Proc. 3rd International Workshop on Evaluating Information Access (EVIA 2010), National Institute of
Informatics, Tokyo, Japan, 2010, pp. 16–24.
[20] M. Agosti, N. Ferro, A Formal Model of Annotations of Digital Content, ACM Transactions on Information Systems (TOIS) 26 (1) (2008)
3:1–3:57.
[21] D. A. Keim, J. Kohlhammer, G. Santucci, F. Mansmann, F. Wanner, M. Schaefer, Visual Analytics Challenges, in: IEEE eChallenges 2009,
2009, pp. 21–23.
[22] M. Braschler, K. Choukri, N. Ferro, A. Hanbury, J. Karlgren, H. M¨uller, V. Petras, E. Pianta, M. de Rijke, G. Santucci, A PROMISE for
Experimental Evaluation, in: Agosti et al. [32], pp. 140–144.
[23] N. Ferro, PROMISE: Advancing the Evaluation of Multilingual and Multimedia Information Systems, ERCIM News 84 (2011) 49.
[24] N. Paskin (Ed.), The DOI Handbook – Edition 4.4.1, International DOI Foundation (IDF). http://dx.doi.org/10.1000/186, 2006.
[25] N. Ferro, G. Sabetta, G. Santucci, G. Tino, F. Veltri, Visual Comparison of Ranked Result Cumulated Gains, in: S. Miksch, G. Santucci
(Eds.), EuroVa – International Workshop on Visual Analytics, The Eurographics Association, Switzerland, 2011.
[26] R. T. Fielding, R. N. Taylor, Principled Design of the Modern Web Architecture, ACM Transactions on Internet Technology (TOIT) 2 (2)
(2002) 115–150.
[27] R. Fielding, Y. Gettys, J. Mogul, H. Frystyk, L. Masinter, P. Leach, T. Berners-Lee, Hypertext Transfer Protocol – HTTP/1.1, RFC 2616 (June
1999).
[28] T. Berners-Lee, R. Fielding, L. Masinter, Uniform Resource Identiﬁer (URI): Generic Syntax, RFC 3986 (January 2005).
[29] W3C, Extensible Markup Language (XML) 1.0 (Fifth Edition) – W3C Recommendation 26 November 2008, http://www.w3.org/TR/
xml/ (November 2008).
[30] W3C, XMLHttpRequest – W3C Candidate Recommendation 3 August 2010, http://www.w3.org/TR/XMLHttpRequest/ (August 2010).
[31] N. Freed, N. Borenstein, Multipurpose Internet Mail Extensions (MIME) Part One: Format of Internet Message Bodies, RFC 2045 (November
1996).
[32] M. Agosti, N. Ferro, C. Peters, M. de Rijke, A. Smeaton (Eds.), Multilingual and Multimodal Information Access Evaluation. Proceedings
of the International Conference of the Cross-Language Evaluation Forum (CLEF 2010), Lecture Notes in Computer Science (LNCS) 6360,
Springer, Heidelberg, Germany, 2010.

