Available online at www.sciencedirect.com

Procedia Computer Science 4 (2011) 86–95

International Conference on Computational Science, ICCS 2011

Multi-path Division Transmission for Improving Reliability and
Energy Eﬃciency in Underwater Acoustic Networks
Junfeng Xu∗ , Keqiu Li∗ and Geyong Min∗∗1
∗ School

of Computer Science and Technology, Dalian University of Technology, China
∗∗ Department

of Computing, University of Bradford, United Kingdom

Abstract
Reliability and energy eﬃciency are the crucial issues for construction of Underwater Acoustic Networks (UANs).
Many schemes have been developed to improve reliability and energy eﬃciency in UANs. However, most of the
existing schemes are based on the unrealistic assumptions that the noise in the underwater surrounding is uniformly
distributed and the attenuation of noise is not considered. In this paper, we take the noise attenuation into account and
propose a new Multi-path Division Transmission (MDT) mechanism to improve reliability and energy eﬃciency in
UANs. To this end, a Multiple Layer Division (MLD) scheme is developed to divide the underwater communication
space for the purpose of initializing the tree-based multi-paths. The problem of energy eﬃciency of MDT is then
formulated as a distributed optimization problem and is solved so as to achieve a set of feasible solutions. Finally,
extensive simulation experiments are conducted to evaluate the performance of the proposed MDT. The results reveal
that MDT signiﬁcantly outperforms the current state-of-the-art multi-path transmission schemes in UANs in terms of
energy eﬃciency and total Packet Error Rate(PER).
Keywords: Underwater Acoustic Networks, Reliability, Energy Eﬃciency, Multi-path Communications

1. Introduction
Underwater acoustic wireless communications enable many civilian and military applications such as oceanographic data collection, scientiﬁc ocean sampling, pollution and environmental monitoring, disaster prevention, assisted navigation, distributed tactical surveillance, and so on [1]. However, the characteristics of the wireless acoustic
physical channels such as limited bandwidth, high propagation delay, high bit error rates (BER) and temporary losses
of connectivity, cause low energy eﬃciency and reliability in Underwater Acoustic Networks (UANs) [2, 3]. To obtain
high energy eﬃciency and reliability, many schemes have been proposed, such as the design approach of low-power
chipset [4], optimization of energy model [5], source schedule [6] and energy control for synchronism communications between multiple nodes[7]. In addition, another important cross-layer approach using Multi-path Power Control
(MPC) communication for time-critical application [8] has been proposed with the aim of reducing packet retransmissions. However, most of the existing schemes are based on the unrealistic assumptions that the noise in the underwater
area is uniformly distributed and the attenuation of the noises is not considered.
1 Corresponding

author

1877–0509 © 2011 Published by Elsevier Ltd. Open access under CC BY-NC-ND license.
Selection and/or peer-review under responsibility of Prof. Mitsuhisa Sato and Prof. Satoshi Matsuoka
doi:10.1016/j.procs.2011.04.010

Junfeng Xu et al. / Procedia Computer Science 4 (2011) 86–95

87

In practice, the acoustic signal strength has a relatively high level near the sound source, is attenuated as it propagates away, and decays to the level of the background noise at some distance in the ocean. Moreover, most of the
noises occur on the ocean surface, caused by shipping, wind, thermal and turbulence. So intuitively, it is much quieter
in the bottom of the ocean than on the ocean surface. In other words, the acoustic transmission becomes smoother in
the deeper ocean area than in the shallow ocean space. This fact motivate us to divide the communication plane into
multiple layer vertically for eﬃcient transmission and for decreasing energy consumption.
In this paper, we present a novel tree-based Multi-path Division Communication (MDT) scheme with the aim
of obtaining both high reliability and energy eﬃciency. In MDT, taking the noise attenuation into consideration, the
communication space is divided into multiple layers to initialize the tree-based multi-path. The cross nodes in the treebased multi-path are located near the border of layers. The source node transmits the original data packet along the
tree-based multiple paths to the same sink. When the data packets are delivered to the cross nodes, the correct packets
are forwarded by virtue of multicasting along the multiple paths. But, the fault packets are forwarded straightforwardly
or dropped. In the sink, the received data packets are combined to generate the original packet. Moreover, in each
path, the intermediate nodes can control transmission power and data rate for saving energy. Thus, MDT can achieve
high reliability and energy eﬃciency, and eliminate retransmission for UANs. The main contributions of this paper
can be summarized as follows:
• A Multiple Layer Division (MLD) scheme is proposed to divide the underwater communication space and to
initialize the tree-based multi-path due to diﬀerent noise levels in the deep underwater area.
• The problem of energy eﬃciency of MDT is formulated as a distributed optimization problem and is solved
using Tabu Search Algorithm for calculating the optimal transmission power and data rate so as to achieve a set
of feasible solutions.
• Extensive simulation experiments are conducted to evaluate the performance of the proposed MDT. The results
reveal that MDT signiﬁcantly outperforms the current state-of-the-art multi-path transmission schemes in UANs
in terms of energy eﬃciency and total Packet Error Rate(PER).
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows: First, Section 2 presents the preliminaries. Section 3.1
describes the system models and the layer division problem, and formulates the energy eﬃciency problem as an
optimization problem and further gives the feasible solutions for it. The simulation experiments and performance
results are presented in Section 4. Finally, the conclusions are given in Section 5.
2. Preliminaries
2.1. Network Scenario
As depicted in Fig. 1, in this study we focus on UANs, where many wireless nodes deployed with the depth
exceeding 1000 meters for. According to the scheme proposed in [9], the three-dimensional network scenario can be
converted into two-dimensional plate. The communication procedure is as follows. First the data packets are copied
for transmission from the root to the top of the tree through the acoustic channels. These copies can then be replayed
and forwarded to the sink node successfully through the radio channel as soon as they are transported to these leaf
nodes. Finally, these copies can be combined to generate the original data packets in the sink node.
2.2. Channel Fading and Noise Model
Channel fading that occurs in an underwater acoustic channel over a distance d for a signal of frequency f is given
by [10]:
F(d, f ) = dk a( f )d .
(1)
where is a unit-normalizing constant, k is the spreading factor, and a( f ) is the absorption coeﬃcient. The spreading
factor deﬁnes the geometry of the propagation (i.e., k = 1 is cylindrical, k = 2 is spherical, and k = 1.5 is practical
spreading). The total fading is calculated based on the spreading loss [11] and on Thorps approximation [12] for the

88

Junfeng Xu et al. / Procedia Computer Science 4 (2011) 86–95

Figure 1: The network scenario

absorption loss. Therefore, the channel model includes a function to calculate Thorps approximation for absorption
at a given frequency as follows:
⎧
⎪
f2
f1
⎪
⎪
+ 44
+ 2.75 · 10−4 f 2 + 0.003, f ≥ 0.4
0.11
⎪
⎪
2
⎪
4100 + f
⎨
1+ f
10loga ( f ) = ⎪
(2)
⎪
⎪
f
⎪
⎪
⎪
0.002 + 0.11
+ 0.011 f, f < 0.4
⎩
1+ f
where a( f ) is given in dB/km and f is in kHz for underwater communications.
There are many types of noise sources such as turbulence, shipping, wind thermal and so on in the underwater
surrounding. The overall noise power, Po( f ), spectral density for a given frequency f is:
n

Po( f ) =

Poi ( f ).

(3)

i=1

where Poi ( f )(1 ≤ i ≤ n, n is the number of the noises) is the power of the noise due to turbulence, shipping, wind
and thermal respectively. n is the count of noise in dB re μPa per Hz as a function of frequency in kHz [13]. Thus,
considering acoustic fading in seawater, the overall noise power at a distance of di is calculated (di is the distance from
the ith noise position to the destination position) as follows:
n

Pod ( f ) =
i=1

Poi ( f )
.
dik a( f )di

(4)

For the above equation, we can observe that the level of noise will be attenuated as the noise propagates away from
the source. That is, it will decay to a very low level in the deep sea.
3. Multi-path Division Transmission
The core component of MDT lies in the multi-path division module in the intermediate nodes near the border of
layers in the underwater scenario. We will solve three important subproblems including 1) how to route packets in
the multiple paths, 2) how to divide the space into multiple layers and 3) how to guarantee the required Packet Error
Ratio (PER) and minimize energy consumption in this section.

Junfeng Xu et al. / Procedia Computer Science 4 (2011) 86–95

89

3.1. Networks Models and MDT Description
As shown in Fig. 1, there are a source node, many intermediate nodes, multiple gateway nodes on the surface of
the water and a sink above the water. Diﬀerent from the acoustic channels for transmission between the source and
the intermediate nodes, the surface gateway nodes communicate with the sink over the radio channels. Considering
that radio signal propagation is orders of magnitude faster, more energy eﬃcient, more reliable than acoustic signal
propagation, it is reasonable to assume that the surface gateways can send packets to the sink above the water in
negligible time and with relatively small energy consumption. In this way, all the surface gateways nodes can be
considered as a virtual sink. In other words, the data packets can be transported to the sink smoothly once they are
forwarded along the multi-paths to one of the surface gateway nodes.
The operation of MDT is as follows.
1. The communication plane is divided into multiple layers equally according to the depth of the water. The
number of layers will be addressed in detail in Subsection 3.3.
2. The source node initiates a multi-path division process to establish the tree-based paths. Firstly, the source node
transmits the multicast data packets to the network. We deﬁne a node on the border of two layers or near (the
”near” is deﬁned as a threshold distance of σ) the border as a border node. Secondly, once the data packets
are forwarded to the border nodes , the multi-path division process in the border nodes detects whether the
cyclic redundancy check (CRC) in the packet header is correct or not. If yes, this means that the data packet
is not corrupted over the acoustic channel. The border node then delivers data packet through two paths to the
next two border nodes by virtue of multicasting. Otherwise, the border node forwards data packet to the next
border. Similarly, the next border nodes will detect the CRC and dispose the data packet until the data packet
is transmitted to the surface gateways. Finally, the surface gateways relay the data packets and transmit them to
the sink through the radio channel.
3. Since the multiple copies of the original data packet contains the same sequence ID in the packet header, the
sink distinguishes these data packets according to the sequence ID. Likewise, the sink ﬁrstly detects the CRC
of the received packets. If it is correct, this means that the sink has received the original data packet properly.
Otherwise, the sink will collect all the corrupted copies and combine them to generate the original data packet.
To this end, we employ a majority voting algorithm [14] in MDT. The key idea of the majority voting algorithm
is to vote the same bit in all the collected corrupted copies to estimate the bit is 0 or 1 . If the bits are 1 in
the majority of the same positions in these copies, the bit is set be to 1 in the position of the ﬁnal combined
packet. Otherwise, it is set to be 0 .
3.2. Packet Error Ratio in Acoustic Channel
To derive the PER in the proposed scheme, we ﬁrstly list some relevant variables and notations in Tab. 1 and then
calculate the BER and PER.
The peculiar bandwidth-distance relationship of the underwater acoustic channel derives from the dependency
on frequency exhibited by both the attenuation and the noise power proﬁles. In turn, based on Eqs. 1 and 4, the
Signal-to-Noise Ratio (SNR) of a transmission depends on the frequency, as shown in the following equation:
μi jk =

Poi jk /F(di jk , f )
=
Podu ( f )

Poi jk
n

a( f )di jk ·
u=1

Pou ( f )
a( f )du

.

(5)

where μi jk is the average received SNR of node Ni jk , and di jk is the distance between N(i−1) jk and Ni jk . As Additive
White Gaussian Noise (AWGN) follows normal distribution, the instantaneous received SNR, μi jk , has the following
distribution [15]:
1 − μμii jkjk
e
.
(6)
f (μi jk ) =
μi jk
Then the conversion from SNR to BER, which is dependent on the channel modulation scheme, can be taken. For the
(π/4) QPSK modulation scheme, the approximate BER, pbijk (μi jk ), is given by [16]:
1
pbijk (μi jk ) = √
2π

∞

√

2μi jk

e−t

2

/2

dt.

(7)

90

Junfeng Xu et al. / Procedia Computer Science 4 (2011) 86–95

Table 1: List of variables and notations

Notation
x
lk
L jk
C(lk )
C(L jk )
Ni jk
Ei jk
Poi jk
Pomax
Rk
Pri jk
Prmax
Prreq
Plen

Meaning
The number of layers.
The kth lay in the communication space.
The jth link in lk .
The number of links in lk .
The number of nodes in L jk .
The ith node in L jk .
Consumed energy of node Ni jk .
Power of node Ni jk .
Maximum power of a node.
Data rate in layer lk .
The PER of The node Ni jk .
The max packet error ratio of the tree.
The required PER.
The length of data packet.

Thus, we can further convert BER to PER, which is dependent on the channel coding scheme:
Pri jk = 1 − 1 − pbijk (μi jk )

Plen

.

(8)

3.3. Multiple Layers Division (MLD)
In this subsection, we will solve the problem how many layers will be divided in the communication plane. To
make the problem tractable, the following assumptions are taken into account: 1) the sensor nodes are distributed
equally and densely in the communication plane. 2) A set of full binary-tree-based multiple paths can be established
in the ideal condition.
In MDT, given the communication plane with area A is divided in to x layers where A = a · b, a and b are the
width and depth of the plane respectively, and ρ in m2 /node is the node density in the plane. The maximum number
of nodes, n, including intermediate nodes and surface gateway nodes can be given by:
n = A · ρ ≥ 2 x · (x + 1)

(9)

Based on the theories of the full binary-tree, the maximum √number of nodes in the top layer is 2 x . We can also
calculate the average horizontal distance of nodes d = √1ρ = √An . Furthermore, the max number of nodes can not
exceed that of the surface gateway nodes:
a
√
(10)
2x ≤ = a · ρ
d
According Eqs. 9 and 10, we can calculate the following equations:
√
⎧
⎪
⎨ x ≤ log2 (a · ρ)
(11)
⎪
⎩ x ≤ lambertw(2 log ·ρA)/ log −1
2
2
√
where lambertw(∗) is an inverse function of f (w) = w·ew . Hence, setting X = MIN(log2 (a· ρ), lambertw(2 log2 ·ρA)/ l
then x ≤ X.
The error probability, Pr x , in the xth layer, can be written as:
2x

C2mx · Pr(x)

Pr(x) = 1 −
m=2 x−1

m

· 1 − Pr(x)

(2 x −m)

(12)

Junfeng Xu et al. / Procedia Computer Science 4 (2011) 86–95

91

where Pr(x) is the geometric mean of the probability set of [Pri jk] is given by:
⎛C(l ) ⎛
⎞⎞1/2x
C(L jx )
⎜⎜⎜ x ⎜⎜⎜
⎟⎟⎟⎟⎟⎟
⎜⎜⎜1 −
⎟⎟⎟⎟⎟⎟
Pr(x) = ⎜⎜⎜⎝
(1
−
Pr
)
i
jx
⎝
⎠⎠
j=1

(13)

i=1

Obviously, the more layers, the more surface gateways are required to establish the tree-based multiple paths. On
one hand, this situation can gain the low PER. Based on Eq. 13, 1 > Pr(x + 1) > Pr(x) > 0. Thus, there are
2 x+1

C2mx+1 · Pr(x + 1)

m

· 1 − Pr(x + 1)

(2 x+1 −m)

m=2 x
2 x+1

>

C2mx+1 · Pr(x)

m

· 1 − Pr(x)

C2mx · Pr(x)

m

· 1 − Pr(x)

(2 x+1 −m)

(14)

m=2 x
2x

>

(2 x −m)

m=2 x−1

Hence, Pr(x + 1) < Pr(x). In other words, the function Pr(x) is monotonically decreasing.
On the other hand, totally, more layers will cause much energy consumption which denoted as E(x), and there is
⎛
⎞
x ⎜
⎟⎟
a 2
b 2 √
⎜⎜⎜ m−1
· ( m+1 ) + ( ) · ρ · E x ⎟⎟⎟⎠
(15)
E(x) =
⎜⎝2
x
2
m=1
where E x is the average energy consumption of each node in xth layer, and
C(L jx ) C(l x )

Ex = (

Ei jx )/(C(l x ) · C(L jx ))
i=1

(16)

j=1

By Eq. 16, there is
⎛ x+1
⎞
⎜⎜⎜
⎟⎟⎟ √
a
b
E(x + 1) − E(x) = ⎜⎜⎜⎝
( )2 + (
· 2m−1 )2 ⎟⎟⎟⎠ · ρ · Em
4
x+1
m=1
⎛ x
⎞
⎜⎜⎜
a 2
b m−1 2 ⎟⎟⎟⎟ √
⎜
− ⎜⎝
( ) + ( · 2 ) ⎟⎠ · ρ · Em
4
x
m=1
⎞
⎛ x+1
⎟⎟⎟ √
⎜⎜⎜
a
b
> ⎜⎜⎝⎜
( )2 + (
· 2m−1 )2 ⎟⎟⎠⎟ · ρ · Em
4
2·x
m=1
⎛ x
⎞
⎜⎜⎜
a 2
b m−1 2 ⎟⎟⎟⎟ √
⎜
− ⎜⎝
( ) + ( · 2 ) ⎟⎠ · ρ · Em
4
x
m=1

(17)

>0
So E(x + 1) > E(x). This means that the function E(x) is monotonically increasing.
From the above-mentioned two aspects, we can observe that the Multiple Layer Division problem lies on the
tradeoﬀ between Pr(x) and E(x). The small number of layer causes the low PER, but consumes more energy. Thus,
given a required PER, denoted as Prreq , if the Pr(x) satisﬁes |Pr(x) − Prreq | ≤ δ, the solution is computed. The
algorithm Layer Division Computation (LDC) for computing the number of the divided layers is given as follows:
3.4. Network Energy Eﬃciency (NEE)
This subsection focus on solving the solving the problem of improving energy consumption by controlling power
and data rate among the intermediate nodes in the network nodes. In communication networks, the energy consumed

92

Junfeng Xu et al. / Procedia Computer Science 4 (2011) 86–95

Algorithm 1: LDC : Layer Division Computation
Input : δ, Prreq
Output: x
1 Calculate Pri jk according to Eq. 5-8;
2 for x = 1 to X do
3
Calculate Pr(x) according to Eq. 12 and 13 ;
4
if |Pr(x) − Prreq | ≤ δ then
5
Return x;

at a node is equal to the transmission power multiplied by the transmission interval which is given by the packet length
divided by the transmission rate. Thus, the energy consumed at node can be expressed as:
Poi jk · Plen
.
Rk

Ei jk =

(18)

where Plen is the length of a data packet. Rk is the the data rate in the kth layer. Thus, E(x) can also be given by:
x C(lk ) C(L jk )

E(x) =
k=1 j=1

i=1

Poi jk · Plen
Rk

(19)

Hence, the issue of network energy eﬃciency (NEE) can be formulated as the following optimization problem:
⎧ Min
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
s.t.
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎨
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎩

E(x)
Pr(x) ≤ Prreq

(20a)
(20b)

R x−1 ≤ R x
R x ≤ RAT E(Pr(x))

(20d)

Poi jk ≤ Pomax

(20e)

(20c)

where C(L) is the number of links in the tree, C(Li ) is the number of nodes in the ith link, Prmax is the maximum
packet error ratio of the tree, Prreq is the required PER. RAT E(Prmax ) is the maximum data rate under Prmax according
to Pomax is the maximum power of each node in the tree. Moreover, RAT E(Prmax ) = 1−H2C(Prmax ) , where H2 (Prmax ) =
(Prmax − 1) log2 (1 − Prmax ) − Prmax log2 Prmax is the binary entropy function with PER, and C = W · log2 (1 + S NR),
(in bits/seconds) [17], where W is the channel bandwidth in Hz and S NR is SNR in dB.
The aim of Eq. (20a) is to minimize the total energy consumption. The ﬁrst constraint ensures that the total PER
can satisfy the required PER, and the second constraint guarantees that there is less packet congestion in the networks;
while the third constraint ensures that the data rate is in a valid range of the maximum RAT E(Pr(x)); ﬁnally the last
constraint speciﬁes that the transmission power do not is beyond the acceptable range Pomax , which is determined by
the hardware of a node.
From Eq. (19), we can observe that both decreasing Poi jk and increasing RAT E(Pr(x)) can consume less energy as
for a single nodes. On the other hand, both decreasing Poi jk and increasing RAT E(Pr(x)) will cause the low reliability.
This mainly because of the fact that less Poi jk and more RAT E(Pr(x)) may result in packet lost. The objective of the
NEE problem is to compute Poi jk and RAT E(Pr(x)) in term of minimizing the energy consumption for the networks.
However, it is hard to solve the optimization problem. The following lemma holds:
Lemma 1. The NEE problem is of NP-hard.
Proof Due to the limited space, we do not present details here.
In practice, such problems are usually solved by heuristic algorithms such as Tabu search [18] and Simulated
Annealing [19]. In our scheme, Poi jk and R x are computed oﬄine using Tabu search algorithm as described below.

Junfeng Xu et al. / Procedia Computer Science 4 (2011) 86–95

93

Algorithm 2: Tabu Search Algorithm for NEE
Input : ξ // ξ is a predeﬁned threshold
Output: a solution set S u = {Poi jk , R x }
1 Generate a huge solution set S according to Alg. 1 and the constrains in Eq. 20b - 20e, where S = {S 1 , · · · , S n }
and S u ∈ S ;
2 Initialize a solution set Var S at random, where Var S ∈ S, clear up the tabu list, T = {T } ;
3 Cur S = Var S ;
4 Min S = ∞ ;
5 Select a new solution set Var N in the neighborhood of Var S , where Var N ∈ S ;
6 Calculate Cur E according to Eq. 18 and 19, where Var N = {Poi jk , R x } ;
7 while |Min E − Cur E| ≤ ξ do
8
Select a new solution set Var N in the neighborhood of Var S , where Var N ∈ S ;
9
Calculate Cur E according to Eq. 18 and 19, where Var N = {Poi jk , R x } ;
10
if T .Var E < Min E then
11
// T is an element in T ;
12
Cur S = T .Var S ;
13
let T = (Var E, Var S ) take place of the oldest solution set in T ;
14
Min E = T .Var E ;
15
Cur S = Var S ;
16
17
18
19

else
Cur S = Var N ;
let T = (Var E, Var S ) take place of the oldest solution set in T ;
S u = Cur S ;

As presented Alg. 2, the key step (step 1) is to generate a huge solution set, S, which determines whether a
proper solution can be searched or not. However, the huge solution set can cause the high computation complexity.
Therefore, the constrains in Eqs. (20b - 20e) can greatly reduce the size of the generated set. Steps 2 − 6 initialize
the variables and illustrate the computation for initialization. From step 7, it is a loop procedure in the algorithm. The
algorithm stops when a ﬁxed number of iterations ξ has been performed. Using the same neighborhood as the tabu
search algorithm is applied to the entire best solution set, S u , at the end of the algorithm.
4. Numerical and Simulation Results
In this section, the performance of MDT is evaluated through numerical experiment and extensive simulations. To
demonstrate the eﬃciency of MDT in terms of energy consumption and PER, MDT is compared with an inﬂuential
multi-path communication scheme, MPC.
4.1. Numerical Results
To evaluate the relationship between the total PER and energy consumption of diﬀerent numbers of layers, the
numerical experiments are performed. The main experiment parameters are set as follows: n = 900, Pr x = 0.1,
a = b = 4000m, 10μJ/packet ≤ Em ≤ 50μJ/pakcet.
Fig. 2 plots the energy consumption and PER with diﬀerent numbers of layers. It is easy to ﬁnd that the number of
layers has a great impact on energy consumption and PER. For all case, with the increase of the number of layers, PER
ﬁrst decreases rapidly, then decreases slowly. On the contrary, the consumed energy increase rapidly and continuously.
This behavior can be explained based on the fact that the problem energy consumption and reliability are of tradeoﬀ. Therefore, it is very important to choose a proper number of layers according to Prreq to maintain the energy
consumption at an ideal level.

94

Junfeng Xu et al. / Procedia Computer Science 4 (2011) 86–95

Figure 2: Energy consumption and packet error rate in diﬀerent number of layers

4.2. Simulation Results
In all simulations, 900 underwater sensor nodes are randomly deployed in a 4000m ∗ 4000m area. We use the
popular network simulation tool, NS-2.29, to evaluate the proposed scheme. In order to support the underwater
environment in NS-2, we downloaded an underwater module from [20], and installed it in NS-2. We also modiﬁed
the MAODV [21] routing protocol for NS-2 to multicast packet in multiple paths. According to the numerical results
shown in Fig. 2, the number of layers is set to be 5.The other key simulation parameters are listed in Tab. 2. It is worth
noting that the simulations can run steadily in the period of 1000 seconds. Finally, for comparison, we implement
another scheme, MPC, in the same underwater network settings. Figs. 3(a) and (b) show that the energy eﬃciency
Table 2: Setting for the underwater network simulations

Parameters
Area
Ship
Wind
Number of Nodes
Period
CPThresh
CSThresh

Values
4000m*4000m
0.8
20
900
1000s
10
20

Parameters
RXThresh
Pt
freq
Initialized energy
txPower
rxPower
idlePower

Values
30
197
914e+6
1000J
0.66
0.395
0.035

achieved and packet lost ratio achieved and caused by MDT compared to those in MPC under diﬀerent data rates with
Prreq = 0.004 and Plen = 200 respectively. With the date rate increases, the consumed energy and packet lost ratio
in all the cased increase because there are more data delivered in the same period of 1000s. From the ﬁgures we can
observe that the performance of MDT is better than that of MPC in terms of energy eﬃciency and reliability. It is
worth noting that the energy consumed by MDT is nearly half of MPC.

(a)

(b)

Figure 3: Energy Consumption and Packet Lost Ratio Comparison with diﬀerent data rate

Junfeng Xu et al. / Procedia Computer Science 4 (2011) 86–95

95

5. Conclusion and Future Work
The acoustic attenuation is an important problem in UANs and can dramatically increase the energy consumption
and degrade the network reliability. This paper has presented a novel MDT scheme with the aim of reducing energy
consumption and enhancing reliability by avoiding packet retransmission. The simulation results show that MDT
can improve energy eﬃciency and reliability by dividing communication space into multiple layers and controlling
transmission power and data rate.
Acknowledgements
This work is supported by NSFC under Grant nos. of 60973117, 60973116, 60903154 and 60973115, New
Century Excellent Talents in University (NCET) of Ministry of Education of China, and Intel-MoE Joint Research
Fund.
References
[1] S. M., P. J., Underwater acoustic communication channels: Propagation models and statistical characterization, IEEE Communications
Magazine (2009) 84–89.
[2] N. J. Singer A.C, K. S.S, Signal processing for underwater acoustic communications, IEEE Communications Magazine (2009) 90–96.
[3] D. Pompili, I. F. Akyildiz, Overview of networking protocols for underwater wireless communications, IEEE Communications Magazine
(2009) 97–102.
[4] J. Wills, W. Ye, J. Heidemann, Low-power acoustic modem for dense underwater sensor networks, Proceedings of the 1st ACM international
workshop on Underwater networks (2006) 79–85.
[5] H. Yang, B. Liu, F. Ren, H. Wen, C. Lin, Optimization of energy eﬃcient transmission in underwater sensor networks, IEEE Globecom.
[6] K. Park, V. Rodoplu, Uwan-mac: An energy-eﬃcient mac protocol for underwater acoustic wireless networks, IEEE Journal of Oceanic
Engineering (2007) 710–720.
[7] D. Pompili, T. Melodia, I. F. Akyildiz, A cdma-based medium access control for underwater acoustic sensor networks, IEEE Transactions on
Wireless Communications (2009) 1899–1909.
[8] J.-H. C. Zhong Zhou, Energy eﬃcient multi-path communication for time-critical applications in underwater sensor networks, ACM MOBIHOC (2008) 221–230.
[9] T. A.Y., W. Cheng, L. Ma, X. Cheng, X. Lu, Z. Lu, 3d underwater sensor network localization, IEEE Transactions on Mobile Computing
(2009) 1536–1233.
[10] M. Stojanovic, On the relationship between capacity and distance in an underwater acoustic communication channel, ACM SIGMOBILE
Mobile Computing and Communications Review (2007) 34–43.
[11] P. C. Etter, Underwater Acoustic Modeling and Simulation, Taylor and Francis, 2003.
[12] L. Berkhovskikh, Y. Lysanov, Fundamentals of Ocean Acoustics, Springer, 1982.
[13] R. Coates, Underwater Acoustic Systems, Wiley, 1989.
[14] A. Willig, Memory-eﬃcient segment-based packet-combining schemes in face of deadlines, IEEE Transactions on Industrial Informatics
(2009) 338–350.
[15] M. K. Simon, M. S. Alouini., Digital Communication over Fading Channels: A uniﬁed approach to performance analysis, John Wiley &
Sons, 2000.
[16] B. Sklar, Digital Communications Fundamentals and Applications, Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliﬀs, NJ, 1988.
[17] D. J. C. MacKay, Information Theory, Inference, and Learning Algorithms, Cambridge University Press, 2003.
[18] A. El Rhazi, S. Pierre, A tabu search algorithm for cluster building in wireless sensor networks, IEEE Transactions on Mobile Computing
(2009) 433–444.
[19] W. Guo, S. Cui, A q-parameterized deterministic annealing em algorithm based on nonextensive statistical mechanics, IEEE Transactions on
Signal Processing (2008) 3069–3080.
[20] Underwater simulation module for network simulator 2, http://www.nbqadri.com/ns2/.
[21] M. S. Ferrari G., T. O.K., On physical layer-oriented routing with power control in ad hoc wireless networks, IET on Communications (2008)
306–319.

