Available online at www.sciencedirect.com

Procedia Computer Science 4 (2011) 1640–1649

International Conference on Computational Science, ICCS 2011

Impact of Different Pre-Processing Tasks on Effective Identification
of Users' Behavioral Patterns in Web-based Educational System
Michal Munka, Martin Drlíka*
a

Constantine the Philosopher University in Nitra, TR. A. Hlinku 1, Nitra 949 74, Slovakia

Abstract
Analyzing the unique types of data that come from educational systems can help find the most effective structure of the elearning courses, optimize the learning content, recommend the most suitable learning path based on student’s behavior, or
provide more personalized environment. We focus only on the processes involved in the data preparation stage of web usage
mining. Our objective is to specify the inevitable steps that are required for obtaining valid data from the stored logs of the webbased educational system. We compare three datasets of different quality obtained from logs of the web-based educational
system and pre-processed in different ways: data with identified users’ sessions and data with the reconstructed path among
course activities. We try to assess the impact of these advanced techniques of data pre-processing on the quantity and quality of
the extracted rules that represent the learners’ behavioral patterns in a web-based educational system. The results confirm some
initial assumptions, but they also show that the path reconstruction among visited activities in e-leaning course has not
statistically significant effect on quality and quantity of the extracted rules.

Keywords: data preparation; session identification; sequence rules; web usage mining;

1. Introduction
According to Bayir [1] we can define Web usage mining (WUM) as the application of data mining techniques to
web log data in order to discover user’s behavioral patterns and website usage analysis for further using in various
website design tasks.
In educational contexts, WUM was used for personalizing e-learning, adapting educational hypermedia,
discovering potential browsing problems, automatic recognition of learner groups in exploratory learning
environments or predicting student performance [2]. Analyzing the unique types of data that come from educational
systems can help us to find the most effective structure of the e-learning courses, optimize the learning content,
recommend the most suitable learning path based on student’s behavior, or provide more personalized environment.
WUM can contribute to finding significant educational knowledge and we can describe it as extracting unknown
actionable intelligence from interaction with the e-learning environment [3].

* Corresponding author. Tel.: +421 37 6408 678; fax: +421 37 6408 556.
E-mail address: mdrlik@ukf.sk.

1877–0509 © 2011 Published by Elsevier Ltd. Open access under CC BY-NC-ND license.
Selection and/or peer-review under responsibility of Prof. Mitsuhisa Sato and Prof. Satoshi Matsuoka
doi:10.1016/j.procs.2011.04.177

Michal Munk et al. / Procedia Computer Science 4 (2011) 1640–1649

1641

But usually, the traditional e-learning platform does not directly support any of WUM methods. Therefore, it is
very difficult for educators to obtain useful feedback on student’s learning experiences or answer the question how
the learners proceed through the learning material and what they gain in knowledge from the online courses [4].
The general knowledge discovery process consists of three phases: data pre-processing, data mining and data
post-processing [5]. WUM data pre-processing phase is an important phase in mining to make efficient pattern
analysis. The aim of the pre-processing phase is to convert the raw data into a suitable input for the next stage
mining algorithms [3]. According to Bing [6] we will use more general term data preparation instead of data preprocessing in this paper.
We focus only on the processes involved in the data preparation stage of WUM by the reason of the overall
complexity of this phase and because the data preparation itself represents the most time consuming phase of the
web page analysis [6]. We realized an experiment for purpose of finding the answer to question to what measure it is
necessary to execute data preparation for web log mining and determine inevitable steps for gaining valid data from
the log file obtained from web-based educational system. Specifically, we would like to assess the impact of these
advanced techniques of data preparation on the quantity and quality of the extracted rules that represent the learners’
behavioral patterns in a web-based educational system [7].
Our objective is to specify the inevitable steps that are required for gaining valid data from the stored logs of the
web-based educational system. We will compare three datasets of different quality obtained from logs of the webbased educational system and pre-processed in different ways: data with identified users’ sessions and data with the
reconstructed path among course activities.
The rest of the paper is structured subsequently. In section 2 we summarize related work of other authors that
deal with data preprocessing issues in the field of usage of WUM connected to web-based educational systems. We
summarize three stages of data preparation phase in section 3. Subsequently, we particularize research methodology
in section 4. This section describes how we prepared log files in different levels of data preprocessing. The section 5
describes summary of experiment results in detail. Finally, we discuss obtained results in section 6.
2. Related work
Preprocessing methodology has not received enough analysis efforts. The study on how to identify user sessions
accurately and acquire user access path become an active area in WUM research. In the recent years Raju and
Satyanarayana ascertained [8] that, there has been many researches on WUM, however, data preprocessing received
far less attention than it deserved.
Marquardt et al. published comprehensive paper about the application of WUM in the e-learning area with focus
on the preprocessing phase [9]. They redefined the notion of visits from the e-learning point of view. In their
approach, learning session, visit in our case, can span over several days if this period corresponds to given learning
period.
Romero et al. [10] paid more attention to data preparation issues in their survey. They summarized specific issues
about data preparation in web-based educational systems and provided references about other relevant scientific
papers. The authors finally put in a good word for enhancing preprocessing facilities that prepare the e-learning data
in a meaningful and useful way. The same authors dealt with specific features of data preparation task in LMS
Moodle in [10]. They ascertained that data gathered by the web-based education system into relational database
might less require cleaning and preprocessing than data collected by other systems. In spite of their affirmation that
Data preparation requires less work, following tasks also need to be done: select data, create summarization tables,
data discretization and data transformation. They pay paid no attention to data preparation.
3. Data Preparation
The available information is heterogeneous and unstructured in the web. The goal of data preparation is to
transform the raw data stored in logs into a set of user profiles [8]. Data preparation presents numbers of unique
challenges which led to algorithms variety and heuristic techniques for preprocessing tasks such as merging and
cleaning, user and session identification etc. Classical WUM applications rely on the web server log files [11].

1642

Michal Munk et al. / Procedia Computer Science 4 (2011) 1640–1649

On the other hand, contemporary web-based education systems store information about their users not in server
log file but mainly in relational database. Web-based education system manages all its services through a relational
database. There we can find high extensive log data of the students’ activities. Web-based education systems usually
have built-in student monitoring features so they can record any student`s activity [12]. This approach provides an
integrated data source to saving some preprocessing effort compared to other data mining applications [13].
On the contrary, Raju and Satyanarayana [8] point out that the same approach requires an extensive data
preprocessing before obtained a single analysis table. They argue that process of database normalization means a
problem for mining algorithms that require data to be assembled into a single, integrated and, in short, analysis table.
The content of the analysis table is to some extend domain dependent and even, inside a particular domain, task
dependent. An important initial decision is concerned with the granularity of the information contained in table [8].
We used logs stored in relational database of LMS Moodle (tables mdl_log and mdl_log_display). These records
contained the entities from the e-learning course with 180 participants. In this stage, log file has been cleaned from
irrelevant items. First of all, we removed entries of all users with the role other then student. After performing this
task, 75 530 entries were accepted to be used in the next task.
In the e-learning context, unlike other web based domains, user identification is a straightforward problem as in
the most cases, the learners must login using their unique ID [3]. We have to know user’s session details to get
accurate mining results [4]. A user session is defined as a sequence of requests made by a single user over a certain
navigation period and a user may have a single (or multiple) session(s) during this time period. Session
identification is a process of segmenting the log data of each user into individual access sessions [8].
A user session acquisition is not a simple task due to proxy servers, dynamic addresses, and cases where multiple
users access the same computer or one user uses multiple browsers or computers [8]. We can find many approaches
to session identification [1, 14-17]. The excellent review of user session identification was made in [4] and [18].
Against this background we considered not only user’s ID, but also computer`s IP address used by user. The
result of this modification was the file with closer division of users’ sessions (File 1).
If we are processing requests after they are handled by the web server, this technique is called "reactive" while in
"proactive" technique the same (pre)processing occurs during the interactive browsing of the web site by the user.
Reactive session reconstruction uses "time" and "navigation" oriented heuristics. Two time-oriented heuristic
methods are often mentioned in literature: session-duration based method and time threshold based method and one
navigation-oriented method. In Raju [8] refers to the paper where the authors compared time-based and referrerbased heuristics for visit reconstruction. They found out that a heuristic's appropriateness depends on the design of
the website (i.e. whether the site is frame-based or frame-free) and on the length of the visits (the referrer-based
heuristic performs better for shorter visits). Another approach combines these heuristics with "site topology"
information in order to increase the accuracy of the reconstructed sessions [1].
In this paper, we used reactive time-oriented heuristic method to define the users’ sessions. From our point of
view sessions were identified as delimited series of clicks realized in the defined time period. In spite of the
recommended 30-minute-long time window [18] we adopted a 15-minute timeout to start a new session with regard
to the setting in used web-based education system. After this application we prepared File 2.
Another problem upon searching for the users behavior patterns seems to be the analysis of the backward path, or
reconstruction of activities of a web visitor. We found and analyzed several approaches mentioned in literature [17,
18]. Finally, we chose the same approach as in our previous paper [7].
The reconstruction of activities is focused on retrograde completion of records on the path went through by the
user by means of a back button, since the use of such button is not automatically recorded into log entries web-based
educational system.
A sitemap has a great importance for retrograde completion of the path. We can find in sitemap information on
the existence of a link among pages, i.e. if a hyperlink from one page to another exists. The sitemap was obtained
for the needs of our analysis by means of Web Crawling application implemented in the used Data Miner. Having
lined up the records according to the IP address we searched for some linkages between the consecutive pages.
A sequence for the selected IP address can look like this: AĺBĺCĺDĺX. In our example, based on the
sitemap the algorithm can find out if there not exists the hyperlink from the page D to our page X. Thus we assume
that this page was accessed by the user by means of using a Backbutton from one of the previous pages.

Michal Munk et al. / Procedia Computer Science 4 (2011) 1640–1649

1643

Then, through a backward browsing we can find out, where of the previous pages exists a reference to page X. In
our sample case we can find out if there no exists a hyperlink to page X from page C, if C page is entered into the
sequence, i.e. the sequence will look like this: AĺBĺCĺDĺCĺX. Similarly, we shall find that there exists any
hyperlink from page B to page X and can be added into the sequence, i.e. AĺBĺCĺDĺCĺBĺX. Finally
algorithm finds out that the page A contains hyperlink to page X and after the termination of the backward path
analysis the sequence will look like this: AĺBĺCĺDĺCĺBĺAĺX. Then it means the user used Back button in
order to transfer from page D to C, from C to B and from B to A. After the application of this method we obtained
the File 3 with an identification of sessions based on user ID, IP address, time and completing the paths [7].
4. Research Methodology of Experiment
We aimed at specifying the inevitable steps that are required for gaining valid data from the log file of web-based
educational system. Specially, we focused on the identification of sessions and reconstruction of student`s activities.
We tried to assess the impact of this advanced techniques on the quantity and quality of the extracted rules which
represent the students’ behaviour patterns. Experiment was realized in several steps.
1. Data acquisition – defining the observed variables into the log file from the point of view of obtaining the
necessary data (user ID, IP address, date and time of access, URL address, activity, etc.).
2. Creation of data matrices – from the log file (information of accesses) and sitemaps (information on the course
contents).
3. Data preparation on various levels:
3.1. with an identification of sessions based on user ID and IP address (File 1),
3.2. with an identification of sessions based on user ID, IP address and time (File 2),
3.3. with an identification of sessions based on user ID, IP address, time and completing the paths (File 3).
4. Data analysis – searching for behaviour patterns of students in individual files. We used STATISTICA Sequence,
Association and Link Analysis for sequence rules extraction. It is an implementation of algorithm using the
powerful a-priori algorithm [19-22] together with a tree structured procedure that only requires one pass through
data [23].
5. Understanding the output data – creation of data matrices from the outcomes of the analysis, defining
assumptions.
6. Comparison of results of data analysis elaborated on various levels of data preparation from the point of view of
quantity and quality of the found rules – patterns of behaviours of students upon browsing the course.
We articulated the following assumptions:
1. we expect that identification of sessions on the basis of time will have a significant impact on the quantity of
extracted rules in terms of decreasing the portion of trivial and inexplicable rules,
2. we expect that identification of sessions on the basis of time will have a significant impact on the quality of
extracted rules in the term of their basic measures of the quality,
3. we expect that completion of paths will have a significant impact on the quantity of extracted rules in terms of
decreasing the portion of trivial and inexplicable rules,
4. we expect that completion of paths will have a significant impact on the quality of extracted rules in the term of
their basic measures of the quality.

1644

Michal Munk et al. / Procedia Computer Science 4 (2011) 1640–1649

5. Results

5.1. Data understanding
The analyzed course consisted of 12 activities and 145 course pages. Among the most used activities (Fig. 1a)
belonged course and data (files, home works and projects uploaded by students), each with portion higher than 20
%, and resource (information sources available in the course) and quiz, each with portion higher than 10 %.
Approximately 5 % of accesses were focused on the book, assignment, forum and user (student’s profile, his/her
grades and information about other students). The remaining activities upload, feedback, glossary and blog achieved
the portion less than 1 % from the point of view of usage.

Fig. 1 Histogram: (a) the frequencies of course activities; (b) the frequencies of the course pages.

The most entered course page (the highest number of accesses) (Fig. 1b) was course view with portion higher
than 20 % which stands for more than 16 000 accesses. Homework 1 view a homework 2 view with portion more
than 13 % and 5 % also belonged to the most accesses course pages. Similarly, course pages user searches user,
view list of quizzes, user - view list of users, view final test results with portion 2 %. The remaining pages achieved
the portion lower than 1 % from the point of view of access. The average number of accesses for individual page
was 487.
Table 1. Number of accesses and sequences in particular files.

Count of course
accesses

Count of costumer's
sequences

Count of frequented
sequences

Average size of costumer's
sequences

Raw data

70 553

186

943

379

File 1

70 553

7 732

92

9

File 2

70 553

12 992

76

5

File 3

75 372

12 992

74

6

Students´ records about their activities in individual course pages in LMS were observed in the e-learning course
in winter term 2009. These records were pre-processed in different levels of data preparation. The variable Session
was based on variables User ID and IP address in the case of File 1. On the other hand, the variable Session was
based on variables User ID, IP address and time-window with selected length in the case of File 2 and File 3.

1645

Michal Munk et al. / Procedia Computer Science 4 (2011) 1640–1649

The sessions were not identified in the file Raw, i.e. each sequence was not identified with the variable Session,
but only with variable User ID. This resulted in increasing count of the frequented sequences obtained from the
limited number of identified customer’s sequences with disproportional length (Table 1). As a result, the count of
users was equal to the count of customer’s sequences. In so far the condition of minimal support met a surfeit of
sequences in 13 weeks of winter term.
Compared to the raw data (Table 1), the number of visits (costumer's sequences) increased 42 times in case of the
identification of sessions based on IP address and even to 70 times in case of the identification of sessions based on
time. Simultaneously, the average length of visit/sequence decreased approximately in the same portion, from 379 to
9 and in the case of identification of sessions based on time even to 5. Equally, the number of the frequented
sequences decreased markedly, nearly 13 times over against the raw data.
Having completed the paths (Table 1) the number of records increased only by almost 7 % and the average length
of sequences increased from 5 to 6. On the other hand (Table 1), upon making provision for the time when
identifying sessions we can follow about 68 % grow of visits (costumer's sequences).
Providing we would identify sessions based on user ID, the separate course visits would join together into one
session during the whole study time. In our case, it stands for the session from the period of minimally 13 weeks. It
has the influence on identification of disproportionate number of frequented sequences and also the inexplicable
rules and increases the values of basic measures of the quality of extracted rules.
We assume that the identification of sessions based on time will have significant impact on decreasing of the
portion of trivial and inexplicable rules. Vice versa, completing paths will has significant impact on increasing of the
portion of useful rules. Simultaneously, we assume that the examined techniques of data preparation will have
significant impact on decreasing the values of basic measures of the quality of extracted rules.
5.2. Comparison of the quantity of extracted rules in examined files
The analysis (Table 2) resulted in sequence rules, which we obtained from frequented sequences fulfilling their
minimum support (in our case min s = 0.01). Frequented sequences were obtained from identified sequences, i.e.
visits of individual students during one term.
Table 2. Incidence of discovered sequence rules in particular files.
Body

==>

(close attempt to final test)

==>

…
(view final test results), (attempt to final test)

Count of derived sequence rules

(view final test results)

File 1

File 2

File 3

0

1

1

1

0

0

1

1

1

54

37

38

…
==>

…
(view final test results)

Head

(close attempt to final test)
…

==>

(attempt to final test)

Percent of derived sequence rules (Percent 1's)

94.7

64.9

66.7

Percent 0's

5.3

35.1

33.3

Cochran Q Test

Q = 23.73913, df = 2, p < 0.000007

There is a high coincidence between the results (Table 2) of sequence rule analysis in terms of the portion of the
found rules in case of files with identification of sessions based on time and with completing paths (File 2, File 3).
The most rules were extracted from file with identification of sessions based on IP address; concretely 54 were
extracted from the file (File 1), which represents over 94 % of the total number of found rules. Based on the results
of Q test (Table 2), the zero hypothesis, which reasons that the incidence of rules does not depend on individual
levels of data preparation for web log mining, is rejected at the 1 % significance level.
Kendall´s coefficient of concordance represents the degree of concordance in the number of the found rules
among examined files. The value of coefficient (Table 3) is 0.21, while 1 means a perfect concordance and 0
represents discordance. Low value of coefficient confirms Q test results.

1646

Michal Munk et al. / Procedia Computer Science 4 (2011) 1640–1649

From the multiple comparison (Tukey HSD test) a single homogenous group (Table 3) consisting of files File 2
and File 3 was identified in term of the average incidence of the found rules. Statistically significant differences on
the level of significance 0.05 in the average incidence of found rules were proved among File 1 and the remaining
ones.
Table 3. Homogeneous groups for incidence of derived rules in examined files.
File

Mean

1

File 2

0.6491

****

File 3

0.6667

****

File 1

0.9474

2

****

Kendall Coeff. of Concordance

0.20824

Identification of sessions based on time has an important impact on the quantity of extracted rules (File 1, File 2).
On the contrary, making provisions for the completing paths has no significant impact on the quantity of
extracted rules (File 2, File 3). Now, we will look at the results of sequence analysis more closely, while taking into
consideration the portion of each kind of the discovered rules. We require from association rules that they be not
only clear but also useful. Association analysis produces the three common types of rules [24]:
x the useful (utilizable, beneficial),
x the trivial,
x the inexplicable.
In our case upon sequence rules we will differentiate same types of rules.
The only requirement (validity assumption) of the use of chi-square test is high enough expected frequencies
[25]. The condition is violated if the expected frequencies are lower than 5. The validity assumption of chi-square
test in our tests is violated. This is the reason why we shall not prop ourselves only upon the results of Pearson chisquare test, but also upon the value of calculated contingency coefficient and graphic visualization of dependency.
Table 4. Crosstabulations - Incidence of rules x Types of rules: (a) File 1; (b) File 2; (c) File 3.
Incidence\

File 1

Types

useful

0
1


File 2
trivial

inexp.

useful

File 3
trivial

inexp.
4

useful

trivial

inexp.
4

1

2

0

1

15

0

15

7.69%

5.00%

0.00%

7.69%

37.50% 100.00%

0.00%

37.50% 100.00%

12

38

4

12

25

13

25

100.00%

62.50% 0.00%

92.31% 95.00% 100.00%

0

92.31% 62.50% 0.00%

0

13

40

4

13

40

4

13

40

4

100%

100%

100%

100%

100%

100%

100%

100%

100%

Pearson Chi-square

0.382; df = 2, p = 0.826

11.786; df = 2, p = 0.003

14.813; df = 2, p = 0.001

Contingency Coef. C

0.08155

0.41393

0.45417

Cramér's V

0.08182

0.45472

0.50977

Contingency coefficients (Coef. C, Cramér's V) represent the degree of dependency between two nominal
variables. The coefficient value (Table 4a) is approximately 0.08, while 1 represents perfect dependency and 0
means independency. There is a trivial dependency among the portion of the useful, trivial and inexplicable rules
and their occurrence in the set of the discovered rules extracted from the data matrix File 1, and the contingency
coefficient is not statistically significant.
The value of coefficient (Table 4c) is approximately 0.51. There is a high dependency among the portion of the
useful, trivial and inexplicable rules and their occurrence in the set of the discovered rules extracted from the data
matrix File 3, the contingency coefficient is statistically significant. The zero hypothesis (Table 4c) is rejected at the
1 % significance level, i.e. the portion of the useful, trivial and inexplicable rules depends on the identification of
sessions based on time and on the completing paths.

Michal Munk et al. / Procedia Computer Science 4 (2011) 1640–1649

1647

Fig. 2 (a) Interaction Plot – File 1 x Types of rules; (b) Interaction Plot – File 2 x Types of rules.

Fig. 3. Interaction Plot – File 3 x Types of rules.

The graph (Fig. 3) visualizes interaction frequencies – File 3 x Types of rules. Curves in this case are not copied
too, they have different course – which only proves the results of the analysis. Unlike File 1, the inexplicable rules
do not occur among the discovered rules. In this file, we follow the same decrease of trivial rules as in case File 2.
Besides, there was found the most useful rules in this file.
The portion of trivial and inexplicable rules is dependent from the identification of sessions based on time and
independent from reconstruction of activities of a student. Completion of paths has impact on increasing portion of
useful rules, but this increase of useful rules is not significant.
5.3. Comparison of the quality of extracted rules in examined files
Quality of sequence rules is assessed by means of two indicators [24]: support and confidence. Results of the
sequence rule analysis showed differences not only in the quantity of the found rules, but also in the quality.
Kendall´s coefficient of concordance represents the degree of concordance in the support of the found rules among
examined files. The value of coefficient (Table 5a) is approximately 0.18, while 1 means a perfect concordance and
0 represents discordancy.
From the multiple comparison (Tukey HSD test) a single homogenous group (Table 5a) consisting of files File 2
and File 3 was identified in term of the average support of the found rules. Statistically significant differences on the
level of significance 0.05 in the average support of found rules were proved among File 1 and the remaining ones.

1648

Michal Munk et al. / Procedia Computer Science 4 (2011) 1640–1649

Table 5. Homogeneous groups for (a) support of derived rules; (b) confidence of derived rules.
Confidence

Mean

1

****

File 2

19.8302

****

****

File 3

20.1760

****

File 1

21.6831

Support

Mean

1

File 2

2.8486

File 3

2.8762

File 1

3.4087

Kendall Coeff. of Concordance

2

****
0.18245

Kendall Coeff. of Concordance

2

****
0.19527

There were demonstrated differences in the quality in terms of confidence characteristics values of the discovered
rules among individual files. The coefficient of concordance values (Table 5b) is almost 0.20, while 1 means a
perfect concordance and 0 represents discordancy.
From the multiple comparison (Tukey HSD test) a single homogenous group (Table 5b) consisting of files File 2
and File 3 was identified in term of the average confidence of the found rules. Statistically significant differences on
the level of significance 0.05 in the average confidence of found rules were proved among File 1 and the remaining
ones. Results (Table 5a, Table 5b) show that the largest degree of concordance in the support and confidence is
among the rules found in the file with identification of sessions based on time (File 2) and with completing paths
(File 3). On the contrary, discordancy is among file with identification of sessions based on IP address (File 1) and
the remaining files (File 2, File 3). Identification of sessions based on time has a substantial impact on the quality of
extracted rules (File 1, File 2). On the contrary, completing the paths has not any significant impact on the quality of
extracted rules (File 2, File 3).
6. Discussion and Conclusions
Courses do not represent only source of information for students but also a substantial data source, from which
we can obtain knowledge about students in our course for the purpose to optimize, personalize, etc. The experiment
was realized with the aim to answer the question to what measure it is necessary to realize data preparation. We
aimed to specify the steps inevitable for gaining valid data from the log file of web-based educational system. We
tried to assess the impact of identification of sessions and reconstruction of student`s activities on the quantity and
quality of the extracted rules which represent the students’ behaviour patterns.
The first assumption concerning the identification of sessions based on time and its impact on quantity of
extracted rules was fully proved. Specifically, it was proved that the identification of sessions based on time has a
significant impact on the quantity of extracted rules. Statistically significant differences in the average incidence of
found rules were proved between File 1 and File 2. The portion of trivial and inexplicable rules is dependent from
identification of sessions based on time. Identification of sessions based on time had impact on decreasing portion of
trivial and inexplicable rules.
In spite of the recommended 30-minute-long time window we adopted 15 minutes timeout with regard to the
setting in used web-based education system. This value may result in increasing or decreasing of total number of
identified sessions. We did not found any research about the relation between timeout of user session and its impact
on quality and quantity of extracted rules.
The second assumption concerning the identification of sessions based on time and its impact on quality of
extracted rules in term of their basic measures of quality was also fully proved. Similarly it was proved that
identification of sessions based on time has a significant impact on the quality of extracted rules. Statistically
significant differences in the average support and confidence of found rules were proved between File 1 and File 2.
Identification of sessions based on time was found crucial in the data preparation.
On the contrary, it was showed that the completion of paths has neither significant impact on quantity nor quality
of extracted rules (File 2, File 3). Completion of paths has impact on increasing portion of useful rules, but this
increase of useful rules is not significant.
The number of records increases by almost 70% according to our previous research with path reconstruction of
logs gathered by web server [7]. This finding means that the path reconstruction is crucial in the data preparation of
logs obtained by web servers.

Michal Munk et al. / Procedia Computer Science 4 (2011) 1640–1649

1649

In contrast, the path reconstruction from logs gathered by web-based educational systems means only about 7%
increase of log entries. We suppose that this situation is caused by the rigid structure of the e-learning course and
carefully work-out hierarchical menu. Additionally, there are breadcrumbs in every e-learning course that a lot of
users used for navigation. The third and the fourth assumption concerning the reconstruction of activities of a
student and its impact on quantity and quality of extracted rules were not proven.
References
1.

Bayir, M.A., Toroslu, I.H., Cosar, A.: A New Approach for Reactive Web Usage Data Processing. Data Engineering Workshops, 2006.

Proceedings. 22nd International Conference on (2006) 44-44
2.

Crespo Garcia, R.M., Kloos, C.D.: Web Usage Mining in a Blended Learning Context: A Case Study. Advanced Learning Technologies,

2008. ICALT '08. Eighth IEEE International Conference on (2008) 982-984
3.

Ba-Omar, H., Petrounias, I., Anwar, F.: A Framework for Using Web Usage Mining to Personalise E-learning. Advanced Learning

Technologies, 2007. ICALT 2007. Seventh IEEE International Conference on (2007) 937-938
4.

Chitraa, V., Davamani, A.S.: A Survey on Preprocessing Methods for Web Usage Data. International Journal of Computer Science and

Information Security 7 (2010)
5.

Romero, C., Espejo, P.G., Zafra, A., Romero, J.R., Ventura, S.: Web usage mining for predicting final marks of students that use Moodle

courses. Computer Applications in Engineering Education (2010) 26
6.

Bing, L.: Web Data mining. Exploring Hyperlinks, Contents and Usage Data. Springer (2006)

7.

Munk, M., Kapusta, J., Svec, P.: Data preprocessing evaluation for web log mining: reconstruction of activities of a web visitor. Procedia

Computer Science 1. ICCS 2010, KREAM (2010) 2273-2280
8.

Raju, G.T., Satyanarayana, P.S.: Knowledge Discovery from Web Usage Data: a Complete Preprocessing Methodology. IJCSNS

International Journal of Computer Science and Network Security 8 (2008)
9.

Marquardt, C.G., Becker, K., Ruiz, D.D.: A pre-processing tool for Web usage mining in the distance education domain. Database

Engineering and Applications Symposium, 2004. IDEAS '04. Proceedings. International (2004) 78-87
10. Romero, C., Ventura, S., Garcia, E.: Data mining in course management systems: Moodle case study and tutorial. Comput. Educ. 51 (2008)
368-384
11. Wang, H., Yang, C., Zeng, H.: Design and Implementation of a Web Usage Mining Model Based On Fpgrowth and Prefixspan
Communications of the IIMA 6 (2006)
12. Romero, C., Ventura, S.: Educational data mining: A survey from 1995 to 2005. Expert Systems with Applications 33 (2007) 135-146
13. Gaudioso, E., Talavera, L.: Data mining to support tutoring in virtual learning communities: Experiences and challenges. In: Romero, C.,
Ventura, S. (eds.): Data mining in e-learning. Wit Press, Southampton (2006) 207-226
14. Zhang, H., Liang, W.: An intelligent algorithm of data pre-processing in Web usage mining. Proceedings of the World Congress on
Intelligent Control and Automation (WCICA) (2004) 3119 - 3123
15. Cooley, R., Mobasher, B., Srivastava, J.: Data Preparation for Mining World Wide Web Browsing Patterns. Knowledge and Information
Systems 1 (1999) 5-32
16. Yan, L., Boqin, F., Qinjiao, M.: Research on Path Completion Technique in Web Usage Mining. Computer Science and Computational
Technology, 2008. ISCSCT '08. International Symposium on, Vol. 1 (2008) 554-559
17. Yan, L., Boqin, F.: The Construction of Transactions for Web Usage Mining. Computational Intelligence and Natural Computing, 2009.
CINC '09. International Conference on, Vol. 1 (2009) 121-124
18. Spiliopoulou, M., Mobasher, B., Berendt, B., Nakagawa, M.: A Framework for the Evaluation of Session Reconstruction Heuristics in WebUsage Analysis. INFORMS J. on Computing 15 (2003) 171-190
19. Agrawal, R., Imieli\, T., \#324, ski, Swami, A.: Mining association rules between sets of items in large databases. Proceedings of the 1993
ACM SIGMOD international conference on Management of data. ACM, Washington, D.C., United States (1993)
20. Agrawal, R., Srikant, R.: Fast Algorithms for Mining Association Rules in Large Databases. Proceedings of the 20th International
Conference on Very Large Data Bases. Morgan Kaufmann Publishers Inc. (1994)
21. Han, J., Lakshmanan, L.V.S., Pei, J.: Scalable frequent-pattern mining methods: an overview. Tutorial notes of the seventh ACM SIGKDD
international conference on Knowledge discovery and data mining. ACM, San Francisco, California (2001)
22. Witten, I., H., Frank, E.: Data Mining: Practical Machine Learning Tools and Techniques. Morgan Kaufmann, New York (2000)
23. Electronic Statistics Textbook. StatSoft, Tulsa (2010)
24. Berry, M.J., Linoff, G.S.: Data Mining Techniques: For Marketing, Sales, and Customer Relationship Management. Wiley Publishing(2004)
25. Hays, W.L.: Statistics. CBS College Publishing, New York: (1988)

