Procedia Computer Science
Volume 29, 2014, Pages 1646–1655
ICCS 2014. 14th International Conference on Computational Science

Personal decision support mobile service
for extreme situations
Vladislav A. Karbovskii1*,
Daniil V. Voloshin1 , Kseniia A. Puzyreva1, Aleksandr S. Zagarskikh1
1

ITMO University, Saint Petersburg, Russia
vladislav.k.work@gmail.com, achoched@gmail.com, kseniapuzyreva@gmail.com,
alazar.az@gmail.com

Abstract
This article discusses aspects of implementation of a massive personal decision support mobile service
for evacuation process in extreme situations, based on cloud computation platform CLA VIRE and a
virtual society model. The v irtual society model was constructed using an agent -based approach. To
increase credibility the individual motivation methods (personal decision support and user training)
were used.
Keywords: Agent-based modeling, mobile services, urgent computing, virtual society, personal decision support

1 Introduction
Modern mobile phones and tablets are mult i-purpose devices that provide their owner with rich
interaction with the real world, including voice, internet, positioning technology and local interaction.
In the aggregate with cloud customisation tools for modern mobile devices, it g ives the opportunity to
organise massive mobile services (MMS), focused on personal decision support in a variety of
situations (e.g., different types of navigators, organisers). One of the most promising areas of
application of MMS is support of mobile users in extreme (including emergency) situations. It
provides information and intellectual support to users in a potentially dangerous area, in order to
preserve their lives, health and property. It includes notification s about emergency situations and
organisation of evacuation (i.e., removal of persons fro m a dangerous place to the safe zone). Existing
methods of informing and notification the population are extensive and do not take into account the
individual characteristics and location of the persons. As a consequence, it raises numerous violations
of evacuation rules, such as interrupting the chain of informat ion or failure to fo llo w official
*

Corresponding author. Tel.: +7-950-002-2288.
E-mail address: vladislav.k.work@gmail.com

1646

Selection and peer-review under responsibility of the Scientiﬁc Programme Committee of ICCS 2014
c The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V.
doi:10.1016/j.procs.2014.05.150

Personal decision support mobile service for extreme situations

V. A. Karbovskii, et al

regulations. In contrast, the adoption of mobile technologies focused on personal decisio n support
allo ws not only increased speed of response to potential danger, but also to independently take
measures to reduce personal risk.
The main features of the research and develop ment of modern MMS for personal decision support
in emergency situations are their dynamics and interactivity. The results of the MMS co mputations are
not static instructions, but a set of scenarios weighted according to the degree of danger, allowing the
user to make their decision on the ground. The agent-based modelling technology has been used to
construct these scenarios in terms of incomp leteness and uncertainty of the input information. The
implementation of MM S requires use of cloud technologies for rea lisation of resource-intensive
modelling procedures and data processing because of the complexity of the used models and
scenarios. This article d iscusses aspects of implementation of personal decision support MMS for
evacuation process in ext reme situations, based on cloud computation platform CLA VIRE (V.
Knyazkov, V. Kovalchuk, N. Tchurov, V. Mary in, & V. Boukhanovsky, 2012) and an agent-based
model (Torrens, 2012)(Johansson & Kretz, 2012) of virtual society.

2 Related works
In general, mobile services can be classified into the types: emergency, navigation, information,
advertising, education, billing and entertain ment. Any of these types can be Location Based Service
(LBS) (Sch iller & Vo isard, 2004) i.e., group of applications and services that utilize in formation
related to the geographical position of their users in order to provide value-adding services to them
(Giaglis, 2003).
Mobile technology for support the actions of people during extreme and emergency situations
implemented in various countries. For examp le, in the USA the Federal Co mmunications Co mmission
adopted the network structure, operational procedures and technical requirements in response to the
Warning, Alert, and Response Network (WARN). The Co mmercial Mobile A lert System (CMAS)
(Daly, Sennett, & others, 2010) was developed as a result. CMAS provides the distribution of
emergency alerts to customers with co mpatible devices via Cell Broadcast (a technology similar to
SMS, but for all phones in the range of a cell tower). Similar services are developing in various
countries. The richest research was conducted in Australia (Aloudat & M ichael, 2010). The key idea is
the ability to receive notifications for almost all mobile devices in the emergency area. These solutions
allo w us to deliver alert notificat ions to the maximu m nu mber o f persons, but impose restrictions on
the technology used. That leads to a reduction of the functional possibilit ies of service (e.g., GPS or
GLONASS based positioning) and loses the variability and quantity of the informat ion contained in
the notification.
Using mobile applications for modern mobile p latforms allow us to avoid the lack of variability
and quantity of the notifications. This approach was used by many co mpanies. For examp le Hurricane
Pro by Kitty Code allows tracking of storms. UbAlert by Bu mp Netwo rk is the disaster social network
where people can share knowledge about danger situations. Mobile Rescuer by EM ERCOM o f Russia
contains the handbook of police, hospitals and fire depart ments and allows sending of emergency
signal to pre-selected contacts.
However, they are primarily focused on the warning of people about the situation itself. None of
these solutions provide support (including decision support) of the evacuation process on a personal
level.
Objective of widely used decision support is to move the situation from the current state to some
desired future state (de Walle & Turoff, 2008). For examp le the Eu ropean Co mmission founded the
RODOS (Nicu lae, 2005) DSS that could provide support for offsite emergency management at all
times follo wing a nuclear accident and that would be capable of finding broad application across
Europe unperturbed by national boundaries . So me co llaboration tools , e.g. Sahana (Sahana, 2006),

1647

Personal decision support mobile service for extreme situations

V. A. Karbovskii, et al

aim to imp rove the decision support process. Sahana is a tool for coordination and managing aid and
volunteers, tracking relocation sites etc.
The lack of decision support is due not only to the already established action system for emergency
situations, but also the user-specific info rmation perception of ext reme and emergency situations. In
our work we co mb ine the different approaches, such as modern mobile technologies, decision support,
personalization technologies, cloud computing and agent-based modeling into a single service.

3 Concepts of personal decision support
First of all, there is the individual perception associated with a tendency that the term "danger" is
partially replaced by the term "risk" (Yamo ri, 2007). Accordingly, people often do not appreciate the
potential threat, but the co mbination of the probability and consequences of adverse events, as well as
the impact of this direct threat to them and their family. As a consequence, individual interest relate s
only to threats in close proximity that require orientation of MMS on local solutions.
Another side of this problem is that the lack of personalisation of emergency warnings reduces
their credibility.
At the same time such a warning approach leads to a false reduced fear of natural disasters. People
often do not respond to messages in the hope of a co mplex solution by emergency services. This leads
to an idle state awaiting rescue. In contrast, people get individual motivation to act when they have the
opportunity of personal risk management and assessment of the situation.
The challenge of increasing people’s motivation in emergency situations is being solved in many
countries, but there is no one decision because of different social factors (Trainor & Mcneil, 2008).
The experts agree that the main parameters of emergency notificat ions are clarity and presence of
specific personal instructions for action in a specific situation, as well as the possible consequences
and how to man ipulate them. The main problem currently is the development of trust between the user
and the MMS, and train ing users to use MMS in everyday conditions for the subsequent rapid
response in emergency situations. As a consequence, it requires the develop ment of MMS functions
for personal decision support not only in quite rare emergency situations (e.g., floods, earthquakes,
etc.), but also in private extreme situations related to personal users ’ risk, which are formed on the
basis of their own problems.
MMS for personal decision support in extreme situations is a geoplanner (Verpoorten & Conin x,
n.d.) containing a task list, formalised by the user. MMS allows the user to store the most important
GPS-based locations and apply some actions to them (e.g., sound off, recall, connect WI-FI, etc.).
Doing a certain set of actions every day the user gets used to the prompts, responds to the application
GUI (graphical user interface), sees it as friendly and is focused on MMS notifications. Designation of
buildings and their assignments in the daily mode gives the perception of specific routes and
assistance centres in extreme situations mode, which allo ws users to not only navigate the complex
situation, but also to make decisions, i.e., assume risk management. Thus, in the daily routine us ers
can develop trust of MMS recommendations, which helps users to adapt to the service and allo ws
partial reduction of the risk of conflict of decisions in the future.

4 Structure and organisation of MMS
An overview of the organisation of a personal decision support MMS for evacuation process in
extreme situations, based on cloud computation platform CLA VIRE and a virtual society model, is
shown in Figure 1.
The service requires the use of Early Warning System (EWS) to obtain sufficient t ime for the
response to current situation. As input data service was used the city infrastructure data

1648

Personal decision support mobile service for extreme situations

V. A. Karbovskii, et al

(Openstreetmap and Wikimapia), landscape data (ASTER GDEM), demographic data (anonymous
data provided by Federal Migration Serv ice of Russia) and social-economic characteristics of
population. This data and EWS data using by agent based model of virtual society and its problem
processing (Holsapple, 2008) DSS. Since the simu lation (including decision support) is
computationally intensive process, we were used the infrastructure of the cloud platform CLA VIRE to
simp lify the access to the computational resources. Also cloud technologies , namely push-technology,
were used to organization of warning notifications delivery to users.
The necessity of using push-technology is dictated by the modern approaches in the
communicat ion between the server and the mobile applications (e.g. no need all the time to keep the
application running).

Figure 1: M M S organisation scheme

1.

Getting the forecasting information about the emergency situation. Server core includes a
subsystem for interaction with early warning systems including running under CLA VIRE, e.g. ,
(Boukhanovsky & Ivanov, 2012).

2.

Collecting the current population density data in the emergency area using mobile operators’ cell
towers interfaces and assessing the total number of people (not only MMS users) (Horanont,
2010).

3.

Sending emergency notificat ions to users. Performed in parallel with step 2. Push-technologies
such as Apple Push Notification Serv ice (APNS), Google Cloud Messaging (GCM) and
Microsoft Push Notification Service (MPNS) were used to send notifications.

4.

Simu lation of the distribution and dynamics of population in the emergency area. Th is problem is
solved by a virtual society model. The model is executed in the environment of cloud computing
platform CLAVIRE.

5.

Simu lation of panic and evacuation. The input data will be the coordin ates of MMS users and
results of claim 4, i.e., distribution of people (crowd). Th is problem is also solved using
CLA VIRE’s co mposite application. The problem of modelling involves the estimation of
population density associated with mass panic and spontan eous evacuation (e.g., escape to hills
during floods). In addition, evacuation routes are constructed and optimised for MMS users.
Service allows finding of the optimal and alternative evacuation routes (Figure 1).

1649

Personal decision support mobile service for extreme situations

6.

V. A. Karbovskii, et al

Sending evacuation information to users. Implemented similarly to claim 3.

5 Simulation of population dynamics
In order to (a) able the MMS to function in the real world (when the subscriber is not alone in the
area) and (b) to test the effectiveness of MMS the virtual society model has been used. The virtual
society model using an agent-based approach to study the dynamics of population density, as well as
the interaction between a population and the environment . Agent-based modelling is a simu lation
method where the behaviour of decentralised autonomous agents determines the behaviour of the
whole system, i.e., " Bottom up". The life of virtual society passes in a special environ ment, which is
an abstract grid structure.
Members constituting the virtual society model – the agents – were endowed with appro ximated
characteristics and attributed to a number of socio-economic classes. Initially classes were marked out
in a way to ensure the majority of
transportation (both commuting and
leisure-related) activit ies performed
in the city throughout the day were
covered. The primary criterion for
allocation was the level of inco me
could be related to consumer,
transporting
and
residential
preferences
of
agents.
So me
organizations such as CACI ACORN
conducted similar researches in the
classification of the population
(CA CI, 2010). Further detailing of
the
specification
involved
introduction
of
gender
and
emp loyment d ivisions as well as
estimated proportioning of classes.
Since there was no substantial
research carried out in social sciences
Figure 2: Agent’s daily movement on population density map
previously to report thoroughly on
the commut ing behaviour of representatives of various social groups, the majo rity of the features
describing the elements of the artificial society were co mp iled fro m both qualitative and quantitative
sources.
A set of consistent rules was designed to allo w forma lisation of the process of modelling the daily
mobility of an agent – a maximu m t rip rate, hierarchy of activities (for instance, commuting has a
higher prio rity than a trip to entertain ment or shopping sight) and temporal characteristics of travelling
(approximate time for an agent to leave the p lace of residence was linked to his/her class and
qualification/emp loy ment characteristics, as well as the return t ime and probability of being late) were
introduced. Subsequently, proportions (diversified by the major classes’ sub-groups employment
status) of people setting off to travel on a particular day and those who, due to abstract reasons , have
to remain at home were established in order to make the model even mo re realistic. All the regulations
listed above were further used to produce daily scenarios (organised into timetables, with cells
representing periods of travelling or staying at a particular destination point) for classes that
encompassed probabilities of various trips to be performed, their destina tions and purposes of
travelling.

1650

Personal decision support mobile service for extreme situations

V. A. Karbovskii, et al

Whereas socio-economic classes are mainly suitable for simu lating routine activit ies, travelling
patterns and interactions, there was a substantial need to introduce a classification that would be
effective in describ ing the differences in behaviour o f agents put into abnormal conditions with higher
levels of uncertainty and risk (e.g., natural d isasters that limit the number of transportation alternatives
such as floods). The solution was found in outlining classes of physical capacity built around age as a
basic criterion determining the mobility (an abstract ability to perform part icular relocations, such as
walking (Verwey, 2010) or overco ming obstacles (Ketcham & Stelmach, 2004) and their speed in
km/h) of an agent. A total of seven age-related classes were introduced, followed by an ext ra class,
constructed to account for the limited physical ability of a group of agents to mo ve around
autonomously. These classes are the following: under 5; 6–16; 17–29; 30–44; 45–55; 56–66; over 67;
disabled (being split into subclasses namely : walk, transportable and non-transportable). Each of the
agents representing one of the classes listed bears a set of characteristics (agility, stamina, power,
passability) that determine h is/her mobility and may vary in the range fro m 0 (min) to 3 (max). The
open list of features was extended by adding factors affecting the potential decision -making of agents:
control, informat ion, role, transport and marital status. Finally, for the sake of the approximation
precision of transportation characteristics, substantial environ ment-related factors were added to the
model, including up/down-hill movement, terrain passability, weight of the load and various
characteristics of the incoming threat.
Possible contradictions between characteristics that were to arise when generating agents on a map
and micro-level features of the environment lead to a need for the introduction of conflict-eliminating
regulations. The rules determining the performance of the physiological classification described above
(as well as its integration with the socio-economic classificat ion) are organised into the fo llo wing
groups:
1.

Direction-of-the-movement rules – regulations concerning the priority of particular "destination
points" and the use of transport, for instance, "the minimal interval between the perception of the
emergency warn ing and actual relocation o f individual is appro ximately 10 minutes" and "in case
there are no places of mass congestion of people nearby, agent would go to the nearest upland".

2.

Terrain-related transportation speed rules – determine to what extent the type of the terrain and
presence of obstacles affects the speed of the agent and the way they correlate with the load
he/she is carrying. Every class has a mean speed which can be modified when environmental or
agent-related factors come into action. Here is an examp le: "If an agent is overcoming an
obstacle/go up the hill and carries a load, his speed is decreased by 0.5–1 km/h compared to his
normal upward speed (mean physiological class speed mu ltip lied by the upward decreasing
coefficient) ".

3.

Transportable disabled agents (2nd disability category) and children below 5 years old
transportation rules – exp lain how these specific groups of agents relocate and deal with
obstacles: "None of the groups of agents have an ability to carry a lo ad", but "if the representative
of one of these classes moves up the hill or encounters an obstacle on the way, h is/her movement
speed is equal to the one that of an advantaged agent when carrying a load and moving
upward/overcoming an obstacle".

4.

Correlation with socio-economic classification rules are designed as proportions that bind two
systems of characteristics of agents together, but also include rules established in a natural
language, such as "A disabled agent of the 3rd disability category can be a member of every of the
socio-economic classes, but his transportation is limited (does not commute/travel through the city
autonomously)".
The model requires detailed configuration of the parameters for the specific city:

1651

Personal decision support mobile service for extreme situations

V. A. Karbovskii, et al

1.

City infrastructure (Crooks & Castle, 2012): living houses, hospitals, universities, offices, road
infrastructure, etc. OpenStreetMap, Wikimap ia and Instagram data and anonymous database of
Federal Migration Service of the Russian Government have been used.

2.

Landscape data. ASTER Global Digital Elevation Map has been used. ASTER GDEM is a
product of METI and NASA.

3.

Social, economic and physical capabilities characteristics of the population.

4.

Calibrat ion (See & others, 2012) of dynamics of population density (Kaiser & Kanevski, 2010)
using mobile operators’ cell towers data.

6 Evaluation of MMS efficiency: Krymsk’s flooding
Simu lation of the efficiency of personal notifications based on MMS in the case of a catastrophic
flood was performed. A situation similar to the s ituation in Krymsk in 2012 was chosen as a
simulation scenario.
On July 6–7, 2012, the powerful rain, constantly maintained by the high convective instability of
the atmosphere clouds, persisted for days in the South-West area of the Krasnodar Region in Russia.
This led to very strong and prolonged rains in the area.
The data obtained from automat ic weather systems allo w us to conclude that the main amount of
precipitation that generated catastrophic flooding in the basin of Adagum river (tributary of Kuban
river), refers to the period fro m 22:00, 6 July to 03:00, 7 July. In this period there was continuous rain
with the intensity of 35– 45 mm per hour. The basin of Adagum river is characterised by a dense
hydrographic network, considerable slopes and stream channels. Fro m 23:30, 6 July to 01:00, 7 Ju ly,
according to the hydrological post, the water level increased by 81 cm. The water level at 01:00 had
not reached a dangerous level (6.8 m for this post) which threatens the lives of people and causes
significant material damage. During the next hour a 3.5 m ju mp occurred. The maximu m level reached
9.95 m at the flap of the hydrological post and 9.5 m below the bridge. The highest level was achieved
between 03:00 and 04:00.
We have modeled a flood similar to the one that took place in Kry msk (Krasnodar Region, Russia).
However, it was by no means an attempt to replicate the exact properties of the particular event. For
realisation of experimental research, modelling of the process of flooding (Krzhizhanovskaya et al.,
2013) with Dynamic, Rapid Flood Spreading Model (DRFSM) was used (Figure 3). The limitation of
the model is that it is not suitable for very fast spreading floods (e.g., tsunami) because it does not
solve the energy balance equation. The flood model takes topographic data of the area and then the
data of water discharges at different sites. The topographical picture of the area is based on ASTER
Global Dig ital Elevation Map, and water consumption on the basis of data report s fro m the Federal
Service for Hydrometeorology and Environmental Monitoring of Russia.

1652

Personal decision support mobile service for extreme situations

V. A. Karbovskii, et al

Distribution of the flood is achieved by transfer of water between the zones of in fluence. The water
level, average d ischarge and average speed are calculated for each zone of influence. The virtual
society model is used for simulation of the population.

Figure 3: M aximum level flood (a) – simulated, (b) – by official report.

Yamobi.ru have published the research results (Yamobi, 2013) that have been obtained by the
processing of Google Analytics, Liveinternet and Openstat data about operating systems for mobile
devices in different cities of Russia. Research results shows that approximately 27% of the residents of
Krasnodar Region are users of smartphones. In our research we assumed that the proportion of service
users among smartphone owners is 50%. Thus the number of users was amounted approximately
15000 (assuming that the data for the Krasnodar Region are suitable for all region cities).
Time before flood, min
MMS users (agents) caught by
flood, %

0
34

5
21

10
12

20
7

30
4

Table 1: Influence of the M M S warning notifications on the evacuation process.

It was assumed in the simulat ion that all agents began to evacuate immediately after receipt of the
notification. The evacuation was spontaneous (in the direct ion opposite to the water) for agents.
However MMS user-agents were evacuated on a calculated shortest path to a safe place (hills). Tab le 1
shows that early warn ing of the population reduces the number of vict ims, as well as that the increase
in the time of early warning reduces the proportion of the population affected.
MMS is focused on massive usage, so it requires high reactivity to the applied solutions. Mobile
device and PCs with the following specifications were used for the experiments. Mobile device: dualcore CPU, 768 Mb RAM, 3g Internet Access, OS Android 4.0 (HTC Sensation Xe). PCs: quad-core
Intel i7 CPU 3.4 GHz, 8 GB Ram, 1 GB/s network. Simu lation of the density dynamics of population
was calculated for the 24 hours of the model t ime with 1 second step. Table 2 shows the averaged time
characteristics of the overhead costs associated with the work of the MMS.
Time characteristics were defined:
T1 - Time costs of simulation of population density and dynamics and evacuation .
T2 - Time to send push messages on the ways of evacuation service GCM.
T3 - The infrastructure costs associated with CLAVIRE.

1653

Personal decision support mobile service for extreme situations

Time characteristic
T1
T2
T3

Mean, s
496
1.03
1.91

50%-Quantile, s
489
1.02
1.67

V. A. Karbovskii, et al

90%-Quantile, s
503
1.11
2.03

95%-Quantile, s
511
1.12
2.14

Table 2: Time measurements

Table 3 shows that the most expensive part is using the cloud -based infrastructure for simu lation.
Additional infrastructure costs are relatively small (about 2 seconds). Time of sending notifications
using push-technology is also small (1 to 2 seconds); the main time is associated with the latent GCM service. In general, the time required in the considered scenario is acceptable fro m the point of v iew of
support of decision-making in the characteristic scale develop ment of the situation (tens of minutes to
hours).

7 Conclusion and Future Works
Massive mobile services are comp lex systems containing many co mponents, where each
component solves a variety of specialized tasks. During the design and development of personal
decision support MMS for evacuation process in ext reme situations, based on cloud computation
platform CLAVIRE and virtual society model, many factors were taken into account.
The general reactivity of the whole system should be satisfying by the specific tasks of the MMS.
It is also important to take into account the general developer recommendations, such as the ability to
use the client applications for d ifferent mobile platforms wh ile developing server-side API. It requires
the use of common standards and protocols.
The virtual society model s hould be calibrated as accurately as possible to obtain adequate
population density results. The real-world data should be used to do this. Such data include city
infrastructure, landscape, social, econo mic and physical capabilities of the population and calibration
of dynamics of population density using mobile operators’ cell towers data. For future work, we will
consider the mapping of real social networks received fro m social med ia (e.g., Facebook, Twitter,
vk.co m) on the agent-based model of virtual society. This will allow us to expand the possibilities of
social simulation in the service due to additional interactions between agents. For more accurate
results we also planned the integration with additional collision detection model wh ich is not taken
into account at the moment.
The individual motivation methods should be used for personal risk management and assessment
of the situation. Such methods include: (a) personal decision support; (b) user training – daily mode of
mobile application helps to develop user’s trust to service’s recommendations and reduce the risk of
conflict of decisions; (c) adaptation of service to user by use of adaptive interface (future work). It is
important because of the conditions of usage. It is d ifficu lt to use unfamiliar or supersaturated GUI
elements in extreme conditions.

8 Acknowledgements
This work was financially supported by the Government of the Russian Federation, Grants 074 U01 and 11.G34.31.0019. We also thank the HR Wallingford team, for providing a free licens e for the
DRFSM software.

1654

Personal decision support mobile service for extreme situations

V. A. Karbovskii, et al

References
Aguirre, B. E. (2004). Homeland Security Warnings: Lessons Learned and Unlearned. International
Journal of Mass Emergencies and Disasters, 22(2), 103–115.
Aloudat, A., & Michael, K. (2010). Toward the regulation of ubiquitous mobile government: a case study
on location-based emergency services in Australia. Electronic Commerce Research, 11(1), 31–74.
doi:10.1007/s10660-010-9070-0
Boukhanovsky, A. V., & Ivanov, S. V. (2012). Urgent Computing for Operational Storm Surge Forecasting
in Saint-Petersburg. Procedia Computer Science, 9, 1704–1712. doi:10.1016/j.procs.2012.04.188
CACI. (2010). The ACORN user guide. Technical report. http://www.fcc.gov/document/fcc-renames-cmaswireless-emergency-alerts-wea.
Crooks, A. T., & Castle, C. J. E. (2012). The integration of agent-based modelling and geographical
information for geospatial simulation. In Agent-based models of geographical systems (pp. 219–251).
Springer.
Daly, B., Sennett, D., & others. (2010). Commercial Mobile Alert System.
De Walle, B., & Turoff, M. (2008). Decision support for emergency situations. Information Systems and EBusiness Management, 6(3), 295–316.
Giaglis, G. M. (2003). Towards a Classification Framework for Mobile Location Services, 64–81.
Holsapple, C. W. (2008). DSS architecture and types. In Handbook on Decision Support Systems 1 (pp.
163–189). Springer.
Horanont, T. (2010). A Study on Urban Mobility and Dynamic Population Estimation by Using Aggregate
Mobile Phone Sources. CSIS Discussion Paper № 115., (115).
Johansson, A., & Kretz, T. (2012). Applied pedestrian modeling. In Agent-based models of geographical
systems (pp. 451–462). Springer.
Kaiser, C., & Kanevski, M. (2010). Population Distribution Modelling for Calibration of Multi-Agent
Traffic Simulation, 1–10.
Ketcham, C. J., & Stelmach, G. E. (2004). Movement control in the older adult. Technology for Adaptive
Aging, 64–92.
Krzhizhanovskaya, V. V., Melnikova, N. B., Chirkin, a. M., Ivanov, S. V., Bou khanovsky, a. V., & Sloot,
P. M. a. (2013). Distributed Simulation of City Inundation by Coupled Surface and Subsurface
Porous Flow for Urban Flood Decision Support System. Procedia Computer Science, 18, 1046–1056.
doi:10.1016/j.procs.2013.05.270
Niculae, C. G. (2005). A socio-technical perspective on the use of RODOS in nuclear emergency
management. The University of Manchester.
Sahana. (2006). Sahana Wiki Community. http://www.reliefsource.org/foss/index.php/Sahana.
Schiller, J., & Voisard, A. (2004). Location-based services. Elsevier.
See, L., & others. (2012). Calibration and validation of agent-based models of land cover change. In Agentbased models of geographical systems (pp. 181–197). Springer.
Torrens, P. (2012). Urban geosimulation. In Agent-based models of geographical systems (pp. 435–450).
Springer.
Trainor, J. E., & Mcneil, S. (2008). A Brief Summary of Social Science Warning and Response Literature A
Report to COT Netherlands.
V. Knyazkov, K., V. Kovalchuk, S., N. Tchurov, T., V. Maryin, S., & V. Boukhanovsky, A. (2012).
CLAVIRE: e-Science infrastructure for data-driven computing. Journal of Computational Science,
3(6), 504–510. doi:10.1016/j.jocs.2012.08.006
Verpoorten, K. L. K., & Coninx, K. (n.d.). Portable Personal Displays for Co-Located Collaboration with
Limited Screen Space.
Verwey, W. B. (2010). Diminished motor skill development in elderly: indications for limited motor chunk
use. Acta Psychologica, 134(2), 206–14. doi:10.1016/j.actpsy.2010.02.001
Yamobi. (2013). Top 10 smartphone cities in Russia. http://yamobi.ru/posts/opublikovan_top10_gorodov_rossii_po_urovnyu_proniknoveniya_smar.html.
Yamori, K. (2007). Disaster Risk Sense in Japan and Gaming Approach to Risk Communication.
International Journal of Mass Emergencies and Disasters, 25(2), 101–131.

1655

