Procedia Computer Science
Volume 51, 2015, Pages 1504–1513
ICCS 2015 International Conference On Computational Science

Big Data on Ice:
The Forward Observer System for In-Flight
Synthetic Aperture Radar Processing
Richard Knepper1 , Matthew Standish1 , and Matthew Link1
Indiana University Bloomington, Indiana, USA
rich@iu.edu, mstandis@iu.edu, mrlink@iu.edu

Abstract
We introduce the Forward Observer system, which is designed to provide data assurance in ﬁeld
data acquisition while receiving signiﬁcant amounts (several terabytes per ﬂight) of Synthetic
Aperture Radar data during ﬂights over the polar regions, which provide unique requirements
for developing data collection and processing systems. Under polar conditions in the ﬁeld and
given the diﬃculty and expense of collecting data, data retention is absolutely critical. Our
system provides a storage and analysis cluster with software that connects to ﬁeld instruments
via standard protocols, replicates data to multiple stores automatically as soon as it is written,
and provides pre-processing of data so that initial visualizations are available immediately after
collection, where they can provide feedback to researchers in the aircraft during the ﬂight.
Keywords: Big Data, Network Filesystems, Synthetic Aperture Radar, Ice Sheet Data

1

Introduction

There are unique challenges in managing data collection and management from instruments
in the ﬁeld in general. These issues become extreme when “in the ﬁeld” means “in a plane
over the Antarctic.” In this paper we present the design and function of the Forward Observer
(hereafter FO): a computer cluster and data analysis system that ﬂies in a plane in the Arctic
and Antarctic to collect, analyze in real time, and store Synthetic Aperture Radar data used
to analyze the thickness and structure of polar ice sheets. We also discuss the processing of
data once it is returned to the continental US and made available via data grids. The needs for
in-ﬂight data analysis and storage in the Antarctic and Arctic are highly unusual, and we have
developed a novel system to meet those needs.
Ailamaki et al [2] describe a number of purpose-built systems for the capture, analysis,
and management of scientiﬁc data by high-performance systems. “Big science” projects such as
analysis of data from the Large Hadron Collider (LHC), earthquake simulations, and astronomy
often involve very big storage and compute facilities. In some cases, such as analysis of LHC
1504

Selection and peer-review under responsibility of the Scientiﬁc Programme Committee of ICCS 2015
c The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V.

doi:10.1016/j.procs.2015.05.340

Big Data on Ice

Knepper, Standish, and Link

data, computational scientists have the beneﬁt of years to prepare massive international storage
and computational grids to analyze data. When doing research in the ﬁeld there are very often
constraints on the size, power consumption, and durability of computing equipment used in the
ﬁeld to do data collection [3].
Starting in 2007, Indiana University (IU) began working with the University of Kansas’
Center for the Remote Sensing of Ice Sheets (CReSIS) in order to support management of
data collected by CReSIS during arctic ﬁeld missions. This began with the PolarGrid project
[5] to create cyberinfrastructure in support of remote sensing systems, particularly Synthetic
Aperture Radar (SAR) imaging of polar ice sheets. Research into the ice sheets at our poles
is vital information to understand the eﬀects of climate change, of glacier interactions, and to
monitor the thickness and condition of ice sheets over time. While there is still uncertainty
regarding the rate of change of the global climate and the causes of that change, what we know
certainly is this: there can be no conﬁdence that data collected next year will be identical
to data collected this year. That means that there is a tremendous premium for researchers
working in polar regions during any year to collect as much data as possible and to ensure that
the data make it back to the laboratory for analysis. Figure 1 shows the general workﬂow for
gathering ice sheet data, to be processed back at IU and CReSIS.

Figure 1: Data movement for the Ice Bridge project
Continuing this relationship, IU continues to provide data collection and management for
SAR data gathered in ﬂight by CReSIS staﬀ participating in NASA Operation Ice Bridge. At
the date of this writing, IU’s engineer is in the ﬁeld supporting the twelfth Operation Ice Bridge
mission. NASA Operation Ice Bridge has lasted six years — “the largest airborne survey of
Earth’s polar ice ever ﬂown,” and is expected to continue for an additional three years. It will
yield an unprecedented three-dimensional view of Arctic and Antarctic ice sheets, ice shelves
and sea ice. These ﬂights will provide a yearly, multi-instrument look at the behavior of the
rapidly changing features of the Greenland and Antarctic ice” [6]. Ice Bridge ﬂights involve a
1505

Big Data on Ice

Knepper, Standish, and Link

SAR radar system and computer equipment taken over a predetermined path to image polar
ice sheets in a plane (either the NASA Operation Ice Bridge DC-8 or P-3 aircraft) [4]. The
NASA Operation Ice Bridge radar systems [9, 7, 8] are enhanced and improved on an ongoing
basis. Raw collection may go up although the introduction of ﬁlters with the radar equipment
may reduce the size of data products that are delivered to the storage system. Table 1 below
shows the rate of data production over time and the expansion of the amount of data collected
per ﬂight day and season.

Campaign
2012 Greenland
2012 Antarctica
2013 Greenland
2013 Antarctica
2014 Greenland
2014 Antarctica

Table 1: Data rates for Ice Bridge ﬁeld missions
Average TB per ﬂight Max TB per ﬂight Total Data (TB)
4.02
161.50
2.47
39.55
1.21
2.51
46.68
1.70
2.95
11.88
1.90
3.06
86.81
1.88
3.27
42.16

Prior to 2012 SAR data collected on NASA Operation Ice Bridge (hereafter OIB) ﬂights
were written directly to disk, and analyzed in as close to real time as possible. In 2011 this
near real time analysis proved absolutely essential to the scientiﬁc mission when vibrations from
the plane interfered with the spinning disks used by SAR radar equipment, causing data to be
only partly usable for analysis. Other environmental conditions such as the physical shock of
shipping and handling in diﬃcult conditions, thermal changes due to diﬀerences in environment
and weather, and issues due to unconditioned power in the hotel rooms and oﬃces used by the
team for processing contributed to multiple failures of drives that were not destructive to radar
data, because the team had already made duplicate copies of the data. Dealing with data risks
with traditional data protection methods such as RAID ﬁlesystems was quickly understood to
be insuﬃcient for true data assurance. Understanding the risks due to these environmental,
shock and power issues, convinced the IU team that it was essential to develop true real time
data collection facilities that included an ability to conduct analyses so that the SAR data
could be observed by scientists in the plane as data were being collected, and also provide a
facility for ensuring that data created in ﬂight are exactly the same through every step from
collection, to processing, transfer, and eventual archiving. In addition to ensuring data quality,
this creates the possibility that the planned route for a ﬂight could be changed in response to
detection of some particularly interesting feature in the ice. In response to these unique needs,
IU developed a new and novel computing system designated the Forward Observer.
The FO represents a considerable improvement over earlier in-ﬂight data management capabilities. FO provides the the ability to capture, process, and display data in real time while
radar instruments are in use as compared to the systems that had previously been used as
part of NASA OIB. Metadata associated with the ﬂight and GPS coordinates are associated
with the data in real time. The FO interface provides information analysis of data in real time
and in addition a real time interface to the data management process, a view into the current
functioning of the system, monitoring any errors in data transfer or processing scripts. Data
pre-processing includes copying data to multiple diﬀerent physical devices (with veriﬁcation),
so that even if a particular storage device is lost or damaged, one of the copies of each byte of
data collected makes it back to the US for analysis. Working in extreme environments sometimes means things don’t go perfectly, and the data copying interface allows for things such as
monitoring the speed at which data are written and checked.
1506

Big Data on Ice

2

Knepper, Standish, and Link

The Forward Observer System Overview

The FO was designed ﬁrst and foremost to provide better data replication and performance
than a simple RAID array installed in the plane. A single RAID array would provide a minimal
amount of data protection in the event of one or two drives failing, and depending on the
architecture would provide suﬃcient speed for writing the data to drives. However, a simple
RAID array would not fulﬁll the requirements of a system that provided full data analysis and
visualization capability at the same time as recording the data from the SAR computers.

2.1

System Constraints and Requirements

IU developed the FO in order to meet several and in some cases stringent constraints:
• Power on the NASA plane is limited to two 110V circuits that must support all of the
running systems.
• Space is limited to an aircraft-rated machine rack that ﬁts within the cabin enclosure
which is 54” tall x 24” deep.
• The system must be as light as possible so that the equipment and passengers together
ﬁt into the weight limits for the plane.
• All of the equipment must be shock-mounted and vibration resistant; the ride in a plane
over Greenland or the Antarctic can be very bumpy. All of the equipment that is mounted
on the plane experiences ﬂight conditions well in excess of what is allowable for commercial
ﬂights and must be rated for safety in the event of high turbulence or other unsafe conditions. Vibration occurring during ﬂights is particularly diﬃcult to manage for mechanical
(rotating) disk storage.
• Input data from the SAR radar is generated from computer systems running the LabView
software [1].
• The CReSIS scientists using a potential system need to be able to provide results of
running Matlab processing on the raw data to NASA mission scientists as quickly as
possible
• Data processing with Matlab must not interfere with the collection and checksumming of
data
The FO system was designed to ﬁt within the above environmental constraints while providing key functions to the researchers collecting radar data. Data must be collected as quickly
as it is recorded by the radar computer and provenance information in the form of checksums
generated. All of the data must be copied to two storage media and checksummed in each
location in order to assure that data can be retrieved in case of issues due to cargo delays or
weather. These checksums allow the veriﬁcation of data integrity throughout the life of the
data. When the data returns to the IU, it is copied to IU’s high performance storage system,
the Data Capacitor, and analyzed using IU’s clusters. Finished data products are published at
the National Snow and Ice Data Center1 .
This is a challenging set of constraints, made more challenging by the data production rates
of the SAR. Up to 4 TB of data can be produced in a ﬂight day. This represents the increased
1 http://www.nsidc.org

1507

Big Data on Ice

Knepper, Standish, and Link

sensitivity of the SAR equipment (which results in a higher rate of data production). Diﬀerent
radar devices are included on diﬀerent campaigns, meaning that data storage needs do not
increase in a linear fashion from campaign to campaing. Depending on the plane supported,
radar array ﬁtted to the plane, and processing done on radar computer, results may vary in
size each mission. The data written by the SAR computer must be successfully written to disk
as it is produced by the instruments — no internal caching within that software buﬀers writes
to storage, so the system must monitor the write throughput, ﬁlesystem limits for numbers of
ﬁles, and I/O streams for the applications.

2.2

Forward Observer Architecture

Matt Standish at IU led the architecture of the project to create the FO. OIB planes carry
multiple radar systems. Each contains its own internal computers that handle A/D conversion
and send data through the PCIe bus of the computer system to a storage destination. Prior
to the creation and implementation of the FO, the destination for data produced by the radar
computers wrote data to arrays of solid-state drives (SSD), with one array per SAR system.
The SSD arrays were removed at the end of each ﬂight and data were able to be processed only
once the plane had landed at the end of a data collection ﬂight. The result of the computational
limits on in-ﬂight processing was that OIB scientists and mission leadership could not see data
visualizations until after backup and processing had completed, usually the following day after
data collection. If any visualizations were made in ﬂight, they were restricted to single images
processed on researcher laptops, providing an extremely limited view of the data being collected.
The FO system replaces the connection from the SAR system to storage system and the
drive array with a network of machines that receive the data and replicate across the system.
Data coming from the SAR system go over a 40Gbps Inﬁniband network to three servers each
with their own array of SSDs, and a storage array ﬁlled with mechanical drives mounted in an
enclosure that suppresses vibrations and allows the mechanical (spinning) drives to function
properly on the plane. Storage is presented to multiple radar computers as a Windows network
share, as a widely used transfer technology that any instrument can write to over an Inﬁniband
network. This approach allows considerable redundancy and resilience in the face of failures of
individual components. However, it creates challenges as well ensuring that the network and
Windows network share provides suﬃcient performance to accept data from multiple SAR systems required signiﬁcant tuning on the part of the storage system in order to ensure maximum
throughput. By providing multiple servers for data storage and assurance purposes, the FO
can dedicate resources to generating data checksums, creating secondary copies on mechanical
drives, and providing resources for matlab processing of data while it is being collected. When
the mechanical drive array is ﬁlled with two copies of data, drives are placed into storage for
safe transport back to IU and CReSIS. Figure 2 shows the network and server layout of the FO
system as deployed in the 2012 Ice Bridge mission season.
The FO software automates the start of all services in order to ensure that all systems are
ready for data collection before the radar computer is started. Software manages the creation
of checksums for each of the data ﬁles written by the radar computer, and the replication
of data ﬁles to each of the servers in the FO cluster. Checksums are created as soon as the
SAR computer ﬁnishes writing each ﬁle to the cluster and verifying checksum information is
transfered to each system throughout the transfer process in order to facilitate easy checks on
each data ﬁle at every location. The FO software replicates data on each node of the system
as soon as ﬁles are written and the checksumming process allows the software to ensure that
every transfer is made correctly.
1508

Big Data on Ice

Knepper, Standish, and Link

Figure 2: Forward Observer as deployed in NASA’s DC-8 aircraft
Data assurance. Integrity of the raw data ﬁle is essential to ensuring that the data collected
in the ﬁeld is consistent across processing systems. Small bit ﬂips in the data are hard to detect
and show up as noise in the processed product. To prevent data corruption the FO software
creates a hash of the data based on an md5 checksum as it is written to disk. Checksum
information is stored with the data and validated each time the data is moved between systems.
Verifying each checksum is a time consuming process and creates a delay in the process of data
collection. The FO automates and speeds up this process as much as possible by copying each
ﬁle to multiple destinations and checking the hash as each block is written.
Processing. Field collection is a lengthy process and it is not possible to complete all levels of
processing in the ﬁeld. However, any processing that can be done in the ﬁeld can have immense
impact on the progress of succeeding ﬂights in the ﬂight mission. By having access to analyses
in near-real time, the Ice Bridge team can make adjustments to planned ﬂight lines and revisit
important data-gathering points. The Ice Bridge team frequently makes use of data during
survey ﬂights in order to both ensure proper operation of the instruments as well as ensuring
that the ﬂight line corresponds to the research goals of that day’s ﬂight. Figure 3 shows the
real-time processing screen of the FO. The dark line on each of the graphs visible in Figure 3
is the border between ice and bedrock.
In order to implement this system while ensuring that no data were lost, we began ﬁeld
testing by doing processing while in ﬂight, but after radar data collection completed. As experience with the system increased, ﬁeld engineers gained conﬁdence (bolstered by performance
data and system analysis) that data collection would be undisturbed by processing data in real
time, in ﬂight, as data were being recorded. Processed ﬁles can be made available to researchers
nearly as soon as they are written to the system, so they can be analyzed by these researchers
while in ﬂight. Processing runs over successive amounts of software do take a nontrivial amount
of time, so the FO software estimates copy completion times across the system so the researcher
can plan processing times. Being able to forecast processing time is essential to ensure that
there is suﬃcient time to complete the processing run while in ﬂight or before ground hardware
needs to be relocated.
1509

Big Data on Ice

Knepper, Standish, and Link

Figure 3: Forward Observer real time processing
Monitoring. Monitoring the cluster environment is essential in a harsh environment. Variables such as temperature, network performance, sudden spikes in data rate or large I/O driven
jobs can negatively impact the performance of the data duplication and block hashing. A
heads up display was created to alert the operator in case thresholds were exceeded. Figure 4
shows the FO heads-up display, which shows the operator the current data rates, error counts,
throughput, and processing queues.

2.3

Advantages and drawbacks

The FO system provides a responsiveness to researchers that was impossible with the available
components a few years ago. While previous Ice Bridge missions required a day’s delay or
more between data capture and the delivery of processed data to the science team, the FO
now delivers visualizations of air, snow, ice, and bedrock levels a few seconds after data is
collected in ﬂight. Furthermore the FO’s data assurance software provides metadata capture
and provenance data that can be retained throughout the life of the data, after it returns
to CReSIS and IU, is processed on local clusters there, and is subsequently archived at IU’s
Scholarly Data Archive system. Not only are researchers able to get instant data visualizations
based on the data as it is collected, but they can be sure that the data is unchanged across
every step in its lifecycle.
While the FO oﬀers new functionality it introduces additional complexity. Before the FO
was implemented the SAR computer wrote to directly attached disks. Troubleshooting I/O
problems was fairly easy as there was only one point possible of bottleneck the SSD arrays
attached to the SAR radar systems. With the implementation of the FO the complexity of
resolving I/O issues was increased. Initial missions with the FO required an IT engineer to
monitor the system and ensure that maximum throughput was available to the SAR computer
and individual write errors minimized.
1510

Big Data on Ice

Knepper, Standish, and Link

Figure 4: Forward Observer heads up display
The radar are sensitive to electromagnetic interference (EMI) and the signature of the
components within the FO is still unknown, pending testing with CReSIS on their systems.
This can make it diﬃcult to troubleshoot abnormalities in the data. When an abnormality is
found the FO needs to be shut down to test for deviations in the data collected by the SAR
computer.
The IU team has done intensive work to ensure that the system is robust despite power
and other environmental factors that may aﬀect operation. While FO development continues
IU has been able to mitigate the risks of EMI contamination. The use of ﬁbre optics network
instead of copper ethernet reduces EMI. Multiple ﬁbre cables are run throughout the plane as
failover paths. The radar can write to any node in the FO in case of node failure and as a
last resort the radar can write directly to disk, syncing to the FO once the situation has been
corrected.

3

Improvements and future developments

The FO introduced a new way for radar engineers to consider data storage and processing. As
the instruments take advantage of the new capabilities that are oﬀered new features can be
integrated to help the operator. Some features in development are a ﬂight tracker, GPS meta
data integration to data ﬁles themselves, and moving from chunk processing to data stream
processing. Future versions of the FO software will incorporate Gluster2 storage that allows for
easier replication across machines and more ﬂexibility of storage conﬁgurations.
As the platform matures and stabilizes it will become less critical for a systems operator to
be on the plane. Remote operation through the Iridium satellite network will allow a system
2 http://www.gluster.org

1511

Big Data on Ice

Knepper, Standish, and Link

analyst in Indiana to operate and monitor the system. Supporting an individual team member
in the ﬁeld represents a cost of tens of thousands of dollars per mission, providing a remote
operation facility for the FO will result in signiﬁcantly reduced cost for the campaign.

4

Conclusion: Forward Observer as a workﬂow element
for instrument-based research

The FO system represents a critical step in connecting high-performance storage and computational resources directly to instruments deployed in the ﬁeld that collect signiﬁcant amounts
of data. The capabilities included in the FO would not be feasible in a ﬁeld-deployable system
as of a few years ago. As data-gathering instruments improve and the ability to move these
instruments to remote locations increases, the demand for on-site processing and data management will increase. Data collection in the ﬁeld is costly and it is frequently non-repeatable.
When collecting data in this manner, data assurance and reliability is vital to the success of
ﬁeld research. In this role, researchers require systems that interface with instruments via simple, well-understood protocols that can be utilized by multiple instruments at once without
substantial adaptation to existing systems.
The system’s ability to ensure the reliability of data copies and data storage checks, and
its self-monitoring capabilities, allow it to be utilized even in harsh situations and provide
considerable security of the instrument data collected. This sort of approach is potentially
valuable in a variety of diﬀerent environments. . . with the note that our current implementation
assumes a relatively dry environment.
Forward Observer’s ability to present storage that is generic and simple to the researcher,
while providing signiﬁcant performance for data analysis in real time and secure data management, represents a resource that allows for signiﬁcant computational tasks and data management activities to take place in novel environments.

Acknowledgment
The authors would like to thank John Paden, Carson Gee, and Carl Leuschen of CReSIS for
their contributions to workﬂow design, Art Mann of Silicon Mechanics for technical input, Drew
Hoﬀman of Hoﬀman Design Works for fabrication of vibration-resistant materials, and Craig
Stewart for comments on earlier versions of this report.

References
[1] NI LabVIEW – Improving the Productivity of Engineers and Scientists – National Instruments,
2013.
[2] Anastasia Ailamaki, Verena Kantere, and Debabrata Dash. Managing scientiﬁc data. Communications of the ACM, 53(6):68–78, 2010.
[3] Peter Arzberger, James Bonner, David Fries, and Arthur Sanderson. Report of the NSF Workshop
on Sensors for Environmental Observatories, 2005.
[4] Tom G. Farr and Mike Kobrick. Shuttle radar topography mission produces a wealth of data. Eos,
Transactions American Geophysical Union, 81(48):583–585, 2000.
[5] Linda Hayden, Geoﬀrey Fox, and Prasad Gogineni. Cyberinfrastructure for remote sensing of ice
sheets. TeraGrid 2007 conference proceedings, Madison, WI (under review), 2007.

1512

Big Data on Ice

Knepper, Standish, and Link

[6] NASA. Operation IceBridge – Studying Earth’s Polar Ice, 2013.
[7] Ben Panzer, Daniel Gomez-Garcia, Carl Leuschen, John Paden, Fernando Rodriguez-Morales, Aqsa
Patel, Thorsten Markus, Benjamin Holt, and Prasad Gogineni. Instruments and methods an ultrawideband, microwave radar for measuring snow thickness on sea ice and mapping near-surface
internal layers in polar ﬁrn. Journal of Glaciology, 59(214), 2013.
[8] F. Rodriguez-Morales, S. Gogineni, C. Leuschen, John Paden, J. Li, C. Lewis, B. Panzer, D. GomezGarcia, A. Patel, K. Byers, R. Crowe, K. Player, R. Hale, E. Arnold, L. Smith, C. Giﬀord,
D. Braaten, and C. Panton. Advanced multi-frequency radar instrumentation for polar research.
IEEE Transactions on Geoscience and Remote Sensing, Pending Publication.
[9] Lei Shi, C.T. Allen, J.R. Ledford, F. Rodriguez-Morales, W.A. Blake, B.G. Panzer, S.C. Prokopiack,
C.J. Leuschen, and S. Gogineni. Multichannel coherent radar depth sounder for nasa operation ice
bridge. In Geoscience and Remote Sensing Symposium (IGARSS), 2010 IEEE International, pages
1729–1732, 2010.

1513

