Procedia Computer
Science
Procedia
(2012)1–6
2457–2462
ProcediaComputer
Computer Science
Science 001 (2010)
www.elsevier.com/locate/procedia

International Conference on Computational Science, ICCS 2010

Modeling options markets by focusing on active traders
G. Qiu1,, D. Kandhai, and P. M. A. Sloot
Section Computational Science, Faculty of Science, University of Amsterdam,
Kruislaan 403, 1098 SJ Amsterdam, The Netherlands

Abstract
In this work, we study the complex behavior of options markets characterized by the volatility smile phenomenon,
through microsimulation (MS). We adopt two types of active traders in our MS model: speculators and arbitrageurs,
and call and put options on one underlying asset. Speculators make decisions based on their expectations of the asset
price at the option expiration time. Arbitrageurs trade at diﬀerent arbitrage opportunities such as violation of put-call
parity. Diﬀerence in liquidity among options is also included. Notwithstanding its simplicity, our model can generate
implied volatility (IV) curves similar to empirical observations. Our results suggest that the volatility smile is related
to the competing eﬀect of heterogeneous trading behavior and the impact of diﬀerential liquidity.

c 2012 Published by Elsevier Ltd. Open access under CC BY-NC-ND license.
⃝

Keywords:
options markets, volatility smile, microsimulation

1. Introduction
The Black-Scholes (BS) formula [1, 2] for pricing a European call/put option on a non-dividend-paying asset is
φ,t
(S t , K, r, T − t, σ) = φ[S t N(φd1 ) − Ke−r(T −t) N(φd2 )],
VBS

(1)

where S t is the price of the underlying asset at time t, K is the strike price, r is the risk-free interest rate, T is the
expiration time of the option and hence T − t is the time to maturity, σ is the volatility of the asset, and φ = 1(−1) for
a call (put) option. In the formula,
d1

=

d2

=

ln(S t /K) + (r + σ2 /2)(T − t)
,
√
σ T −t
√
d1 − σ T − t,

and N(x) is the standard normal cumulative distribution function.
Email address: G.Qiu@uva.nl (G. Qiu)
author

1 Corresponding

c 2012 Published by Elsevier Ltd. Open access under CC BY-NC-ND license.
1877-0509 ⃝
doi:10.1016/j.procs.2010.04.277

(2)
(3)

2458

G. Qiu et al. / Procedia Computer Science 1 (2012) 2457–2462
G. Qiu et al. / Procedia Computer Science 00 (2010) 1–6

2

All parameters in the BS model other than the volatility are observables. Moreover, according to the model, the
theoretical value of an option is a monotonic increasing function of the volatility. A unique volatility is therefore
implied by the market price of an option (V φ,t ), namely, an implied volatility (IV):
σφ,t
imp :

φ,t
φ,t
VBS
(S t , K, r, T − t, σφ,t
imp ) = V .

(4)

According to the BS model, the IV is independent of the strike for a ﬁxed time to maturity. Hence, curves of IV
against strike should be ﬂat. In reality, however, it is well known that IVs exhibit a remarkable curvature [3, 4, 5, 6, 7,
8], which is commonly referred to as a volatility smile. In particular, equity index options tend to have a downward
sloping IV curve, i.e. a volatility skew, and it has become much more pronounced only after the stock market crash of
October 1987. Foreign currency options, however, typically show a symmetric smile, especially if the currencies are
of equal strength. Contrary to equities, some commodity options often show an upward sloping skew.
Another important fact is that the volatility smile changes over time. In addition, it has been revealed that three
principal components can suﬃciently account for the observed deformation of the smile [7, 8]. The ﬁrst component
reﬂects the shift in its overall level; the second one conveys the change of its slope; and the third component accounts
for the adjustment in its convexity.
Apparently, the volatility smile conﬂicts with the BS framework. To account for the deviations of option prices
from the BS formula, models based on processes for the underlying asset other than geometric Brownian motion2 ,
such as stochastic volatility and jump diﬀusion processes, have been proposed [6]. They can include the smile eﬀect
on the valuation of options to some extent. However, market prices of options are ultimately determined by supply
and demand, which result from traders’ behavior. From this perspective, these alternative models do not explain the
origin of the smile phenomenon.
In view of these facts, our motivation is to develop a microscopic simulation (MS) model with a simple structure
that can reproduce the volatility smile and illustrate the mechanisms that govern the smile phenomenon. The general
reason for the adoption of simple MS models to conﬁrm stylized facts of ﬁnancial markets has been discussed in
Ref. [9].
In Sec. 2, we describe our MS model. We present it in the order of increasing level of sophistication, so that
the cause(s) of certain stylized feature(s) can be clearly identiﬁed. The simulation results of the model are shown in
Sec. 3. In the ﬁnal section, we present our conclusions and plans for future work.
2. Modeling Options Markets by Focusing on Active Traders
In options markets, there are three main types of traders: hedgers, speculators, and arbitrageurs. Typically, hedgers
use options as insurance to protect their ﬁnancial interests, but do not attempt to gain proﬁt from options markets;
speculators trade options to bet on the future prices in the hope of making capital gains; and arbitrageurs involve
making riskless proﬁts by taking advantage of price disparities.
Traders are also diﬀerent in their trading activity. Hedgers only need to trade once in a certain period. In contrast,
speculators are much more active due to the beneﬁts of option trading, i.e. its power of leverage, namely gaining
exposure to larger amounts of assets for a much smaller investment, and its potential to proﬁt whether the underlying
asset moves up or down. Arbitrageurs are even more active. There are many traders of this type in options markets
and their trading will quickly eliminate any detected arbitrage opportunity. Consequently, price disparities are usually
small and transient, and arbitrageurs need to trade frequently in order to lock-in signiﬁcant proﬁts.
The smile dynamics exhibits apparent regularity even on short (e.g. daily) time scales, as shown in Refs. [7, 8].
We therefore consider that, whereas the smile is inevitably inﬂuenced by the less active traders, its basic dynamics
should be accounted for by the behavior of the more active market participants. In modeling options markets, we
hence focus on active traders, i.e. speculators and arbitrageurs.
In our model, agents trade in European call/put options on a single underlying asset with diﬀerent strikes. All
options have the same time to maturity. Speculators make decisions based on their expectations of the asset price at
the option expiration time. In addition, their expected prices are inﬂuenced by news over time. Arbitrageurs trade at
2 In

the BS model a geometric Brownian motion is assumed for the price dynamics of the underlying asset.

G. Qiu et al. / Procedia Computer Science 1 (2012) 2457–2462

2459
3

G. Qiu et al. / Procedia Computer Science 00 (2010) 1–6

diﬀerent arbitrage opportunities, such as violation of put-call parity. The diﬀerence in liquidity between out-of-themoney (OTM) and in-the-money (ITM) options is also included. Changes of option prices are proportional to the
excess demands.
2.1. Level I: The Market Consists of only Speculators
In our model, there are Ntr traders and Nop call/put options. At this level all traders are assumed to be speculators
(SP). The strike price of the n-th call/put option is represented by K n , and its market price at time t is denoted as V n,φ,t ,
and the i-th trader’s expected asset price at the option expiration time is expressed as S i,t .
We assume that the speculators’ expected prices follow a log-normal distribution with mean mtS P and standard
deviation σtS P , based on the fact that prices can not be negative. Tests showed that adopting other distributions, e.g. a
normal or Lorentzian distribution, does not inﬂuence the principal characteristics of the simulated IVs.
Based on their expected asset prices, the speculators estimate the proﬁtability of trading each option. Without loss
is proportional to his estimated proﬁt of the
of generality, we assume that a speculator’s transaction quantity QSi,n,φ,t
P
deal:
= λS P [max(φ(S i,t − K n ), 0) − V n,φ,t ],
Qi,n,φ,t+1
SP

(5)

where λS P is a positive parameter that controls the activity level. At this level λS P = 1. Here, max(φ(S i,t − K n ), 0) is
the expected payoﬀ of the option. Notice that in this paper we assume that the interest rate is zero.
2.2. Level II: The Market Consists of both Speculators and Arbitrageurs
The arbitrageurs (AR) monitor the option prices in order to detect arbitrage opportunities. These agents will
trade those options that are found to violate the arbitrage relations. Without loss of generality, we assume that an
arbitrageur’s transaction quantities are proportional to the extent to which the relations are violated. In the case of
violation of put-call parity (PCP) [10], we therefore have
Qi,n,φ,t+1
AR PCP = −φλAR

with
An,t
AR
An,t
AR PCP

PCP

n,t
PCP AAR PCP

(6)

= (V n,1,t − V n,−1,t ) − (S t − K n ),

(7)

indicates the extent to which put-call parity is violated and λAR PCP is a positive parameter.
where
If the butterﬂy spread (BFS) relation [10] is violated, the following rule applies,
with

Qi,n,φ,t+1
AR BFS = −2λAR

n,h,φ,t
BFS AAR BFS ,

Qi,n−h,φ,t+1
= Qi,n+h,φ,t+1
= λAR
AR BFS
AR BFS

n,h,φ,t
BFS AAR BFS

1
n,φ,t
An,h,φ,t
− (V n−h,φ,t + V n+h,φ,t ) + εh , 0),
AR BFS = max(V
2

(8)

where An,h,φ,t
AR BFS indicates the extent to which the butterﬂy spread relation is violated and λAR BFS is a positive parameter. Here the prices of the three options corresponding to the strikes K n , K n−h , and K n+h are involved. The value of
h varies, meaning that the arbitrageurs apply this rule to all the possible butterﬂy spreads of which K n is the common
middle strike. εh ≥ 0 denotes the convexity of the curve considered by the arbitrageurs. For a typical convex IV curve,
εh increases with increasing h. For simplicity, we adopt εh = αh where α ≥ 0.
2.3. Level III: Diﬀerence in Liquidity is Further Included
In real markets, the liquidity of options is not balanced across strikes [11]. In general, OTM options are more
liquid than ITM options, implying that speculators trade in the former more actively than the latter. To reﬂect this fact,
we modify the parameter λS P as follows,
λS P (K n ) = ηS P [φ tanh(γ(K n − S t )) + 1],

(9)

where ηS P and γ are positive parameters. It is an increasing/decreasing function of the strike for call/put options.
In principle, arbitrage strategies are self-ﬁnancing and risk-free, stipulating that all the options involved must
be traded simultaneously and in the speciﬁed proportions. Liquidity unbalancing is therefore not applicable to the
arbitrageurs in our model.

2460

G. Qiu et al. / Procedia Computer Science 1 (2012) 2457–2462
G. Qiu et al. / Procedia Computer Science 00 (2010) 1–6

4

2.4. Option Price Updating
The prices of the options are updated according to the following rule, which can be explained as the eﬀect of
market makers’ action to balance the supply and demand:
V n,φ,t+1 = V n,φ,t +

βQn,φ,t
,
Ntr

(10)

where Qn,φ,t is the total transaction quantity or the excess demand of the n-th option at time t. Since the excess demand
is proportional to Ntr , we rescale it with the latter. Here β is a positive parameter that indicates the sensitivity of the
option price to the excess demand. Due to the fact that option prices cannot be negative, the lower bound of V n,φ,t is 0.
3. Simulation Results
In the model we do not include a term structure of the smile. Therefore, we adopt a ﬁxed value for T − t.
For simplicity we also keep S t and σtS P constant. We change the value of mtS P in the sense that news alters the
speculators’ expected prices. For comparison, we display the simulated option prices together with the corresponding
prices obtained by the BS model with the volatility σBS . The BS prices satisfy all the arbitrage relations.
The parameters λS P , λAR PCP and λAR BFS represent the traders’ activity levels for employing the corresponding
strategies (for the S and SA model, λS P = ηS P ). We assume that their values are proportional to the traders’ conﬁdence
levels about the proﬁtability of the strategies. For example, speculative proﬁts are much more uncertain than arbitrage
gains, so the value chosen for ηS P is much smaller than that for λAR PCP and λAR BFS . In simulations, ηS P = 0.1,
λAR PCP = 1.0, and λAR BFS = 1.5. The values for some other parameters are Ntr = 5000, Nop = 11, τ = 1, r = 0,
γ = 1.5, α = 0.1 3 , β = 0.1, mtS P = 19, σtS P = 3.5, σBS = 0.2, the fraction of speculators and that of arbitrageurs are
both set to 0.5. We assume that the minimum IV accepted by the traders is 5%. The initial prices of all the options are
equal to 1.
In the simulation based on the level I model, if mtS P coincides with S t , the simulated option prices overlap with
the corresponding BS prices and the resultant curve of IV against strike is ﬂat (data not shown).
Next, we examine the IV smile in the case that mtS P < S t . In this situation, the price of the underlying asset
is considered by the speculators more likely to suddenly drop than to suddenly rise, in line with the nature of stock
indexes. (Notice that we have assumed a zero interest rate and ignored dividends.) As shown in Figs. 1(a) and 1(b),
the resultant prices of all call/put options are lower/higher than the corresponding BS prices. Consequently, the IVs
of the call options are lower than the corresponding IVs for the put options. Obviously, the simulated option prices do
not satisfy put-call parity.
As illustrated in Fig. 1(c), the simulated option prices based on the level II model satisfy both put-call parity
and the butterﬂy spread relation. It can be observed that the speculators’ trading and that of the arbitrageurs tend
to move the option prices in opposite directions. Hence, the diﬀerent strategies followed by the speculators and the
arbitrageurs, respectively, lead to a competing eﬀect on the simulated option prices. As shown in Fig. 1(d), at this
level the IV curves still depart from empirical observations.
In the simulations based on the level III model, if the arbitrageurs only act on violation of put-call parity, we have
obtained the results as shown in Figs. 2(a) and 2(b). Here we see that most of the simulated option prices satisfy
put-call parity. In addition, the IVs of the options with strikes lower than S t are higher than those IVs corresponding
to the options with strikes higher than S t . Here we can observe that the competition becomes unbalanced due to
the diﬀerence in speculators’ activity between OTM options and ITM options. However, the options do not satisfy
the butterﬂy spread relation. Consequently, the IV curves are not convex as shown in empirical data. When the
arbitrageurs also trade in response to violation of the butterﬂy spread relation, as displayed in Figs. 2(d), we ﬁnally
have an IV skew similar to those observed in real markets for equity and index options.

3 Solely for reference, the average alpha value of the corresponding BS prices where the common middle strike is 20 and the volatility is between
0.1 and 0.3 is around 0.08.

G. Qiu et al. / Procedia Computer Science 1 (2012) 2457–2462
G. Qiu et al. / Procedia Computer Science 00 (2010) 1–6

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

2461
5

Figure 1: Simulation results of the level I model and those of the level II model plotted against moneyness (K n /S t ). The simulated option prices
(solid lines) are displayed together with the corresponding prices given by the BS model (dashed lines). The price curves of the call/put options are
decreasing/increasing against moneyness and the IV curves of the call options are lower than or overlap the corresponding curves of put options.
(a) Option prices of the level I model; (b) corresponding IVs. (c) Option prices of the level II model; (d) corresponding IVs.

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

Figure 2: Simulation results of the level III model plotted against moneyness (K n /S t ). The simulated option prices (solid lines) are displayed
together with the corresponding prices given by the BS model (dashed lines). The price curves of the call/put options are decreasing/increasing
against moneyness and the IV curves of the call options are lower than or overlap the corresponding curves of the put options. (a) Option prices
when arbitrageurs only act on violation of put-call parity; (b) corresponding IVs. (c) Option prices when the arbitrageurs also act on violation of
the butterﬂy spread relation; (d) corresponding IVs.

2462

G. Qiu et al. / Procedia Computer Science 1 (2012) 2457–2462
G. Qiu et al. / Procedia Computer Science 00 (2010) 1–6

6

4. Conclusions
Notwithstanding its simplicity, our model can generate IV curves similar to empirical observations. Our results
suggest that the volatility smile is related to the competing eﬀect of the distinct behavior of option traders and the
diﬀerence in speculators’ trading activity for options with diﬀerent strikes. Although not fully shown in this paper, it
has been found that the shape of the smile is determined by the mean of the speculators’ expected prices. In our future
work we will investigate the origin of the diﬀerence in the shape of the empirically observed IV curves for options on
various types of underlying assets. In addition, we will numerically compare our simulated IV surfaces with empirical
observations in terms of principal components.
Acknowledgments
This work was carried out in the context of VLe (Virtual Laboratory for eScience), a project supported by a BSIK
grant from the Dutch Ministry of Education, Culture and Science.
References
[1]
[2]
[3]
[4]
[5]
[6]
[7]
[8]
[9]
[10]
[11]

F. Black and M. Scholes, J. Polit. Economy 81 (1973) 637.
R. C. Merton, Bell J. Econ. 4 (1973) 141.
F. Black, Financial Anal. J. 31 (1975) 36.
J. D. Macbeth and L. J. Mervilla, J. Finance 34 (1979) 1173.
M. Rubinstein, J. Finance 40 (1985) 455.
R. Rebonato, Volatility and Correlation, John Wiley & Sons, Chichester, 2004.
R. Cont and J. da Fonseca , Quant. Finance 2 (2002) 45.
M. R. Fengler, W. K. H¨ardle, and C. Villa, Rev. Derivatives Res. 6 (2003) 179.
G. Qiu, D. Kandhai, and P. M. A. Sloot, Phys. Rev. E 75 (2007) 046116.
J. C. Cox and M. Rubinstein, Options Markets, Prentice Hall, Englewood Cliﬀs, 1985.
L. Ederington and W. Guan, J. Derivatives 10 (2002) 9.

