Procedia Computer Science
Volume 29, 2014, Pages 1756–1761
ICCS 2014. 14th International Conference on Computational Science

Flexible approach to astronomical data reduction
workﬂows in Kepler
Paweł Ciecieląg1 , Marcin Płóciennik2 , Piotr Spyra2
Michał Urbaniak2 , Tomasz Żok2 , and Wojciech Pych1
1

N. Copernicus Astronomical Center, Polsish Academy of Sciences, Warsaw, Poland
{pci, pych}@camk.edu.pl
2
Poznań Supercomputing and Networking Center, Poznań, Poland
{marcinp, pspyra, michalu, tzok}@man.poznan.pl

Abstract
The growing scale and complexity of cataloguing and analyzing of astronomical data forces scientists to look for a new technologies and tools. The workﬂow environments seem best suited
for their needs, but in practice they proved to be too complicated for most users. Before such
environments are used commonly, they have to be properly adapted for speciﬁc needs of the scientiﬁc domain. To that end, we have created a universal solution based on the Kepler workﬂow
environment. It consists of a library of domain modules, ready-to-use workﬂows and additional
services for sharing and running workﬂows. There are three access levels depending on the
needs and skills of the user: 1) desktop application, 2) web application 3) on-demand Virtual
Research Environment. The whole solution is set up in the context of Polish Grid Infrastructure,
enabling access to its resources. For ﬂexibility it includes interoperability mechanisms with the
domain speciﬁc applications and services (including astronomical Virtual Observatory) as well
as with other domain grid services.
Keywords: Kepler, Astronomy, Virtual Observatory

1

Introduction

Astronomy is a science relying greatly on observations and on numerical modeling. Nowadays, in both ﬁelds there is an increasing necessity for automation of certain activities. On the
observational side, data reduction pipelines were used for a long time. Currently, with observational data streams of order of 1 TB/night, astronomy enters the era of big data ﬂood. For
such amounts of data, majority of steps between observation and scientiﬁc result have to be
automated. It includes early warning pipelines, data dissemination to scientiﬁc institutions and
the data analysis. Optionally, the data can be published in the world-wide, astronomical data
1756

Selection and peer-review under responsibility of the Scientiﬁc Programme Committee of ICCS 2014
c The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V.
doi:10.1016/j.procs.2014.05.160

Astronomical data reduction workﬂows in Kepler.

Ciecielg, Pciennik, Spyra et al.

grid: the Virtual Observatory[3] (hereafter VObs 1 ). Thanks to strict standardization of data
formats and communication protocols, VObs itself provides means for automatic data search
and retrival, enabling massive analyses. In the ﬁeld of numerical modeling, massive parameter
studies of large or complex simulations require advanced control of jobs and management of
resulting data in an automatic fashion. In practice, activities elaborated above are fully accomplished only in rare cases, mostly in large collaborations. For small groups or individual
astronomers the setup of workﬂow environment is prohibitively diﬃcult. While the workﬂow
development obviously needs special expertise, there is still a need to create ﬂexible environment in which scientists could easily reconﬁgure ready-to-use components and weave into it
already used, domain software. In this article we present an universal solution built around the
Kepler workﬂow environment [1]. It is part of the AstroGrid-PL – astronomical domain grid of
the PLGrid Plus project [4].

2

Requirements and design

Our environment was initiated in response to various demands for pipelined tasks among astronomers using Polish Grid Infrastructure (PL-Grid). When designing it, the main objectives
were simplicity and ﬂexibility. Most scientists prefered to use predeﬁned pipelines via simple GUI. For this scenario we have identiﬁed a few well deﬁned use cases, mostly related to
semi-automatic reduction of observational data, which should be implemented and provied with
simple GUI to change input parameters and share the pipelines with others. But other scientists
pointed out the need for ﬂexibility i.e. ability to create or modify pipelines and to interface them
with other domain software or grid services. In general it is hard to reconcile both objectives,
but working within PLGrid Plus project we were able to ﬁnd quite universal solution with different levels of access, depending on needs and technical advancements of a user. Working with
scientists on the ’ﬂexible’ part of this solution we have identiﬁed more speciﬁc requirements.
This includes a selection of domain speciﬁc Kepler actors and certain interoperability mechanisms with other software and services. In particular, the solution should cooperate with other
AstroGrid-PL services: the domain data grid (iRODS based) and the Polish VObs infrastructure. Recognizing the growing, world-wide popularity of the VObs technology we decided to
promote support for its protocols and software wherever possible. This approach has been used
before in the astronomical extensions to the Taverna environment [9]. Of particular importance
should be support for the SAMP protocol [8] since it allows to exchange data between existing,
VObs-enabled applications. Support for other protocols is also desirable to access vast VObs
archives. The ﬁnal goal should be to make Kepler another VObs-enabled application in the
international VObs infrastructure.
In any case it should be possible to share workﬂows within working groups. Furthermore,
interactive elements of workﬂows should be optional since the general usage pattern is to adjust
input parameters in the interactive mode and then batch processing.

3

Implementation

Our solution extends Kepler with: a library of domain speciﬁc actors (plus a general tool to
convert C codes into actors), dedicated actors for interaction with the user and astronomical
applications, ready-to-use workﬂows for typical scenarios; they can access grid resources thanks
1 Commonly used acronym for Virtual Observatory is ’VO’ but in the context of this article we choose to
use ’VObs’ in order to avoid confusion with the grid’s Virtual Organisation.

1757

Astronomical data reduction workﬂows in Kepler.

Ciecielg, Pciennik, Spyra et al.

to the Serpens suite distributed with Kepler. The environment is accessible in three ways
depending on needs and advancement of the user:
Desktop Application. The Kepler’s GUI can be started on a workstation, which is useful for
interactive workﬂows and prototyping. We provide packages supplementary to Kepler: readyto-use library of domain actors and workﬂows.
Web Interface. We’ve developed a portlet devoted to conﬁguration and sharing of workﬂows
within workgroups. It is embeded in the main AstroGrid-PL portal. Users can upload workﬂows
with any auxiliary data, add metadata, change the workﬂow parameters and deﬁne workgroups.
Virtual Research Environment (VRE). Our environment is part of VRE hosted in the
PL-Grid cloud service. For users, this is the most convenient access method, since they get
on-demand remote desktop with all the domain software pre-installed and conﬁgured. The
software includes our Kepler-based solution, VObs applications, iRODS data grid clients and
Reﬂex (Kepler based pipelines for data reduction from the European Southern Observatory
telescopes, [2]).
An important aspect of our environment is its interoperability with other technologies.
Kepler has already build-in access mechanisms to access iRODS and other data sources (ftp/gridftp, SQL, REST/SOAP web services). Very important is support of VObs data formats
and protocols. We provide interoperability mechanisms with VObs by supporting: VOSpace
API (abstraction access layer to data resources), SAMP (messaging protocol for exchange of
data between applications), and apllications using SAMP. Finally, in the PL-Grid context it
is important to support diﬀerent midlewares. This is assured by the oﬃcial Kepler suite –
Serpens [7]. It provides support for job submission, monitoring and data handling in gLite and
UNICORE stacks as well as for Vine Toolkit.

4

Use cases

In this chapter we present two examples of implemented workﬂows. From the user perspective
they are available as part of PL-Grid services which implies general registration procedure
(portal registration, obtaining grid certiﬁcates and activation of required services). PL-Grid
provides also help desk services for domain users.

4.1

DIAPL workﬂows

DIAPL [6] is an astronomical package devoted to photometry using diﬀerential image analysis
method. It consists of a number of command line programs in C language which are typically
invoked from a shell script. The package programs can be used in various conﬁgurations depending on the problem, so we have implemented them as Kepler actors and prepared ready-to-use
workﬂows for typical applications. The basic workﬂow presented here is typically the ﬁrst step
in analyses with DIAPL. It averages series of images aiming to increase signal to noise ratio
with respect to a single frame and to remove image artifacts. The main steps are as follow:
1. Read in conﬁg ﬁles.
2. Start VObs-enabled applications: SAMP hub and ds9 image viewer.
3. Display reference image and camera bad pixels mask (in ds9). The user has an option to
interactivelly modify the mask.
4. For each input image calculate basic statistics (min, max, sky level, full-width half maximum of stellar proﬁles).
5. Reﬁne selection of input images. The user is assisted by a checkbox list of image names
and calculated statistics; any change in the list loads the corresponding image into ds9
1758

Astronomical data reduction workﬂows in Kepler.

Ciecielg, Pciennik, Spyra et al.

for inspection.
6. Calculate transformation between each image and the reference one. This is an automatic
step done with sophisticated algorithm provided by DIAPL.
7. Regrid images to common coordinates and create averaged template image. Additional
proﬁt is removal of traces of cosmic rays in the averaged image.
8. Display both reference and template images for comparison.
Figure 1 shows screenshot taken at step 5. This workﬂow is a good example of a ﬂexible

Figure 1: Averaging of images workﬂow. Central dialog widget corresponds to step 5, lower left
part shows SAMP hub and the right part shows ds9 – VObs-enabled image viewer.
approach. It can be run in the interactive mode from the desktop application or in the VRE.
Some interactive features are provided by the external, well-known to astronomers, software.
The software is VObs-enabled so the users can e.g. perform more extensive analysis of images
before ﬁnal selection for averaging. Workﬂow assistance in interactive work through VObs
protocols (e.g. importing marked regions of bad pixels) signiﬁcantly reduces analysis time since
the calculations itself are not very intensive and the whole workﬂow may need to be repeated
several times in order to ﬁnd out best combination of input parameters. Afterwards, when the
parameters are set, the workﬂow may be shared using our web interface (and in future also
executed in the grid). Thanks to the Kepler’s ability to run in non-gui mode and to the usage
of VObs protocols, the user may easily weave this workﬂow into other activities done outside
of our environment.

4.2

Spectral Analysis with Broadening Function Method

Spectral analysis helps to determine many parameters of a star: temperature, chemical composition, magnetic ﬁeld, rotation velocity and radial velocities. The next workﬂow implements it
using Broadening Function (BF) method [5]. It is physicaly superior over other methods which
are still commonly used because it relies on a singular value decomposition of the template
spectra of well known single star and then calculation of the BF for analyzed spectra. The BF
1759

Astronomical data reduction workﬂows in Kepler.

Ciecielg, Pciennik, Spyra et al.

is a function transforming template spectra into analyzed one. This workﬂow calculates BF for
a series of input spectra with respect to single template in the following steps:
1. Singular value decomposition of the template spectra (the most time consuming part).
2. Calculate BF for subsequent spectra ﬁle.
3. Smooth BF by convolution with Gauss function.
4. Determine physical parameters of object by ﬁtting model to the BF.
5. Go to step 2.
The main beneﬁt to the user is support for interactive adjustmentment of input parameters.
The results can be displayed in VObs-enabled application (SPLAT-VO) enabling access and
comparison with huge amounts of VObs archive data, for example to ﬁnd better template
spectra. This application is also more time consuming so users beneﬁt from running it in the
grid over large sets of input ﬁles.

5

Conclusions and future work

We have presented a ﬂexible solution for handling of pipelined tasks in astronomy, based on
the Kepler workﬂow environment. The solution is deployed in the PL-Grid infrastructure, and
in cooperation with other domain services of AstroGrid-PL forms multi-functional platform
for astronomical research. The key features making our solution ﬂexible are: diﬀerent levels
of access depending on user needs, support for the VObs protocols and interoperability with
VObs-enabled applications and other domain grid services. Our solution stimulated general
interest in workﬂow environments, which were considered by our users too complicated before.
Essential factor here was comprehensive user support through the PL-Grid platform. Further
work will concentrate on providing more ready-to-use workﬂows and domain-speciﬁc actors.
We are also planning simpliﬁed GUI for the desktop application which would present necessary
input/output elements while hiding the main Kepler workspace.
Acknowledgments. This research has been partially supported by the European Regional
Development Fund program no. POIG.02.03.00-00-096/10 as part of the PL-Grid PLUS project.

References
[1] I. Altintas, C. Berkley, and E. et al. Jaeger. Kepler: an extensible system for design and execution
of scientiﬁc workﬂows. Scientiﬁc and Statistical Database Management, 2004. Proceedings. 16th
International Conference on, pages 423–424, 2004.
[2] W. Freudling, M. Romaniello, and et al. Bramich, D. M. Automated data reduction workﬂows for
astronomy. The ESO Reﬂex environment. Astronomy & Astrophysics, 559:A96, November 2013.
[3] IVOA. International Virtual Observatory Alliance. http://ivoa.net/. [Online;].
[4] PLGrid Plus. Domain-oriented services and resources of Polish Infrastructure for Supporting Computational Science in the European Research Space – PLGrid Plus. http://www.plgrid.pl/en.
[Online;].
[5] W. Pych. BF package. http://users.camk.edu.pl/pych/BF/. [Online;].
[6] W. Pych. DIAPL package. http://users.camk.edu.pl/pych/DIAPL/. [Online;].
[7] M. Płóciennik, T. Żok, and et al. I. Altintas. Approaches to distributed execution of scientiﬁc
workﬂows in kepler. Annales Societatis Mathematicae Polonae. Series 4: Fundamenta Informaticae,
Vol. 128, nr 3:281–302, 2013.

1760

Astronomical data reduction workﬂows in Kepler.

Ciecielg, Pciennik, Spyra et al.

[8] M. Taylor, T. Boch, M. Fitzpatrick, A. Allan, L. Paioro, J. Taylor, and D. Tody. IVOA Recommendation: SAMP - Simple Application Messaging Protocol Version 1.3. ArXiv e-prints, October
2011.
[9] NicholasA. Walton and Eduardo Gonzalez-Solares. Astrogrid and the virtual observatory. In José
Gracia, Fabio Colle, and Turlough Downes, editors, Jets From Young Stars V, volume 791 of Lecture
Notes in Physics, pages 81–113. Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2009.

1761

