Procedia Computer Science
Volume 80, 2016, Pages 2317–2321
ICCS 2016. The International Conference on Computational
Science

Modelling complex systems with distributed
agency and fuzzy inference systems.
Knowledge-based curricula in higher education
Eduardo Ahumada-Tello1 and Manuel Castanon-Puga1
1

Autonomous University of Baja California, Tijuana, Mexico
eahumada@uabc.edu.mx, puga@uabc.edu.mx

Abstract
Higher education has become a cornerstone in the arise of knowledge society conceptualization. This
concept covers a new type of social configuration that puts knowledge as the main value in human
interaction for future social and economic development and also as one of the main actions to improve
in order to gain a better quality of life. In this paper we discuss the importance of this structure and its
characteristics, then we focus in the need to generate a higher education curriculum that fits this
emphasis in social development of a new knowledge-based society. Finally, we use complex systems
simulation to analyze six agents including: 1) Students; 2) Teaching - Teachers; 3) Training plan Teachers; 4) Scientific research, IT development, innovation and professional performance; 5)
Management - Managers; and 6) Environment and relevance or External Agents and five variables for
this study: 1) Teaching; 2) Extracurricular activities; 3) Research and development; 4) Management;
and 5) Educational culture. The final goal is to propose a curriculum that includes a projection to
create knowledge-based society from higher education as a main factor to achieve this objective
Keywords: complex systems, higher education, knowledge-based curricula, distributed agency, FIS

1 Introduction
In recent years, computational science has increased the amount of research in complex systems
(CS). This scientific points of view try to achieve a correlation between the analysis and application of
this computer science approach in conventional and multi factorial research questions. The aim of
some techniques, such as fuzzy logic and neural networks points out to understand in a much more
quantitative approach some specific social phenomena [1]. A CS is characterized by a highly
connected network of entities from which emerges a higher order behavior. Research in the field of CS
has become multidisciplinary and has focused on the use of computational modeling and simulation as
a methodology for analyzing diverse social phenomena.

2 Knowledge based society as a complex system
Knowledge emerge from information as well as information emerge from data. There is a direct
relationship between data, information and knowledge. If the information is transformed into
knowledge, then the intervention of a person has occurred [4]. Actions of knowledge generation occur
Selection and peer-review under responsibility of the Scientiﬁc Programme Committee of ICCS 2016
c The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V.

doi:10.1016/j.procs.2016.05.429

2317

Modelling complex systems with distributed...

E Ahumada-Tello and M Castanon-Puga

in humans [2]. The Information and Communication Technologies (ICT), even though its data
processing capacity and information creation, can not create knowledge, this is possible only after the
intervention of a human being [3], and it To this we can add the increases it complexity over time [4].
Knowledge societies have existed since man has been organized into groups [5] and have
relevance in economic growth and quality of life [7]. Social, economic and cultural developments are
now linked to technological progress [8], the presence of these technologies affects how quickly you
can develop a society that is based on knowledge [9]. The concept of knowledge society is
characterized by three attributes [7]: 1) Creative capacity; 2) Innovative talent; and 3) Ability to
determine relevance. These can be generated by an educational system by extending the existing
knowledge and innovative talent aimed at satisfying specific needs and developing systems of
knowledge in universities[6] [10]. Much of the knowledge available, needs extensive training because
it is tacit and can not be easily communicated, even for someone who knows it [7]
Knowledge gets involve in a society and therefore public policy are oriented to fulfilled several
requirements defined by the United Nations [11]. Gender equality, democracy, pluralism, indigenous
knowledge, freedom of speech and a number of sub-categories in which the knowledge society is
divided are the main aspects that define it. The emergence of knowledge is based also in educational
schemes that promote the new global reality [12] [1].

3 Complex higher education system. A case study
CS exhibit properties that emerge from the interaction of their parts and which cannot be predicted
from the properties of the parts [13]. These systems consist of many diverse and autonomous but
interrelated and interdependent components or parts linked through many (dense) interconnections,
therefore, they cannot be described by a single rule and their characteristics are not reducible to one
level of description. It's necessary to do a depth analysis of its properties and specific characteristics to
try to reach an understanding of its behavior [12] [13] [14].
The purpose of modeling an educational program is that through this process the researcher is able
to identify the elements that can be improved in order to increase the quality of the results expected of
it. In this context, this paper aims to represent the outcome obtained through the analysis of the
elements in a research applied in Autonomous University of Baja California in Tijuana Mexico. The
agents and variables proposed and involved in this research, have the following agents and variables in
this proposed modeling [15] [1] [18] [16] [17] :

Evaluation agents

Variables

Students
Teaching
Teaching [Teachers]
Teaching
Training plan [Teachers]
Teaching. Extracurricular activities
Scientific research, technological development, innovation and
Research and development
professional quality performance [Researchers]
Management [Managers]
Management
Environment and relevance [External agents]
Educational culture
Table 1: Agents and variables involved in this research

4 Modelling higher education system with DA and FIS
The methodology of Distributed Agency (DA) represents a general theory of collective behavior
and structure formation, which intends to redefine agency and reflect it in multiple layers of
information and interaction, as opposed to the traditional approach in which agency is only reflected in
individual, atomized and isolated agent [23] [25]. Social simulation aims to cross the gap between the
descriptive approach used in the social sciences and the formal approach used in the hard sciences, by
moving the focus on the processes/mechanisms/behaviors that build the social reality [19][27].
Following the relationship between agents and variables before and according to theory approach and
expert techniques to define variables, this case was divided into the next codes and categories:

2318

Modelling complex systems with distributed...

Variable

E Ahumada-Tello and M Castanon-Puga

Code

Teaching
Research and
development
Management
Educational
Culture
Extracurricular
activities

DOC-ADCA
DOC-C
DOC-ATE
DOC-PEA
I+D-DI
I+D-EI
I+D-AR
I+D-TIC
I+D-IC
DA-PEE
DA-SAM
DA-AMTE
DA-GR
CU-AV
CU-TE
CU-DOR
CU-L
CU-MGEL
AE-SA
AE-IF
AE-F
AE-OV

Category
Sports, cultural and artistic activities
Courses
Management of educational technology
Participation in academic events
Research Design
Research Execution
Resource Management
Information and Communication Technologies
Context Interaction 
Educational planning and execution
Selection and management of teachers
Acquisition, maintenance and updating of educational technology
Resource management
Acquiring securities
Teamwork
Teaching for Results
Leadership
Multiculturalism, gender, ethnicity and language
Student Society
Tournaments between faculties
Celebrations, parties and fun events
Travel organization

Table 2: Codes and categories by variable

The findings presented below are the result of qualitative instruments implementation:
Agents
Variable
Teaching

Students
DOC-ADCA
DOC-C

Research and
development
Management
Educational
Cultures
Extracurricular
Activities

CU-AV
CU-TE
CU-DOR|CU-L
AE-SA
AE-IF
AE-F | AE-OV

Teachers
DOC-C
DOC-ATE
DOC-PEA
I+D-TIC
I+D-EC

Researchers
DOC-C
DOC-ATE

Managers
DOC-ADCA

External
Agents
DOC-ADCA
DOC-PEA

I+D-DI | I+D-EI
I+D-AR | I+D-IC
I+D-TIC

DA-GR

DA-GR

DA-PEE
DA-SAM
DA-AMTE | DA-GR

CU-AV
CD-TE
CU-MGEL

CU-AV
CU-TE
CU-L

CU-AV
CU-MGEL

CU-AV

AE-F
AE-OV

AE-F
AE-OV

AE-F
AE-OV

AE-F

Table 3: Relation between variables and agents

The modeling of a realistic social system cannot be achieved by resorting to only one particular
type of architecture or methodology [24]. The methodology of Distributed Agency (DA) represents a
potentially ground-breaking applications in engineering and in social sciences areas in which it
minimizes the natural distances between physical and sociological systems approaches. In this work
we thus lay the foundations for a DA description of socio-educational realities, in a process that
weaves different available computational techniques to represent social and individual behavior in a
contextualized fashion, accommodating agents with limited rationality and complex interactions [20].
This methodology represents a novel approach to simulation architectures, creating a language that
links the social sciences to programmable terminology and that can thus be broadly applied. The DA
methodology represents a general theory of collective behavior and structure formation [5], which
intends to redefine agency and reflect it in multiple layers of information and interaction, as opposed
to traditional approach in which agency is only reflected in individual isolated agents [25] [26].
To build the computational model is necessary to follow the distributed agency methodological
steps listed as follows [14]: 1. Determining the levels of agency and their implicit relationships; 2.
Data mining 3. Generating a rule-set; 4. Multi-Agent Modelling (Implementation on an agent based

2319

Modelling complex systems with distributed...

E Ahumada-Tello and M Castanon-Puga

simulation tool); 5. Validating the model; 6. A simulation and optimization experiment; and 7.
Analyzing the outputs
Although the methodology covers the life-cycle of a research process, we are describing the data
mining and generating rule set steps. We’re focused on the neuro-fuzzy approach in order to set up a
rule set into agents. An Interval Type-2 Fuzzy Neural Network (IT2FNN) are used for automatically
generate rules. The phase of data mining using Interval Type-2 Fuzzy Logic Systems (IT2FLS) [22]
becomes complicated, as there are rules to determine which variables to take into account.
Using IT2FNN for automatically generating the necessary rules, this phase of data mining with an
IT2FLS [22] becomes complicated, as there are enough rules to determine which variables one should
take into account. Using the search method of back propagation and hybrid learning (BP+RLS); being
more efficient on other methods such as genetic algorithms, shown in other studies [21] [22]. Since the
IT2FNN method seems to produce more accurate models with fewer rules.

Figure 1: Architecture IT2FNN of Knowledge-base curricula in higher education [22]

This optimization algorithm is widely used and is a numerical method to minimize an objective
function in a multidimensional space, and the approximate global optimal solution to a problem with
N variables, which minimize the function varies smoothly [21]. Using this grouping algorithm we
obtain the rules, the agent receives inputs from its environment and also must choose an action in an
autonomous and flexible way to fulfill its function [11] [1] [12].

5 Conclusions
In this paper the agents (students, teachers, researchers, managers and external agents) consider
knowledge as the most valuable assets. The study indicates that in order to achieve knowledge society,
education evolution must be one of the most important goals in society. Also, the different agents must
be able to create a relationship between actions and executioners. Second, the use of computer tools
and frameworks tend to facilitate the understanding of this phenomena. Using distributed agency and
fuzzy inference systems helps to build scenarios that any social researcher can analyze and use it as a
methodological tool that may helps to test their research questions and hypothesis. In order that
societies can move toward a true knowledge society, it is necessary also to assess the scientific and
technological knowledge, evaluate space and the value of traditional knowledge. In future works it's
going to take part the implementation of the model using the data we collect in a simulation software.
Also its necessary complete test the FIS developed for this research with new data in its goal of
determine how accurate is to increase performance acquisition to develop knowledge-based societies.

2320

Modelling complex systems with distributed...

E Ahumada-Tello and M Castanon-Puga

6 References


[1]

E. Ahumada-Tello, M. Castañon-Puga, J. R. Casto and E. Suarez, "Distributed Agency and AgentBased Modeling as an
Alternative and Complementary Research Methodology for Business Applications," in Epistemological Perspectives on
Simulation (EPOS 2012), San Diego, USA, 2012.

[2]

T. Davenport and L. Prusak, Conocimiento en acción. Cómo las organizaciones manejan lo que saben, Buenos Aires:
Prentice-Hall, 2001.

[3]

J. Mendel and D. Wu, "Perceptual Computing. Aiding People in Making Subjective Judgments," Computational
Intelligence, vol. 13, 2010.

[4]

G. Michel, Existencia y método, México, D.F.: Castellanos Editores, 2006.

[5]

J. Diamond, Guns, germs and steel: The fates of human societies, USA: W.W. Norton & Company, 1997.

[6]

S. Diaz de Sarralde, C. Garcimartin and L. Rivas, Políticas de competencia y crecimiento. El caso irlandés, Madrid: Instituto
de Estudios Fiscales. Ministerio de Hacienda, 2005.

[7]

J. Tilak, "Knowledge society. Education and aid," Compare, vol. 32, no. 3, pp. 297-310, 2002.

[8]

M. Castells, La era de la información Vol. I. La sociedad red, vol. I, Barcelona: Plaza y Janés, S.A., 2002.

[9]

N. Stehr, Knowledges societies - The transformation of labour, property and knowledge in contemporary society, Londes:
Sage, 1994.

[10]

M. Casas-Armengol, "Nueva universidad ante la sociedad del conocimiento," Revista de Universidad y Sociedad del
Conocimeinto RUSC, vol. 2, no. 2, pp. 1-18, 2005.

[11]

UNESCO, Hacia las sociedades del conocimiento, M. Jouve, Ed., Paris: Organización de las Naciones Unidas para la
Educación, la Ciencia y la Cultura, 2005.

[12]

R. Axelrod, "Advancing the Art of Simulations in the Social Sciences," Handbook of Research on Nature Inspired
Computing for Economic and Management, pp. 1-13, 17 May 2005.

[13]

P. M. Senge, La Quinta Disciplina: El arte y la práctica de la organización abierta al aprendizaje, Madrid: Ediciones Granica,
S.A..

[14]

B. Y. Marquez, Metodología Multinivel Utilizando Sistemas Inteligentes. Simulación para Estudios Sociales, Editorial
Académica Española, 2013.

[15]

E. Ahumada-Tello, Modelo educativo hacia la formación de la sociedad del conocimiento en la Licenciatura en Informática
de la Facultad de Contaduría y Administración en la UABC Tijuana, Tijuana: Universidad Iberoameticana, 2009.

[16]

J. Levinson-Rose and R. Menges, "Improving college teaching: A critical review of research," Review of educational
research, vol. 51, no. 3, pp. 403-434, 1981.

[17]

P. Dressel, Handbook of Academic Evaluation, San Francisco: Jossey-Bass, 1976.

[18]

A. Gupta and V. Govindarajan, "Knowledge flows within multinational corporations," Strategic Management Journal, vol.
21, pp. 473-496, 2000.

[19]

D. Suarez and M. Castañon-Puga, "Distributed Agency: A Simulation Language for Describing Social Phenomena," in IV
Edition of Epistemological Perspective on Simulation, Hamburgo, Germany, 2010.

[20]

M. Castañon-Puga, J. M. Flores-Parra, C. Gaxiola-Pacheco, L. E. Palafox-Maestre and E. Ahumada-Tello, "Extending
Netlogo with Interval Type-2 Fuzzy Inference Systems," in Complex Systems (WCCS), 2014 Second World Conference,
USA, 2014.

[21]

J. R. Castro, O. Castillo, P. Melin and A. Rodriguez-Diaz, "A hybrid learning algorithm for a clas of interval type 2 fuzzy
nerual networks," Journal or Information Sciences, vol. 179, no. 13, pp. 2175-2193, 2008.

[22]

J. Rantala and H. Koivisto, "Optimised substractive clustering for neuro-fuzzy models," in 3rd WSEAS International
Conference on Fuzzy Sets and Fuzzy Systems, Switzerland, 2002.

[23]

E. Ahumada-Tello, M. Castañon-Puga, J. R. Castro, E. D. Suarez, B. Y. Marquez, C. Gaxiola-Pacheco and D. L. Flores, "A
Multi-Agent Model of Knowledge Society for Business and Management System: Modeling Distributed Agency Using Data
mining and Neuro–Fuzzy System," International Journal of Digital Information and Wireless Communications (IJDIWC),
vol. 1, no. 2, pp. 516-525, 2012.

[24]

M. Yolles, Organizations as Complex SystemsL: An Introduction to Knowledge Cybernetics, 1st ed., Greenwich,
Connesticul: Information Age Publishing, 2006, p. 865.

[25]

B. Y. Marquez, M. Castañon-Puga, J. R. Castro and E. D. Suarez, "Methodology for the Modeling of Complex Social
System Using Neuro-Fuzzy and Distributed Agencies," Journal of Selected Areas in Software Engineering, pp. 1-8, March
2011.

[26]

E. D. Suarez, M. Castañon-Puga, D.-L. Flores, A. Rodriguez-Diaz, J. R. Castro, C. Gaxiola-Pacheco and M. GonzalezFuentes, "A multilayered agency analysis of voting models," in The 3rd World Congress on Social Simulation WCSS2010,
Kassel, Germany, 2010.

[27]

N. Gilbert, Computational Social Science: Agent-based social simulation, Oxford: Bardwell, 2007.

2321

