Available online at www.sciencedirect.com

Procedia Computer Science 18 (2013) 742 – 748

International Conference on Computational Science, ICCS 2013

Virtual reality simulator for phacoemulsiﬁcation cataract surgery
education and training
Chee Kiang Lama,∗, Kenneth Sundaraja , M. Nazri Sulaimanb
a AI-Rehab

Research Group, Universiti Malaysia Perlis (UniMAP), Kampus Pauh Putra, 02600 Pauh, Perlis, Malaysia.
of Ophthalmology, Hospital Tuanku Fauziah, Jalan Kolam, 01000 Kangar, Perlis, Malaysia.

b Department

Abstract
Computer systems are taking an important role in the ﬁeld of medicine with the introduction of electronic biomedical devices
in diagnosis and treatment, where medical records obtained from the devices are documented and processed as reference to
medical panels. The capability of latest computed tomography technology in generating three-dimensional patient model for
graphical representation is very informative for surgeons to plan and make decision before the operation. This initiates the
idea of implementing the model into computer-generated simulator for surgical education and training. This paper presents the
development of virtual reality cataract surgery simulator. Three-dimensional eye model and surgical instruments are generated
as the virtual surgical environment. The system is equipped with a pair of haptic devices to provide actual sensation. The
results show that the simulator is capable of providing interactive training on the main procedures of cataract surgery. It has
the potential to be incorporated as part of the curriculum of medical program when the proposed future work in the end of the
paper is completed.
Keywords: cataract surgery; phacoemulsiﬁcation; surgical simulator; virtual reality.

1. Introduction
Virtual reality is usually classiﬁed as a computer-simulated environment that responds to human activities.
It has been implemented into diﬀerent areas not limited to scientiﬁc research, education and training, product
evaluation, safety measurement and entertainment. This system normally consists of a computer that renders
three-dimensional virtual world in real-time, a position tracking controller and a head-mounted stereoscopic
display [1]. Visual and auditory are the two elements found in most of the virtual environments in providing
sensation of actual interaction with the virtual world [2]. A higher level electronically simulated medium is able
to generate faithful force feedback with the aid of the latest implementation of haptic interface in virtual reality.
A real-world phenomenon can be replicated into the virtual environment with the objective to provide speciﬁc
exposure, training or treatment for the users in a protected and controlled medium, where severe injury and lost of
property that may happen in actual situation are avoidable.
The growth of electronics and computer technology has contributed to the development of virtual reality
surgical training tool. Medical simulation has become a valuable learning and practicing tool in training and
teaching skills for various types of surgery. This is due to the limitations occur in the traditional training on
∗ Corresponding

author. Tel.: +6-012-525-3111.
E-mail address: cklam85@gmail.com.

1877-0509 © 2013 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. Open access under CC BY-NC-ND license.
Selection and peer review under responsibility of the organizers of the 2013 International Conference on Computational Science
doi:10.1016/j.procs.2013.05.238

Chee Kiang Lam et al. / Procedia Computer Science 18 (2013) 742 – 748

animals and human cadavers. Animals do not possess the same anatomy as human beings, the samples usually
are expensive and not reusable. Despite the fact that human cadavers have the correct anatomy, they are diﬃcult
to procure, expensive and prone to tissue degradation problems [3]. Surgical training simulators that are available
in the market for surgery such as endoscopic surgery [4], endovascular surgery [5] and laparoscopic surgery [6],
have received constructive response from some clinical validation reports. This evidence shows that virtual reality
simulator has potential to be incorporated into the curriculum of surgical training and assessment for the coming
years.
This article focuses on the research and development of a cataract surgery simulator, with the aim to serve
the purpose of providing repetitive training on the main procedures of phacoemulsiﬁcation surgery. Preliminary
results concerning the realization of corneal incision, capsulorhexis, phaco-sculpting and intraocular lens (IOL)
implantation are described. Tissue deformation and topological modiﬁcation are modelled and simulated with
response to the actions performed on the pair of haptic devices that is equipped to the system. The article is
organized in four sections. Section 2 presents an overview on cataract surgery. The system architecture of
the cataract surgery simulator is addressed in Section 3. Section 4 shows the simulation of four main cataract
surgery procedures, corneal incision, capsulorhexis, phaco-sculpting and IOL implantation. Section 5 outlines the
conclusion of this research work and suggests future improvement and development.
2. Cataract and Surgical Treatment
Cataract is the clouding of the lens in the eye that inﬂuences vision. Most of the cataract formed inside the
patient’s eye is age-related cataracts. This is usually caused by the protein in the lens clumps up which reduces the
light from reaching the retina and produces blurred vision. Besides that, diabetes, glaucoma, ocular inﬂammation,
radiation and smoking are some of the risk factors that lead to the formation of cataract.
Phacoemulsiﬁcation is the modern cataract surgery, which is introduced by Dr. Charles Kelman in the late of
1960s [7]. The main advantage of this technique is the incision required for the procedure is small and usually
self-sealable. The visual recovery period after the operation can be shorten eﬀectively. Phacoemulsiﬁcation
cataract surgery begins with topological anesthetic, where anesthetic gel is instilled in the eye pre-operatively.
A side port incision is made for the injection of viscoelastic to hold open the space between the cataract and the
delicate underside of the clear cornea in front of it. The operation continues with corneal incision, ophthalmologist
uses keratome to make an incision of 2.2 mm to 2.5 mm wide on temporal limbus as the tunnel for insertion of other
surgical instruments. Anterior surface of the capsule that lies on top of the nucleus is removed after that, which
the procedure is named as capsulorhexis. The layer is torn by using forceps to create a round shape opening for
the removal of cataract. Cataract in the eye is divided into four quadrants by using divide and conquer technique.
Phaco handpiece with steel needle emulsiﬁes the cataract into small pieces while the aspiration port at the tip of
the probe removes the fragments by suction from the pump. The surgery is completed by removing the soft cortex
and implanting foldable IOL of appropriate power into the capsular bag.
3. System Architecture and Development
The developed cataract surgery simulator is carried out in a personal computer with hardware conﬁguration of
Intel Core i7-2600 CPU, 8GB DDR-3 RAM and NVIDIA GeForce GTX560 Ti graphics card. A pair of SensAble
Phantom Omni haptic devices is equipped into the system to provide the control of virtual surgical instruments
and generate faithful force feedback. The devices consist of six degrees-of-freedom in position tracking and
three degrees-of-freedom for force feedback, which are adequate to be used as human-computer interface for the
simulation. The surgical training platform of phacoemulsiﬁcation cataract surgery simulator is shown in Fig 1.
Haptic worlds are created in the system to obtain the contact point and force from both of the styli’s movements
respectively. The information of the styli is processed by simulation system to identify the types of surgical
activity such as cutting, grasping, pulling, pushing, sculpting and emulsifying. Besides that, reaction force is
also computed and sent to the haptic devices at the same time. Modelling system identiﬁes and updates the tissue
deformation and topological modiﬁcation on the mesh of eye model. The changes on the eye ball will be generated
into three-dimensional images and outputs to the users via computer display. Fig 2 outlines the system architecture
of the surgical training simulator.

743

744

Chee Kiang Lam et al. / Procedia Computer Science 18 (2013) 742 – 748

Fig. 1. Phacoemulsiﬁcation cataract surgery simulator.

Fig. 2. System architecture.

Human eyeball and surgical instruments, which are the main objects to be visualized in the virtual surgical
environment of simulator are designed by using a 3D modelling, animation and rendering software named Autodesk
3ds Max. Cornea, iris, lens, sclera and extraocular muscles are the parts of eye that have been designed for
the simulation along with surgical instruments such as keratome blade, hook, forceps, phaco probe and IOL
injector. The virtual objects are saved in OBJ format as the information of vertices and triangular facets are used
to represent the mesh of the three-dimensional models. In order to improve the visual realism of the virtual surgical
environment, rotational movements of eyeball and extraocular muscles are implemented into the simulator with
response to the force that is applied from the virtual surgical instrument [8].
An interactive graphical user interface (GUI) is designed in the developed simulator in order to provide an
appropriate platform for medical residents and ophthalmologists to conduct surgical training eﬀectively. GLUI
library, which is a GLUT-based user interface library embedded in OpenGL, is used to develop the interface.
Features such as selections of eye anatomy and surgical instruments together with controls of three-dimensional
view are implemented in the GUI. As the intention to develop a more user-friendly simulator, a graphical force
indicator is created to show the value of force applied on the surface of eyeball model. The colored force bar varies
in length by referring to the reading obtained from the simulation system. This feature allows users to monitor
their action when manoeuvring virtual surgical instrument through haptic device, thus reduces error in damaging
ocular tissue unintentionally.

Chee Kiang Lam et al. / Procedia Computer Science 18 (2013) 742 – 748

4. Results
4.1. Corneal Incision
Small incisions have to be made in the beginning of cataract surgery. The tunnels on temporal limbus are the
place where forceps, phaco probe and IOL injector can be inserted into the eye to carry out subsequent procedures.
The surface of cornea is represented by using triangular surface mesh. Virtual keratome blade in the simulation
is controlled by manoeuvring the stylus of the haptic device. When the resultant force applied on surface of the
cornea exceeds the penetration force threshold, the contact point between the tool and the surface is classiﬁed as
cutting point and the vertices surrounding the contact point are grouped to form a cutting mesh. The tunnel is
created by leaving a distance between the triangular facets that belongs to the cutting mesh and positioned around
the region of cutting point. The simulation of corneal incision is illustrated in Fig 3.

Fig. 3. Corneal incision.

4.2. Capsulorhexis
The outermost layer of the lens, anterior capsule, has to be removed during the operation in order to provide
an opening for phaco probe to access into the nucleus of lens and emulsify the cataract. Anterior capsule in
the simulation is represented by a thin layer of triangular mesh model. The vertices are connected to other
surrounding vertices by using mass-spring system. Fig 4 demonstrates the operation of capsulorhexis by using
forceps. Grasping point is identiﬁed when the virtual forceps clipping on the surface of capsule. Vertices that
are close to the grasping point are pulled in response to the force and its direction, which is obtained from the
reading of haptic device. Due to this, the springs which are connected between the vertices, transfer its force
to the adjoining vertices just like the intention to move them. Eﬀect of tearing occurs when resultant force has
overcome the breaking point of springs that connect the vertices. The ﬂap of the anterior capsule is pulled by the
forceps gently and carefully until a round shape tear is formed on the lens.
4.3. Phacoemulsiﬁcation
Divide and conquer nucleotomy is most commonly used for phaco-sculpting procedure. It involves the
dissection of nucleus into quadratic sections. The phacoemulsiﬁcation training begins by making a trench on
the cataract using the virtual phaco probe, where deep sculpting is performed across the centre of nucleus. The
facets touched by the tip of the tool are removed when the phaco dynamic of the system is activated. After a trench
is made, the nucleus is required to be rotated at 90 degrees in order to create a cross shape trench and separate
the nucleus into four equal parts. The nucleus can be rotated in anti- or clockwise direction depending on the
direction of forces applied from the pair of haptic devices. The emulsiﬁcation of each quadrant starts after the
nucleus is divided. The fragments that fall into the spherical zone in front of the tip of phaco probe are sucked out
by aspiration. This procedure is considered complete when fragments of cataract are removed from the eye. Fig 5
shows the diﬀerent stages of phacoemulsiﬁcation procedure.

745

746

Chee Kiang Lam et al. / Procedia Computer Science 18 (2013) 742 – 748

Fig. 4. Capsulorhexis.

As the purpose to imitate the sensation of phaco dynamic, which is produced by irrigation and aspiration of
phaco probe in real cataract surgery, mild vibration is generated by the system and it can be felt on the stylus
of the haptic device. In addition, a virtual medium with viscous eﬀect is created inside the eyeball model to
replicate the actual feeling of manoeuvring the surgical instruments covered by aqueous humour. These two
eﬀects are important in improving the haptic realism of the cataract surgery simulators; therefore medical residents
and ophthalmologists can adapt themselves into the virtual surgical training more readily and comfortably. The
simulator will warn the users if the surgical instrument touches some sensitive parts of the eye that may cause
ocular damage or surgical trauma on patient.
4.4. IOL Implantation
An intact posterior capsule is left behind after phacoemulsiﬁcation for providing support for the IOL, which
replaces the clouded crystalline lens to focus sharp image on the retina. A specially designed injector is used as
the insertion device for IOL implantation. Refractive power correction is incorporated in the recent invention of
multifocal IOL, allowing focus of both distant and near images on retina. A lens injector as illustrated in Fig 6
is designed virtually to replicate the actual process. Ophthalmologists are able to familiarize themselves on the
techniques of inserting the IOL and positioning it into capsular bag.
5. Conclusion
This paper presents a virtual reality cataract surgery simulator that is capable of providing education and
training for medical residents and ophthalmologists. The main procedures of phacoemulsiﬁcation cataract surgery
are implemented into the system, where precise representation of the anatomy and physiology of the human eye
is simulated computationally eﬃcient. The surgical platform consists of interactive user interface and guidance
which reduces the complexity in getting used to the training tool.
The main upcoming development of the simulator is the application of surgical training and skill assessment
system. Criteria-based training module will be used to evaluate the performance of users along the virtual surgical
operation. The purpose of this system is to diﬀerentiate the level of competency by comparing the surgical
performance of the users. Proﬁciency of individuals can be increased by repetitive training using the simulator
before they are assigned to the real surgical task. Professional and experienced ophthalmologists will be invited to
conduct usability study. Experimental result and information obtained from the experts will be used to enhance the
surgical simulator and benchmark the performance evaluation system. Clinical validation is planned to be carried
out when the development of the simulator reaches the ﬁnal stage. Medical panels from diﬀerent levels and years
of service in ophthalmology will be recruited to compare the diﬀerence of eﬃciency between traditional wet-lab
training and computer-simulated virtual training simulator. The goal is to demonstrate the reliability and validity
of cataract surgery simulator as part of the curriculum of medical training program.

Chee Kiang Lam et al. / Procedia Computer Science 18 (2013) 742 – 748

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)
Fig. 5. Stages of phacoemulsiﬁcation. (a) Trench, (b) nucleus rotation, (c) cross-trench and (d) emulsiﬁcation.

747

748

Chee Kiang Lam et al. / Procedia Computer Science 18 (2013) 742 – 748

Fig. 6. IOL implantation.

Acknowledgements
This project is funded by the eScienceFund of the Malaysian Ministry of Science, Technology and Innovation
(MOSTI) and in collaboration with the Department of Ophthalmology, Hospital Tuanku Fauziah (HTF), Perlis,
Malaysia.
References
[1] J. Steuer, Deﬁning virtual reality: Dimensions determining telepresence, Journal of communication 42 (4) (2006) 73–93.
[2] K. Stanney, G. Salvendy, Aftereﬀects and sense of presence in virtual environments: Formulation of a research and development agenda,
International Journal of Human-Computer Interaction 10 (2) (1998) 135–187.
[3] C. Luciano, P. Banerjee, T. DeFanti, Haptics-based virtual reality periodontal training simulator, Virtual reality 13 (2) (2009) 69–85.
[4] K. Van Sickle, L. Buck, R. Willis, A. Mangram, M. Truitt, M. Shabahang, S. Thomas, L. Trombetta, B. Dunkin, D. Scott, A multicenter,
simulation-based skills training collaborative using shared gi mentor ii systems: results from the texas association of surgical skills
laboratories (tassl) ﬂexible endoscopy curriculum, Surgical endoscopy 25 (9) (2011) 2980–2986.
[5] I. Van Herzeele, R. Aggarwal, Virtual reality simulation in the endovascular ﬁeld, Interventional Cardiology (2008) 41–45.
[6] E. McDougall, F. Corica, J. Boker, L. Sala, G. Stoliar, J. Borin, F. Chu, R. Clayman, et al., Construct validity testing of a laparoscopic
surgical simulator, Journal of the American College of Surgeons 202 (5) (2006) 779–787.
[7] C. Kelman, The history and development of phacoemulsiﬁcation, International ophthalmology clinics 34 (2) (1994) 1–12.
[8] C. Lam, K. Sundaraj, M. Sulaiman, Virtual simulation of eyeball and extraocular muscle reaction during cataract surgery, Procedia
Engineering 41 (2012) 150–155.

