Available online at www.sciencedirect.com

Procedia Computer Science 4 (2011) 2344–2353

International Conference on Computational Science, ICCS 2011

On some recent achievements of earthquake simulation
Muneo Hori, Tsuyoshi Ichimura and Lalith Wijerathne
Earthquake Research Institute, University of Tokyo, Yayoi, Tokyo, 113-0032, Japan

Abstract
This paper presents some recent achievements of earthquake simulation, which is divided into the seismic wave
propagation simulation and the seismic structure response simulation. These achievements are based on rigorous
mathematical treatment of continuum mechanics problems, and numerical algorithms of solving the problems are
developed. A multi-scale analysis method is developed for the seismic wave propagation simulation; numerical dispersion is reduced by introducing a new discretization scheme. A smart treatment of crack initiation and propagation
is developed for the seismic structure response simulation, so that a numerical experiment is made for failure processes
by using numerous samples of one structure.
Keywords: large scale numerical computation, multi-scale analysis, numerical dispersion, particle discretization
scheme, crack

1. Introduction
Earthquake simulation is divided into two categories, namely, the simulation of seismic wave propagation and
the simulation of seismic structure response. Both the simulations solve an initial-boundary value problem for a
vector function of displacement, with the governing equation being linear or non-linear partial diﬀerential equations,
which are derived from classical continuum mechanics. Spatial and temporal resolution must be high in order to
make a reliable prediction about earthquake hazard and disaster, which leads to the need for large scale numerical
computation.
The recent seismic wave propagation simulation is capable to reproduce or predict wave components up to around
1 Hz in the frequency range[1, 2, 3, 4]. Current major concerns are thus investigation of rupture processes on a
fault from which seismic waves are emitted and modeling of heterogeneous crust structures, in order to make a more
reliable model for the simulation. The governing equation is linear, and a ﬁnite diﬀerence method is usually used
as a numerical analysis method. The method of solving the governing equation is matured, except for numerical
treatment of the conﬁguration of the crust structures and the ground surface, depending on which concentration of
wave amplitudes would take place in particular regions.
The seismic structure response simulation has been used for seismic design of a wide class of buildings and
structures[5]. Since the purpose is design, it is suﬃcient to simulate vibrations of a target structure which are induced
by seismic ground motion; a reliable simulation can be made for the structure responses prior to damaging or collapsing by using a commercial ﬁnite element method. A remaining task of the seismic structure response simulation is to
analyze damage or collapse processes of a structure.
The earthquake simulation is chosen as one of key research themes of the next generation super computer in Japan.
The main objective is to improve the spatial and temporal resolution of the seismic wave propagation and structure
1877–0509 © 2011 Published by Elsevier Ltd. Open access under CC BY-NC-ND license.
Selection and/or peer-review under responsibility of Prof. Mitsuhisa Sato and Prof. Satoshi Matsuoka
doi:10.1016/j.procs.2011.04.255

Muneo Hori et al. / Procedia Computer Science 4 (2011) 2344–2353

2345

response simulations by taking advantage of a large scale parallel computing environment. The improvement requires
much smarter theoretical analysis of continuum mechanics problems, together with development of better algorithms
which can take advantage of the large scale computational environment.
2. Solid continuum mechanics
A basic model of solid continuum mechanics is elastic body. Analysis of deformation of this solid starts from
three phenomenological assumptions, namely, strain-displacement relation, equilibrium equation, and stress-strain
relation. The three equations are mathematically combined, so that an initial-boundary value problem is posed for
a displacement function, which is often transformed to the form of Lagrangian. We explain this framework using a
Cartesian coordinate (x1 , x2 , x3 ). Displacement, strain and stress are denoted by ui , i j and σi j , respectively, which are
vector or second-order tensor functions of space x and time t. The three phenomenological equations are
ij

=

1
(ui, j + u j,i ), σ ji, j = ρ¨ui , σi j = ci jkl
2

kl ,

(1)

and the governing equation, which is often called a wave equation, is
(ci jkl uk,l ), j = ρ¨ui .

(2)

A Lagrangian for the displacement function is
˙ =
L[u, u]
D

1
1
ci jkl ui, j uk,l − ρ˙ui u˙ i dx.
2
2

(3)

Here, ci jkl and ρ are elasticity tensor and density, comma and dot indicate spatial and temporal derivatives, i.e.,
∂(.)
˙
(.),i = ∂(.)
∂xi ) and (.) = ∂t Cand summation convention is employed. Symbol D denotes a domain of analysis.
In Eq. (1), the strain-displacement relation is linear. This is called an assumption of inﬁnitesimally small deformation. As deformation becomes larger, say, | i j | exceeds 10−3 , this assumption is not suitable and non-linear
strain-displacement relation should be used. Similarly, the stress-strain relation in Eq. (1) is linear, which is called an
assumption of linear elasticity. Depending on the kind of a material, as deformation becomes larger, the stress-strain
relation tends to be non-linear or stress tends to depend on the history of strain (or the history of stress). Such extensions of the strain-displace6ment and stress-strain relations, which usually lead to non-linearity, have been studied in
order to generalize continuum mechanics.
Specialization has been made for continuum mechanics, on the contrary to the above generalization. It provides
speciﬁc constrains for displacement, which are related to the conﬁguration of a target solid. For instance, a displacement function is approximated as a function of one variables for structure member of bar or beam, and a function of
two variables for structure member of plate or shell. Even though some additional approximations are made, such specialization converts to Eq. (2) in a simpler form, so that an analytic solution can be obtained. Continuum mechanics of
this specialization is understood as structure mechanics, which is the foundation of earthquake engineering. It should
be noted that the simpliﬁed governing equation is readily derived by substituting constrained displacement functions
into L of Eq. (3).
As brieﬂy mentioned, it is a ﬁnite diﬀerence method that is usually used for the seismic wave propagation simulation of solving Eq. (2). The domain D is a heterogeneous semi-inﬁnite space which models the crust structure. As
the nature of the wave equation, higher temporal resolution is needed in order to increase the spatial resolution of
solving Eq. (2). Hence, it is a smart choice to use ﬁner grid in the ﬁnite diﬀerence method, with sacriﬁce of accuracy
in modeling the crust structure, for the sake of large scale and eﬃcient numerical computation.
The seismic structure response simulation usually uses a ﬁnite element method to solve a Lagrange equation of
Eq. (3) even though the form of Lagrangian changes depending on a structure. This is because non-linear analysis due
to the generalization of continuum mechanics is required. The specialization of continuum mechanics provides smart
elements which are relevant to a structure member of particular conﬁguration. The use of the smart elements drastically reduces the degree-of-freedom that is needed in numerical computation, even though it often needs experiments
to tune up non-linear properties of the element.

2346

Muneo Hori et al. / Procedia Computer Science 4 (2011) 2344–2353
u1: high resolution

domain d

103~4 [m]

102~3 [m]
u0: low resolution

domain D
103~4

103~4 [m]

[m]
domain D

103~4 [m]

Figure 1: Schematic view of u0 and u1 of multi-scale analysis for seismic wave propagation simulation.

3. Seismic wave propagation simulation
Seismic waves are generated by the failure of a fault which is located at the depth of 103∼4 m, and propagate in the
crust. The crust consists of rock, and has a wave velocity of around 103 m/s when modeled as an elastic body. Due to
the on-going sedimentation process, the crust has strong heterogeneity near the ground surface, and soft soil structures
appear above around 101 m. The wave velocity of ground is smaller by the order of 101∼2 m/s, which changes the
direction of the seismic wave to the vertical and ampliﬁes the amplitude of the seismic waves; the ampliﬁcation
reaches 10 times for wave components of 10−1∼0 s which are the range of the period of structure vibration. Smaller
wave speed means shorter wave length; the wave length that corresponds to the period of 10−1∼0 s is 101∼2 m for the
surface ground layer but 102∼3 m for the deeper part of the crust. In numerical computation, therefore, higher spatial
resolution in modeling the heterogeneous ground structure is needed for the surface ground layer.
The authors apply a multi-scale analysis in order to eﬃciently make the seismic wave propagation simulation in
a designated temporal resolution[6, 7]. The multi-scale analysis is based on singular perturbation expansion. That is,
denoting by ε( 1) the ratio between the spatial resolution for the rock crust and the soft ground layer, we expand u
in the following form:
1
u(x, t) = u0 (x, t) + εu1 (x, x, t)
(4)
ε
The ﬁrst term, u0 , is a solution of low resolution, and the second term, u1 , is its correction of high resolution; see
Fig. 1. Unlike regular perturbation expansion, it is assumed that u1 is a function of 1ε x as well as x, and hence Eq. (4)
is called singular; x and 1ε x correspond to the spatial scale of the low and high spatial resolution, respectively. A set of
coupled governing equations are derived for both u0 and u1 by substituting the expansion into Eq. (2). u0 is computed
for the entire domain D that includes the fault, and then u1 is computed for a small domain which is located near the
ground surface and includes the target structure in it. For simplicity, this small domain is denoted by d.
In the seismic wave propagation simulation, a spatial resolution depends on the temporal resolution. This implies
that a smaller domain is employed for d as the temporal resolution increases. However, the simulation requires wave
components in longer periods, and such a small domain is not suitable to accurately compute these components in
d. The multi-scale analysis based on the singular perturbation expansion must use a larger domain even though the
temporal resolution is increased, in order to obtain an accurate solution in a wide range of periods. Thus, the authors
model d using the spatial resolution that corresponds to the highest temporal resolution, say, 101 m, but the size of d
is in the order of 102∼3 m. With this size of d,
u0 is used as approximate boundary conditions acting on the boundary of d, and u0 + u1 which is regarded
as a function of 1ε x is solved in d.
This is the authors’ problem setting of the numerical computation that is made for the seismic wave propagation
simulation.

Muneo Hori et al. / Procedia Computer Science 4 (2011) 2344–2353

2347

decomposition of {Φα} for u

domain D

decomposition of {Ψβ} for gradient of u

Figure 2: Schematic view of PDS; two domain decompositions, {Φα } and {Ψβ }, are applied to domain D.

Besides the ampliﬁcation due to the diﬀerence in the material properties of rock and ground, seismic waves are
ampliﬁed due to the conﬁguration of heterogeneous crust and ground structures. For instance, surface soils make
layered structures, and the width of each layer is not uniform in a segmented plane. Sometime there occurs large
concentration at the part where the layer conﬁguration wildly changes[8, 9]. As an extreme case, the concentration
of strain becomes inﬁnite at the edge of the layer, if exists, when linear elasticity is assumed. Accurate evaluation of
such wave ampliﬁcation requires a model of higher spatial resolution, which may exceed the spatial resolution that
corresponds to the required temporal resolution.
In the multi-scale analysis mentioned above, Eq. (2) with slight modiﬁcation is solved for the two models of D
and d by applying large scale numerical computation. Even though the equation is linear, the proﬁle of seismic
waves that are numerically computed is often broken. This is because the accuracy of computing wave components of
shorter periods is worse than that of computing wave components of longer periods. This numerical error is usually
referred as numerical dispersion. There have been made a number of attempts to reduce the numerical dissipation; for
instance, smart discretization of functions have been proposed. In particular, computational seismology that uses a
ﬁnite diﬀerent method takes advantages of staggered grid in which displacement and stress are discretized in diﬀerent
grids.
The authors apply the same idea as the staggered grid to a ﬁnite element method[10]. This attempt applies two
sets of basis functions to discretize a function and its derivatives; see Fig. 2. In solving Eq. (2) for D, a displacement
function u is dicretized by decomposing D into a set of small subdomains {Φα } and using a characteristic function of
Φα , denoted by φα , as follows:
uα (t) φα (x).
(5)
u(x, t) =
α

The gradient of the displacement function, ∇u, uses another domain decomposition, {Ψβ }. Denoting by ψβp a polynomial in Ψβ which serves as a basic function, the discretization of ∇u is
(∇u)βp (t) ψβp (x),

∇u(x) =
β

(6)

p

where (∇u)βp stands for the coeﬃcient of the discretization. For a given u or ∇u, the discretization coeﬃcient, {uα }
or {(∇u)βp } is determined by minimizing D |u − α uα φα |2 dx or D |∇u − β p (∇u)βp ψβp |2 dx, respectively, where
|(.)|2 stands for the square of the norm of a vector or a second-order tensor, (.). As shown in Eq. (5), u is discretized
as a sum of characteristic functions. This discretization is interpreted as modeling of a body as an assembly of small
particles each of which moves with rigid-body motion, i.e., Φα moves with uα . In view of this interpretation, the
discretization of Eqs. (5) and (6)is called Particle Discretization Scheme (PDS).

2348

Muneo Hori et al. / Procedia Computer Science 4 (2011) 2344–2353

1000m
z
x

y

a) model of numerical experiment

GF
GF
0.2 m/s
0.5 m/s

FEM - GF
FEM - GF
PDS-FEM - GF

PDS-FEM - GF
0

10

20

time s

30

40

0

10

20

time s

30

40

b) comparison of exact solution (GF) with ordinary FEM (FEM) and PDS-FEM at observation points 1 and 14
Figure 3: Example of reduction of numerical dispersion by using PDS-FEM.

The authors apply a ﬁnite element method which is implemented with PDS (PDS-FEM) to the seismic wave
propagation simulation. It is shown that the numerical dispersion is reduced by using PDS as a discretization scheme;
PDS-FEM, just like the staggered grid, {Φα } and {Ψβ } are a set of grids which are shifted by the half length of the
grid edge length, and {ψβ p } is third order polynomials. The simulation is made for a two-layered D to which Green’s
function is analytically computed. It is shown that the numerical dispersion is reduced to around 1/5 of the ordinary
FEM, for the part of D where larger numerical dispersion takes place[7]; see Fig. 3. Beside the use of the two sets
of basis functions for the discretization, PDS-FEM regards a continuum as an assembly of rigid-body particles, so
that the mass matrix automatically becomes diagonal[11, 12]; unlike an ordinary ﬁnite element method which makes
approximations to convert a mass matrix to a diagonal one, PDS-FEM rigorously derives a diagonal mass matrix.
4. Seismic structure response simulation
The mechanism of seismic structure response is more complicated than usually considered. Seismic ground
motions are waves which propagate in the grounds. When the motions are input to a structure, it is shaken as if it is a
rigid body. This is because the structure is ﬁxed to the ground; while some portions of seismic waves propagate in the
structure, the rigid body motion is dominant in shaking the structure. The motion of the rigid body instantaneously
induces acceleration at every point in the structure, and the gradient of stress is generated to satisfy equilibrium. The
stress satisﬁes the traction free conditions on the structure surface, so that its value is determined. As shown in the

Muneo Hori et al. / Procedia Computer Science 4 (2011) 2344–2353

2349

preceding section, a set of fourth dimensional partial diﬀerential equations, Eq. (2), are posed for displacement which
accompanies the stress; this deformation is induced by the rigid boy motion of the structure that is transformed from
the seismic ground motion.
The above mechanism is described in the viewpoint of continuum mechanics. While the information of the
boundary conditions is delivered to the point inside the structure at the elastic wave speed, the information of the
seismic ground motion which is transformed as rigid body motion is delivered instantaneously. This is strange in the
viewpoint of modern physics, showing the limitation of continuum mechanics; this limitation that the inﬁnite speed
of delivering ground motion information is never fatal for earthquake engineering.
As is seen, it is obvious that a model which precisely describes the structure conﬁguration is needed, and a large
scale computation is inevitable to numerically solve the diﬀerential equations of such a model. When the computer
environment was poor, various approximations were made to obtain reasonably accurate approximate solutions; as
mentioned, a non-linear model was developed for a structure member, and it was tuned up by carrying out various
experiments. The approximate solutions are actually useful for the purpose of seismic design, because they are
simple. However, they are not suﬃcient to analyze the processes in which a structure is damaged or collapsed by
the seismic ground motion, or to estimate malfunctioning of structure members and facilities. Furthermore, a newly
tuned-up model must be developed when the design of a structure is changed. The current computer environment
gives us an opportunity to accurately analyze the seismic structure response[13]. The analysis is made by applying a
ﬁnite element method to a detailed model which is constructed in terms of solid elements; the method uses massive
numerical computation to solve the Lagrangian equation of Eq. (3), instead of Eq. (2).
It should be emphasized that the seismic structure response is regarded as vibration phenomena, rather than wave
propagation phenomena. For small deformation, all the equations shown in Eq. (1) are linear, and hence the structure
response is given as a sum of several distinct modes of vibration. When the deformation induced by the seismic
ground motion becomes large, the equations become non-linear and some residual deformation is generated after the
seismic ground motion is ﬁnished. This residual deformation corresponds to local damage of the structure. When
the induced deformation becomes larger, it results in local or overall failure due to the initiation and propagation of
cracks.
A crack is separation of solid. Mathematically, it is expressed as discontinuity in a displacement function. In
numerically solving diﬀerential equations, a target function is required to be continuous and diﬀerentiable, and it
is necessary to introduce a new surface or a special basis function every time a crack is initiated or propagates.
The degree-of-freedom of the numerical computation increases. Moreover, it is a diﬃcult task to determine the
conﬁguration of the propagating crack. A numerical analysis which is based on fracture mechanics determines an
increment of crack surface using a suitable fracture criterion for a given increment of loading, but a two-dimensional
curved surface is not easily determined for a crack which propagates in a three-dimensional body; the determination
is really diﬃcult, if branching and kinking are further considered.
When PDS is applied to discretize a displacement function, as shown in Eq. (5), the function has discontinuity
across boundary ∂Φα of a decomposed subdomain Φα . Assuming that a set of ∂Φα are candidates of facets of an
initiating or growing crack, we replace a problem of determining the crack surface conﬁguration with a problem of
choosing a suitable facet among the candidates, which can be solved with much less numerical computation. This
assumption corresponds to the spatial heterogeneity of local material strength or fracture properties, i.e., ∂Φα is
regarded as a facet on which the local material is weaker than the surroundings. It is natural to employ non-structured
domain decomposition such as Voronoi tessellation. Indeed, if {Φα } is chosen as a Voronoi tessellation of the domain
D and {Ψβ } is the dual Delaunay tessellation with ψβp being a 0-th order polynomial or the characteristic function
of Ψβ , then, a stiﬀness matrix of PDS-FEM coincides with that of ordinary FEM with linear elements[10, 14]. The
stiﬀness matrix of PDS-FEM is given as
Kiβj αα =

φα,k ψβ dx cik jl

φα,l ψβ dx ,

(7)

and this coincides with the stiﬀness matrix of linear elements when Ψβ is used as a tetrahedron element; ψβ is the
characteristic function of Ψβ . The coincidence of the stiﬀness matrix means that the speed of the convergence of the
PDS-FEM solution is the same as that of the ordinary FEM with linear elements. When a crack propagates on ∂Ψβ , the
corresponding stiﬀness matrix changes the value of its components since the contribution of ∇φα ψβ to the integration

2350

Muneo Hori et al. / Procedia Computer Science 4 (2011) 2344–2353

Figure 4: Convergence of Mode I stress intensity factor at a tip of semi-inﬁnite crack.

is dropped. Instead of introducing a new degree-of-freedom, PDS-FEM treats the crack propagation as the reduction
of the stiﬀness matrix. The accuracy of this treatment is not bad; it is shown that the accuracy of computing the strain
energy stored at a crack by PDS-FEM is similar to the FEM with linear element, and that the accuracy is increased by
adding rotational motion to the motion of Φα ; see Fig. 4.
There are many Voronoi tessellations for one common D. One model of a Voronoi tessellation is regarded as
one sample since it has a distinct set of possible crack surfaces and shows distinct cracking processes when analyzed
by PDS-FEM. A solution is unique if ideal homogeneity is assumed for the parameters of strength or fracture. In
reality, however, there exists material heterogeneity. Thus, if the solution of ideal homogeneity is stable or instable,
the presence of such local heterogeneity does not or does change the cracking process drastically, respectively. It is
also intuitively acceptable to expect that the solution of ideal homogeneity is stable or instable before or after cracking
takes place, respectively, since local cracking depends on local material properties. The stability of the solution of the
ideally homogeneous body is examined by a numerical experiment which uses many samples of diﬀerent tessellations.
As an illustrative example, a numerical experiment is conducted for two anti-symmetric cracks which are located in a
plate subjected to dynamic loading; see Fig. 5. It is shown[15] that
• the anti-symmetry is lost during the cracking processes, and there are many patterns of the processes.
• the crack conﬁguration is likely to remain anti-symmetric for lower loading rate, but it loses anti-symmetry for
higher loading rate
• the conﬁguration is not random unlike the process, and, in most samples, one cracks grows long and straight
while the other curves.
• the branching is often observed for the crack conﬁguration at highest loading rate.
See Fig. 6 for examples of crack propagation processes and for the distribution of crack conﬁguration; the distribution
is expressed as a probability density function at a point that a crack passes the point, and the function is computed by
using 200 samples of diﬀerent Voronoi tessellations.
5. Concluding remarks
Numerical computation of solving non-linear problems of solid continuum mechanics is well established. The
authors regard the numerical computation that is needed for the seismic wave propagation and structure response
simulations as the last tough problem. This is because an eﬃcient multi-scale analysis is needed to compute a large
domain in high spatial resolution, and because smart treatment is required to compute crack initiation and propagation.
Commercial ﬁnite element methods are well matured, and suﬃcient for seismic design. The numerical computation

Muneo Hori et al. / Procedia Computer Science 4 (2011) 2344–2353

2351

Figure 5: Model for two anti-symmetric cracks located in plate.

discussed in the present paper is needed only to advance seismic design, so that structure responses induced by very
strong ground motions caused by a nearby fault is predicted or the seismic safety of various functionalities of a
structure are examined.
Comparison with observations and experiments is of essential importance to advance numerical computation. In
seismology and earthquake engineering, comparison of numerical computation is made by using a dense network of
seismographs or a full scale experiment, and there is a need to advance observation and experiment techniques. The
numerical computation also needs a new benchmark testing to examine the accuracy of a solution. A next generation
supercomputer will serve as a computer environment in which such a benchmark testing is made for the seismic wave
propagation and structure response simulations.
References
[1] T. Furumura and K. Koketsu, Speciﬁc distribution of ground motion during the 1995 Kobe earthquake and its generation mechanism, Geophysical Research Letters, 25, 785–788 (1998).
[2] A. Pitarka, 3D elastic ﬁnite-diﬀerence modeling of seismic motion using staggered grids with non-uniform spacing, Bulletin of Seismological
Society of America, 89, 54–68 (1999).
[3] K. Koketsu, H. Fujiwara and Y. Ikegami, Finite-element Simulation of Seismic Ground Motion with a Voxel Mesh, Pure and Applied Geophysics 161, 2463–2478 (2004).
[4] J. Bielak, O. Ghattas and E. J. Kim, Parallel Octree-based Finite Element Method for Large-scale Earthquake Ground Motion Simulation,
Computer Modeling in Engineering and Science, 10, 99–112 (2005).
[5] M. Hori, Introduction to computational earthquake engineering, 2nd edition, Imperial College Press (2011).
[6] T. Ichimura, M. Hori and H. Kuwamoto, Earthquake Motion Simulation with Multi-scale Finite Element Analysis on Hybrid Grid, Bulletin of
the Seismological Society of America, 97, 1133–1143 (2007).
[7] T. Ichimura, M. Hori and J. Bielak, A Hybrid Multiresolution Meshing Technique for Finite Element Three-Dimensional Earthquake Ground
Motion Modeling in Basins Including Topography, Geophysical Journal International, 177, 1221–1232 (2009).
[8] S. Ma, R. J. Archuleta and T. Morgan, Eﬀects of Large-Scale Surface Topography on Ground Motions, as Demonstrated by a Study of the San
Gabriel Mountains, Los Angeles, California, Bulletin of the Seismological Society of America, 97, 2066–2079 (2007).
[9] P. Moczo, J. Kristeka, M. Galisb, P. Pazaka and M. Balazovjecha, The Finite-diﬀerence and Finite-element Modeling of Seismic Wave Propagation and Earthquake Motion, Acta Physica Slovaca, 57, 177–406 (2007).
[10] M. Hori, K. Oguni and H. Sakaguchi, Proposal of FEM implemented with particle discretization for analysis of failure phenomena, Journal
of the Mechanics and Physics of Solids, 53, 3, 681–703 (2005).
[11] S. R. Wu, Lumped Mass Matrix in Explicit Finite Element Method for Transient Dynamics of Elasticity, Computer Methods in Applied
Mechanics and Engineering, 195, 5983–5994 (2006).
[12] J. Matsumoto and N. Takada, Two-phase Flow Analysis based on a Phase-ﬁeld Model using Orthogonal Basis Bubble Function Finite Element
Method International Journal of Computational Fluid Dynamics, 22, 555–568 (2008).
[13] T. Belytschko, W. K. Liu and B. Moran, Nonlinear Finite Elements for Continua and Structures, John & Wiley, New York (2000).

2352

Muneo Hori et al. / Procedia Computer Science 4 (2011) 2344–2353

low loading rate

high loading rate
a) examples of crack propagation processes

U=1Vr

U=3Vr

U=9Vr

U=27Vr

b) distribution of crack conﬁguration; U indicates loading rate with Vr being reference speed.
Figure 6: Propagation process and conﬁguration of anti-symmetric cracks.

Muneo Hori et al. / Procedia Computer Science 4 (2011) 2344–2353

2353

[14] M. L. L. Wijerathne, K. Oguni and M. Hori, Numerical Analysis of Growing Crack Problems using Particle Discretization Scheme, International Journal for Numerical Methods in Engineering, 80, 46–73 (2009).
[15] H. Chen, M. Hori, M. L. L. Wijerathne and T. Ichimura, Stability analysis of crack subjected to dynamic loading, JSCE, Journal of Applied
Mechanics (in review process).

