Available online at www.sciencedirect.com

ScienceDirect
Procedia Computer Science 108C (2017) 2210–2219

International Conference on Computational Science, ICCS 2017, 12-14 June 2017,
Zurich, Switzerland

Simulation of emergency care for patients with ACS in
Saint Petersburg
for ambulance
decisionwith
making
Simulation
of emergency
care for patients
ACS in
Saint Petersburg for ambulance
decision
making
1
1
Ivan Derevitskiy , Evgeniy Krotov ,
Daniil Voloshin1, 1Alexey Yakovlev1,2
,
Ivan Derevitskiy 1, Evgeniy Krotov1,
1
Sergey V. Kovalchuk
,
Vladislav
Karbovskii
1
1,2,
,
Daniil
Voloshin
Alexey
Yakovlev
1
ITMO University, Saint-Petersburg, Russian Federation.
1
1
2
V.Medical
, Vladislav
KarbovskiiRussian
Kovalchuk
Federal AlmazovSergey
North-West
Research
Centre, Saint-Petersburg,
Federation

1
ITMO University,john.krotov@gmail.com,
Saint-Petersburg, Russian
Federation.
iderevitskiy@gmail.com,
achoched@gmail.com,
Federal Almazov North-West Medical
Research Centre, Saint-Petersburg,
Russian Federation
yakovlev_an@almazovcentre.ru,
sergey.v.kovalchuk@gmail.com,
vladislav.k.work@gmail.com
iderevitskiy@gmail.com, john.krotov@gmail.com, achoched@gmail.com,
yakovlev_an@almazovcentre.ru, sergey.v.kovalchuk@gmail.com, vladislav.k.work@gmail.com
2

Abstract
One of the stages of emergency medical care in case of Acute Coronary Syndrome (ACS) (if there are
Abstractconditions for surgical intervention) is directly linked to the time between the first contact
medical
One of
stagesand
of the
emergency
medical
in case
ofcoronary
Acute Coronary
Syndrome
(if there
are
Time
with
thethe
patient
and inflating
the care
balloon
in the
artery (in
a medical(ACS)
institution).
medical
conditions
surgical facility
intervention)
is on
directly
linked
to the delivery
time between
the first
of
the operation
startfora medical
depends
the time
of patient
to hospital,
as contact
well as
withthethewaiting
patienttime
and the
andqueue
inflating
theinstitution.
balloon in the
artery (ina adevelopment
medical institution).
Time
Thiscoronary
paper describes
of ambulance
on
in the
in the
of
the operation
start aaggregate
medical facility
depends
on thetwo
timeperiods
of patient
delivery
to hospital,
as time
well as
model
for obtaining
estimation
of these
of time.
The
estimation
is
on
the waiting
time of
in the
queue in
paper
describes
a development
of ambulance
ambulance
obtained
by means
described
in the
the institution.
article the This
decision
support
system
(DSS) in the
model
obtaining
aggregate
estimation
of these
time. The
estimation
time(the
is
service.for
Unlike
modern
navigation
systems DSS
takestwo
intoperiods
accountofambulance
vehicle
behavior
obtained
of described
in the
the decision
system
(DSS)
in the
the help
ambulance
With
of the
ability to by
exitmeans
into oncoming
traffic)
andarticle
availability
of freesupport
operation
rooms.
service. Unlike
modern
navigation
DSSservice
takes into
accountout
ambulance
behavior
(the
described
simulation
model
of the systems
ambulance
we carried
the timevehicle
distribution
analysis
ability
to
exit
into
oncoming
traffic)
and
availability
of
free
operation
rooms.
With
the
help
of
the
(between the first contact with the patient and surgical intervention in case of ACS) in St. Petersburg,
described
simulation
modeluses
of the
carried out
the in
time
analysis
Russia. Simulation
scenario
realambulance
data on theservice
work ofwe
ambulance
service
thedistribution
city.
(between the first contact with the patient and surgical intervention in case of ACS) in St. Petersburg,
© 2017 The
Authors.
Published
by Elsevier
B.V.
Russia.
Simulation
scenario
uses
real
data
on
the work
of ambulance
serviceambulance
in the city.
Keywords:
acute
coronary
syndrome,
transport
modeling,
decision
support system,
service
Peer-review under responsibility of the scientific committee of the International Conference on Computational Science
Keywords: acute coronary syndrome, transport modeling, decision support system, ambulance service

1 Introduction
Modern
ambulance service
1
Introduction

is a dynamic multi-functional system, which has a complicated
maintenance mechanism. Relevance of the research decision support systems in the ambulance service
Modern
service
is a dynamic
multi-functional
system,
has of
a patient
complicated
is caused ambulance
by the necessity
to optimize
decision-making,
in order to
improvewhich
the quality
care.
maintenance
mechanism.
decision
support
in the ambulance
service
Among the key
features ofRelevance
the work of the research
ambulance
service,
we cansystems
highlight
increased need
for
is
caused by of
theevery
necessity
to optimize
decision-making,
in orderlife
to improve
theThus,
quality
patient
care.
"reliability"
decision,
due to its
importance for human
and health.
theofuse
of DSS
is
Among the key features of the work of the ambulance service, we can highlight the increased need for
"reliability" of every decision, due to its importance for human life and health. Thus, the use of DSS is
1877-0509 © 2017 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V.
Peer-review under responsibility of the scientific committee of the International Conference on Computational Science
10.1016/j.procs.2017.05.178

	

Ivan Derevitskiy et al. / Procedia Computer Science 108C (2017) 2210–2219

an effective approach that automates processing large amounts of information. Another key ambulance
service feature is the high dynamics of the service work. High dynamics results from little time to
make a decision that healthcare providers usually have. Consequently, the DSS can be used to reduce
the time of decision-making in complicated cases by automating the analysis of the situation.
This paper describes the methodology of development of DSS in the ambulance service. One of the
DSS modules solves the problem of time estimation between the first contact with the patient and the
beginning of the surgical intervention for patients with ACS. This estimate was obtained using a
complex model, which includes a transport model, (that assessed the time of the patient delivery to the
hospital), flow of calls model, as well as the queuing model that evaluates the waiting time.
According to the paper, by (Tereshchenko & Zhirov 2010), in the provision of care for patients
with ACS (patients with medical conditions for Percutaneous Coronary Intervention, PCI) the
algorithm of actions of a medical brigade depends on the predicted time of start PCI. Tereshchenko
and Jirov state that if the time between the first contact with medical personnel and inflating the
balloon in the SC (coronary artery) exceeds 90 minutes, it is preferable to use thrombolytic therapy. If
the predicted time is less than 90 minutes, then the use of invasive strategy is preferable. Thus, the task
of predicting the time between the first contact of medical staff with patients and the beginning of the
operation is an urgent one. The quality of the forecast impacts the patient's treatment strategy.

2 Related Works
2.1 Time estimation of the patient transportation to a hospital
The period time between the first contact with the patient and the start of the operation can be divided
into two parts. The first step is to calculate the patient delivery time. Delivery time is calculated on the
basis of the selected route from the patient initial location to the hospital. Thus, when calculating the
patient delivery time, it is necessary to find the fastest route.
The problem of finding the fastest routes for ambulances may be considered from the perspective
of the search of the optimal path in a weighted graph. To find the way we must take into account
dynamic changes in the traffic situation and also the specific behavior of the ambulance vehicles.
One of solutions to the problem of the ambulance fastest path search is proposed in (Gayathri &
Chandrakala 2014). The authors apply Dijkstra algorithm of the shortest path search in a weighted
graph, which takes into account the current state of traffic. The paper (Nordin et al. 2011) proposes a
more efficient (in terms of performance) algorithm A * of finding the shortest path in the graph. In
(Maxwell et al. 2010) the shortest route is searched using ADP dynamic programming techniques. In
(Gendreau et al. 2001) ambulance route search problem is solved by a heuristic tabu search algorithm.
In (Kergosien et al. 2015) it is proposed to seek the shortest path between two points and estimate the
time of its passage, on the basis statistical data of prior ambulance trips, and comparing estimated
routs to the current ones. Data of base previous ambulance trips helping in choosing the optimal route
is also described in (López et al. 2005). In (Créput et al. 2011) proposed to use the method of neural
networks (Kohonen self-organizing maps) to find the shortest path for an ambulance.
One of the disadvantages of these approaches is the lack of consideration of the special behavior of
ambulances on the roads. For example, the possibility of entering the opposite lane can change route
selection. Unlike the above mentioned approaches, in the ambulances movement model, described in
this paper, simulates travel into the oncoming lane.

2.2 Queuing models in ambulance service
The second step of estimating time from the first contact with patient to the moment of surgery
beginning is to calculate waiting time which patient has to spent in hospital after arrival.

2211

2212	

Ivan Derevitskiy et al. / Procedia Computer Science 108C (2017) 2210–2219

In cardiology that time interval is called door-to-balloon time. Due to limited resources of PCI
facilities in hospitals queues can emerge and in some cases queuing time can exceed the time of
transportation.
Applications of queuing theory for solving optimization problems in the ambulance is a widely
used practice. One of the most well-known example is the hypercube model for solving the problem of
the distribution ambulance fleet (Brandeau & Larson 1986). The advantage of that model is the
possibility of finding the analytical solutions of the optimization problem. However, with increasing
complexity of the model, as an instance introduction of priority levels (Siddharthan et al. 1996) of
calls significantly complicates the solution of the problem. Also for simplicity of patient flow
simulation arrival rates are modeled as a homogeneous Poisson process (Green et al. 2006), however,
in order to take into account time dependence of the arrival rate we need to use non-homogeneous
process, but finding parameters of its distribution is a complex task. In our work we use the empirical
distribution of arrival rate instead of analytical distribution.
There are some other applications of queuing theory, in (Cochran & Roche 2008) queuing model is
used to find the optimal number of beds in hospitals. However, the main idea of the model is the same.
Complex model presented in this paper which combined a queueing and transportation model
allow us not only to solve optimization problems of ambulance fleet and hospitals resources
allocation, but also a problem of finding the optimal ambulance dispatching policy.

3 Description of the model
3.1 Simulation environment description
In this paper, we present the imitational simulation environment. The described instrument is based on
Pulse tool, described in (Karbovskii et al. 2016). The function of the environment is to simulate the
operation of the ambulance at a given locality. The ambulance service model consists of two
autonomous units: transport model and health facilities queuing model.
A transport model for ambulance services has been devised on previous work described in (Ivanov
& Knyazkov 2014). It imitates the generation of incoming ambulance calls and dispatching
(assignment of crews and vehicles to patients) process. The realization of the model used here has
been implemented using C# programming language. A comprehensive description of the model is
presented further in section 3.2.
The queuing model used in this research has been previously discussed in (Kovalchuk et al. 2016).
Based on the data about the flow of planned and emergency patients the model imitates the ques inside
health facilities. More detailed description of the model can be found in section 3.3.
Interaction between the described units of the imitational simulation environment is performed
through POST http requests sent by the transport model to the server component of the health facilities
queuing model. Transport model issues requests of the following types: initiation of the queuing
model, request for id of the health facility patient shall be transported to (if the medical indicators
speak in favor of hospitalization), request-notification of patients’ arrival to the hospital, termination
of the queuing model work.
At the beginning of the ambulance service operation simulation, the POST request that initiates the
queuing model is sent. When the decision to hospitalize a patient is made, a request for a receiving
health facility is sent to the transport model. Arguments for the request are the estimates of the time
needed to transport patients to the health facilities suitable for a them based on the diagnosis-specific
requirements, current model simulation time and patient’s id. The location of the facility that has been
retrieved through the id request is considered to be optimal for patient’s transportation. Notificationrequest indicating the arrival of the patient serves to assign the patient to the que of one of the health
facilities. Here arguments are patients and health facility id’s and current simulation time. After the

	

Ivan Derevitskiy et al. / Procedia Computer Science 108C (2017) 2210–2219

request of the last type has been sent and simulation statistics are aggregated, simulation terminates.
The outline of the Interaction between simulation environment’s components is presented in Figure 1.
Health facility queuing
model
Simulation initiation

Ambulance service transport
model
Start request

Optimal hospital
request
Assignment to health
facility

Addition of the patient
to the que
Simulation statistics
aggregation
Termination of the
simulation

Optimal hospital
information
Patient adding
request

Finish request

Simulation initiation

Travel to patient s
address
Hospitalization
decision-making
Transportation of
patient to hospital
Termination of the
simulation

Request from A to B

Figure 1: – Scheme of the interaction between models

3.2 Description of the multiagent transport model
The transport model was developed based on multi-agent transport simulation package is described
in the (Ivanov & Knyazkov 2014) and (Karbovskii et al. 2014). Imitational modeling of the work of
ambulance services allows to assess the effectiveness of different dispatching decisions without
interfering with the quality of treatment of actual patients. The imitational model used in this research
consists of multiagent transport model reproducing the relocations of patients and a model of
registration and procession of incoming calls for ambulance, described in section 1.3. It is based on the
time-discreet leader-follower behavior model known as IDM (Intelligent Driver Model Treiber et al.
2000).
Strictly speaking, he transport model proposed by this paper is a modification of IDM. In our
model, IDM agents are only ambulances. Values of our model parameters are presented in Table 1.
Automobile traffic is simulated using average values of speeds on the roads. When an ambulance is
driving along the road, its desired speed is assigned the average speed value from the data set.
Moving to the oncoming lane is simulated using the data on the road network. An ambulance
moves to the oncoming lane if average speed on the current road is lower than the lowest speed
boundary, and the speed of the oncoming lane is higher than the upper speed boundary. This method is
based on a rough assumption, that high speed indicates a low density of cars. Boundary speed values
are also presented in Table 1. On the oncoming lane, the ambulance drives with the desired speed.

2213

2214	

Ivan Derevitskiy et al. / Procedia Computer Science 108C (2017) 2210–2219

Model parameter
Vehicle Length
Maximum Acceleration
Desired deceleration
Desired velocity
Safe Time Interval
Minimum distance
Acceleration exponent
The lowest speed boundary
The upper speed boundary
Table 1: Simulation parameters.

Parameter value
7 meters
8 meters per second
3 meters per second
60 kilometers per hour
1.8 second
0.5 meter
0.7
25 kilometers per hour
45 kilometers per hour

The algorithm for describing ambulance vehicle travel through road network is based on the
regulations for transporting ambulance patients currently utilized in Saint Petersburg (Russia). At the
beginning of the simulation, a crew and a vehicle are placed at the ambulance stations. When an
incoming call is registered, a vehicle that has shortest estimated arrival time of is assigned to the
address. At the next step, an optimal route regarding current traffic situation is generated. Upon the
arrival to the address the vehicle is not serving other patients during the treatment time. If
hospitalization is required, an optimal traffic-adjusted route to the hospital is generated. Upon
transporting the patient to the hospital, an optimal route for a vehicle to reach the ambulance station is
generated and it becomes available to new patients.

Figure 2: User interface devised for the imitational model software package
As mentioned above, ambulance vehicle, as a special type of transport, has privileges over other
types of transport. However, as literature survey suggests, the vast majority of the approaches to
modeling ambulance vehicle travel do not account for such benefits. In order to tackle this issue, the
transport model used in this research previously received a module for reproducing the authorized
counter-flow movement of ambulance vehicles. In order to filter off the streets with a single-lane
traffic, transport model uses the information about the availability of the second lane on the given road
is derived from the OpenStreetMap data for Saint-Petersburg. In cases, where second lane is present, a
decision to switch to it depends on two factors: a) own speed of the vehicle; b) mean traffic speed at
the edges of the graph representing left (for the right-hand direction of traffic) or opposite-flow lane (if
the density at the opposite lane is low and the speed of vehicles is high, ambulance vehicle can shift

	

Ivan Derevitskiy et al. / Procedia Computer Science 108C (2017) 2210–2219

lanes). Thus, the lower the ambulance vehicle’s own speed and density of the traffic at the opposing
flow, the higher is the probability of shifting lanes. In this study, we have set thresholds for the own
speed to 20 km/h and the density of the counter-flow traffic equal to the conditions where average
speed exceeds 45 km/h.
An example of the user interface from the imitational model software package is presented in
Figure 2.

3.3 Mass Servicing System model in ambulance service
In order to simulate in-hospital workload we use queueing model introduced in (Kovalchuk et al.
2016). This model describes activities of the hospital with several PCI facilities in case of defined
inflow of patients. Simulation performed by the developed model provides detailed information on
patients inflow processing. E.g., analysis of time spent by patients in queues can be used for predictive
estimation of mortality rates.
Next component

Planned flow generator

Planned queue
Scheduler

Urgent flow generator

PCI unit 1

PCI unit 2

Urgent queue
PCI unit 3

Figure 3: Mass Servicing System model.
This model includes two patients flows – that is, planned and urgent patients. In waiting time
distribution (including arrival rate and time of PCI) was estimated using data from Almazov Federal
Medical Research Center, which serves (among others) as a destination for ambulances transporting
the patients with ACS as well as regular patients scheduled for cardiological surgeries.
In this paper urgent flow generator is replaced with flow generated according to chosen decision
policy. Model structure is presented in fig. 3. It has two FIFO (first in, first out) queues for planned
and urgent patients. The urgent queue always has a higher priority than the planned queue, but it has to
be noticed if a planned operation started it cannot be interrupted.
When one of the PCI units is available (operation is finished) the model scheduler selects a patient
from the queues according to their priority status and directs them to the available PCI unit. The
number of PCI units and their operational mode is based on real data for every hospital.
In addition to patient waiting time and the time of PCI, the model takes into account the time
needed to prepare the patient for the surgery and time of switching facilities from one PCI to another.
As a result, the model provides rough estimation of door-to-balloon time (Soon et al. 2007) which
correlates with mortality and complications rates after PCI. The amount of door-to-balloon time
together with transportation time can be used to predict mortality or complication probability during
certain periods of time with better accuracy.

4 Description of the experiment
4.1 Simulation scenario
In order to study the distribution of time between the first contact with the patient and the beginning of
the operation 2 simulation scenarios were launched. Each scenario simulates the work of emergency

2215

2216	

Ivan Derevitskiy et al. / Procedia Computer Science 108C (2017) 2210–2219

services in St. Petersburg for 7 days. The scenarios differ in the selection method for the hospital to
transport patients with ACS. In the first scenario (when hospitalization is required) the hospital with
the shortest path time in selected. In the second scenario, in addition to the path time the hospital,
availability of operating rooms is taken into account.
In these scenarios calls to the ambulance service are divided into 2 types. The first type includes
treatment with the ACS diagnosis. These scenarios are generated on the basis of real data on the
intensity and location of calls with the diagnosis of acute coronary syndrome received in 2015 in St.
Petersburg. The data were obtained using the ambulance service in St. Petersburg. According to the
ambulance service, on the average they daily receive about 43 calls from of patients with ACS. In the
simulation scenario, after receiving the first type call patient hospitalization in one of the city's
medical institutions with equipment for PCI, is simulated.
The second type of calls includes calls with all other diagnoses. These calls are simulated to take
into account ambulances workload with other calls and its impact on providing service to patients with
ACS. Data on the daily all intensity and the number of working ambulances were obtained from of the
Saint-Petersburg Ambulance Service station website (www.03spb.ru). Calls location is simulated on
the basis of the density of population of the city. The greater the number of people registered at a
particular address, the more likely is a call from the given address.
The data on the density of St. Petersburg population was obtained from the Federal Migration
Service. In contrast to the calls of the first type, hospitalization of the second type patients (after
providing initial medical care) is not simulated. When providing care to patients of the second type the
average time of the process care is taken into account. The average time is known from the report by
the Committee of Health of St. Petersburg.
The methodology of obtaining data on the road network congestion is described in detail in
(Derevitskiy et al. 2016). Data on the structure of the road network of St. Petersburg was obtained by
OpenStreetMap.
The used in the simulation scenarios data on the number of ambulances, ambulance stations, the
number and location of health facilities receiving patients for PCI, the intensity of both types calls are
illustrated in Table 2.
Model parameter
Number of ambulances (normalized to the intensity of the calls ACS)
The daily calls rate ACS
The daily calls to the service rate (normalized to the number of
ambulances)
The number of hospitals with PCI
The number of ambulance stations
The average time of providing initial medical care to patients with ACS
The average time helping the rescue squad patients of the second type
Table 2: Simulation parameters.

Parameter value
43
43
473
15
46
10 min
30 min

4.2 Time distribution analysis
At the start of each simulation scenario statistics of the model were collected. For each patient with
ACS the following data were recorded: ambulance travel time to the patient, the time of transporting
the patient to the hospital, patient waiting time in the hospital. Distribution of the transportation times
for both scenarios is illustrated in Figure 4 (in right). The distribution of the waiting time in hospitals
is illustrated in Figure 4 (in left).
Figure 4 (in left) illustrates the increase in the average transportation time in the second scenario,
when compared with the first one. This is due to the fact that in the second scenario, the patient is not

	

Ivan Derevitskiy et al. / Procedia Computer Science 108C (2017) 2210–2219

always taken to the nearest hospital (in terms of transportation time). Figure 4 (in right) illustrates the
reduction in patient waiting time in the second scenario if compared with the first one. The decrease
results from the usage of the algorithm that takes into account queue to the operating room, in the
second scenario.
In fig. 4 we can observe a few number of significant delays (over 1500 minutes). In our experiment
it happened because of occurrence of extremely long planned surgery, which is actually a rare event
(less than 15 cases in a year), and combined with intense income flow it resulted in a long waiting
time. Normally, in such cases patients from queue should be transferred to another hospital.

Figure 4: Distribution of time indicators

Figure 5: Distribution of time between the first contact with the patient and the beginning of PCI
Figure 5 illustrates the distribution of time between the first contact with the patient and the
beginning of PCI. Time is calculated as the sum of the time of providing the initial medical care on the

2217

Ivan Derevitskiy et al. / Procedia Computer Science 108C (2017) 2210–2219

2218	

spot (in our model it is 10 minutes), the time of the patient transportation to the hospital, and the
waiting time before operation. Results of the research show a reduction of the total time when the
second strategy of choice of medical institution is applied. Thus, it can be concluded that the second
strategy is more effective in terms of reducing the time between the first contact with the patient and
the start of PCI.

5 Conclusion
In this article, we present a methodology of the development of multicomponent simulation
environment. The suggested tool is capable of simulating the ambulance service in town. One of the
environment modules calculates the predicted time passing between the first contact with patient and
the start of surgical intervention for patients with ACS. The described module can be helpful when
making a decision on the thrombolytic therapy for a patient.
Unlike existing navigation aids, transport model which is part of the described instrument takes
into account the possibility of the ambulance moving into the oncoming lane. In future we are going to
compare the effectiveness of ambulance travel time prediction made with the help of the suggested
model, with the efficiency of the forecast by modern navigation systems.
One of the perspectives of our further research is the use of distributed computing in the described
multi-agent model. Tools and methods for distributed multi-agent simulation in the social sciences are
described in (Gulyás et al. 2011).
With the help of the simulation environment, we analyze the effectiveness of the strategy which
takes into account queues in hospitals (in case of patients with ACS transported to hospitals). We
conclude that this strategy is more effective in comparison with the strategy based on the forecast of
the patient transportation time.

6 Acknowledgements
This research is financially supported by The Russian Scientific Foundation, Agreement #14-1100823 (15.07.2014).

	

Ivan Derevitskiy et al. / Procedia Computer Science 108C (2017) 2210–2219

References
Brandeau, M.L. & Larson, R.C., 1986. Extending and applying the hypercube queueing model to
deploy ambulances in Boston. TIMS Studies in Munagement Science, 22, pp.121–153.
Cochran, J.K. & Roche, K., 2008. A queuing-based decision support methodology to estimate hospital
inpatient bed demand. Journal of the Operational Research Society, 59(11), pp.1471–1482.
Créput, J.-C. et al., 2011. Dynamic vehicle routing problem for medical emergency management. In:
Self Organizing Maps. Applications and Novel Algorithm Design, pp.233–250.
Derevitskiy, I. et al., 2016. Traffic estimation on full graph of transport network using GPS data of bus
movements. Procedia Computer Science, 101, pp.207–216.
Gayathri, N. & Chandrakala, K.R.M.V., 2014. A novel technique for optimal vehicle routing. In
Electronics and Communication Systems (ICECS), 2014 International Conference on
Electronics and Communication System. pp. 1–5.
Gendreau, M., Laporte, G. & Semet, F., 2001. A dynamic model and parallel tabu search heuristic for
real-time ambulance relocation. Parallel computing, 27(12), pp.1641–1653.
Green, L. V et al., 2006. Using queueing theory to increase the effectiveness of emergency department
provider staffing. Academic Emergency Medicine, 13(1), pp.61–68.
Gulyás, L. et al., 2011. Tools for large scale (distributed) agent-based computational experiments.
Proceedings of CSSSA-11, Computational Social Science Society of America Annual
Conference, Santa Fe, NM, USA, October 2011.
Ivanov, S. V & Knyazkov, K. V, 2014. Evaluation of in-vehicle Decision Support System for
Emergency Evacuation. Procedia Computer Science, 29, pp.1656–1666.
Karbovskii, V. et al., 2016. Multimodel agent-based simulation environment for mass-gatherings and
pedestrian dynamics. Future Generation Computer Systems.
Karbovskii, V., Ivanov, S. & Knyazkov, K., 2014. A Multi-agent Simulation Of Human Behavior
During Emergency Evacuations With In-vehicle Decision Support System. WIT Transactions on
Information and Communication Technologies, 56, pp.635–644.
Kergosien, Y. et al., 2015. A generic and flexible simulation-based analysis tool for EMS
management. International Journal of Production Research, 53(24), pp.7299–7316.
Kovalchuk, S. V et al., 2016. Distributed data-driven platform for urgent decision making in
cardiological ambulance control. Future Generation Computer Systems.
López, B. et al., 2005. A multi-agent system to support ambulance coordination in time-critical patient
treatment. In 7th Simposio Argentino de Intelligencia Artificial-ASAI2005.
Maxwell, M.S. et al., 2010. Approximate dynamic programming for ambulance redeployment.
INFORMS Journal on Computing, 22(2), pp.266–281.
Nordin, N.A.M. et al., 2011. An application of the A* algorithm on the ambulance routing. In
Humanities, Science and Engineering (CHUSER), 2011 IEEE Colloquium on. pp. 855–859.
Siddharthan, K., Jones, W.J. & Johnson, J.A., 1996. A priority queuing model to reduce waiting times
in emergency care. International Journal of Health Care Quality Assurance, 9(5), pp.10–16.
Soon, C.Y., Chan, W.X. & Tan, H.C., 2007. The impact of time-to-balloon on outcomes in patients
undergoing modern primary angioplasty for acute myocardial infarction. Singapore medical
journal, 48(2), p.131.
Tereshchenko, S.N. & Zhirov, I.V., 2010. Treatment of the acute coronary syndrome with ST segment
elevation at the pre-hospital care. Russian Cardiology Research and Production Complex. (In
Russian), 6(3), pp.363–369.
Treiber, M., Hennecke, A. & Helbing, D., 2000. Congested traffic states in empirical observations and
microscopic simulations. Physical review E, 62(2), pp.1805–1824.

2219

