Procedia Computer
Science
Procedia Computer
001(2010)
1–8
Procedia
ComputerScience
Science
(2012)
819–826

www.elsevier.com/locate/procedia

MML: towards a Multiscale Modeling Language
Jean-Luc Falconea , Bastien Choparda,∗, Alfons Hoekstrab
a University

b University

of Geneva, Switzerland
of Amsterdam, The Netherlands

Abstract
Recent multiscale applications require more and more often the coupling of many sub-models, usually originating
form diﬀerent ﬁelds of science. Therefore, it is increasingly important to propose an eﬀective description language
that can help scientists with diﬀerent background to co-develop a multiscale application. We propose a Multiscale
Modeling Language (MML) i.e. a description language aiming at specifying the architecture of a multiscale simulation
program. We will illustrate this approach by proposing a MML description of a computer model for restenosis in a
stented vessel.
c 2012 Published by Elsevier Ltd. Open access under CC BY-NC-ND license.
⃝

Keywords: Multiscale modeling, description language, cellular automata, lattice Boltzmann method, scale separation

1. Introduction
Most current multiscale applications are restricted to the coupling of two sub-systems, with a micro-macro scale
relation. However, there is a growing interest for complex problems requiring the coupling of many sub-models,
usually originating form diﬀerent ﬁelds. Biomedical systems, for instance, involve biological, chemical and physical
processes evolving at diﬀerent scales. Following this approach, we recently developed a multiscale biomedical model
for restenosis in stented coronary arteries [1]. This model involves three diﬀerent processes, all acting at their own
time scale: blood ﬂow, smooth muscle cell proliferation and drug diﬀusion. Developing such a model in a consortium of computer scientists, clinicians and biologists demonstrated the importance of having a natural, intuitive and
informative way to describe all the processes in interaction.
Since a few years, scientists are studying more and more complex applications by integrating together several
new or existing single-science and single-scale models. Simultaneously, development teams are often composed of
diﬀerent specialists working on separated geographical locations. Therefore, it is increasingly important to propose
an eﬀective description language that can help to co-develop multiscale applications and collaborate eﬃciently to the
architecture of the solver. Also, with such a detailed “blueprint” of an application, other groups can then easily extend
the model by incrementally adding more features, without the need for a full re-engineering.
In this paper we propose a Multiscale Modeling Language (MML) i.e. a human-friendly description language
based on a graphical representation and/or an XML language. MML aims at specifying the architecture of a multiscale
simulation program. In particular, it allows the scientists to specify the list of sub-models, their coupling, (including
∗ Corresponding

author
Email addresses: Jean-Luc.Falcone@unige.ch (Jean-Luc Falcone), Bastien.Chopard@unige.ch (Bastien Chopard),
A.G.Hoekstra@uva.nl (Alfons Hoekstra)

c 2012 Published by Elsevier Ltd. Open access under CC BY-NC-ND license.
1877-0509 ⃝
doi:10.1016/j.procs.2010.04.089

820

J.-L. J.-L.
Falcone
et al. / Procedia Computer Science 1 (2012) 819–826
Falcone / Procedia Computer Science 00 (2010) 1–8


	

		



	

		
		
		



		



2



		

	
		

	

		
		
		



		

Figure 1: Example of the generic loops and coupling template describing two coupled submodels.

the relation between the computational domains and scales), the type of coupling (coarse graining, scale splitting,
ampliﬁcation), input and output data, etc. We will illustrate this approach by proposing a MML description of a
restenosis multiscale application.
Here we will assume that the sub-models are only based on the cellular automata or lattice Boltzmann methods
and obey the general formalism proposed in the so-called CxA framework [2, 3, 4]. Within this framework, all the
objects are well deﬁned, which allows us to be quite speciﬁc. In addition, in that case, our MML description can be
parsed automatically in order to produce the skeleton of the application and, soon, to generate the full coupling code
of the multiscale simulation.
Although the current work is restricted to the CxA multiscale methodology, we are convinced that it can be
extended to other numerical frameworks. The goal of this paper is mainly to stimulate the multiscale community to
discuss the opportunity of MML and to open the door to its speciﬁcation.
2. Multiscale coupling with CxA
2.1. General concepts
We have recently proposed in [3, 4] a methodology for multiscale modeling based on the coupling of any numbers
of lattice Boltzmann [5] and cellular automata [6] sub-models, all running at their speciﬁc time and spatial scales. We
coined this framework CxA for “Complex Automata”. Together with the theoretical concepts, we have also developed
a coupling software called MUSCLE [7, 8] which provides the glue to run simulations with these interacting submodels.
In our framework, a distinguishing feature of a multiscale application is the relation that exists between the computational domains of each sub-model. We propose to consider two cases: (1) single domains where both sub-models
share the same spatial domain and (2) multi-domain where the diﬀerent sub-domains are adjacent or slightly overlapping.
However the main ideas of the CxA framework is that (1) cellular automata (CA) or Lattice Boltzmann (LB)
models can be described by a generic sequence of calls to well deﬁned operators (the so-called main loop) and that
(2) the coupling between any two sub-models can be expressed as a ﬂow a data between a pair of these operators.
Figure 1 illustrates these features on the coupling of two models having for instance diﬀerent temporal resolution and
simulating the growth of coral resulting from the nutrient brought by water currents.
In our generic description, the state of the CA or LB model over the computational domain D is denoted by the
symbol f . The operators are U for updating the computational domain, B for imposing the boundary conditions, C
for performing the so-called collision step and P for the propagation of the f on the computational domain. Note that
these operators are speciﬁc to the LB and CA models and we refer the reader to [3, 4] for a full description. Finally
the operator Oi and O f denotes any observation that needs to be made on the system.
We have observed that not all coupling patterns are present in the rather large set of multiscale applications we
have considered in [4]. Only a few the pairs of operators are actually needed to express the multiscale coupling

J.-L. Falcone
et al. / Procedia Computer Science 1 (2012) 819–826
J.-L. Falcone / Procedia Computer Science 00 (2010) 1–8

821
3

between two sub-models. Among these possible coupling, some reﬂect a single-domain relation and other a multidomain relation. Also the nature of coupling (coarse graining, scale splitting or ampliﬁcation [4]) further speciﬁes the
pair of operators that can be involved.
This rather small set of possible couplings suggests that a graphical language can be devised to express the existing
interaction between sub-models in our CxA framework. This is the very purpose of this paper. But before proposing
a set of rule to implement this MML language, we need to specify a few more elements of the framework.
First, as discussed above, a coupling template corresponds to a ﬂow of data between two operators. However, the
data may need some transformation between the two ends of the link. For this reason a ﬁlter can be inserted along
the data path to performe the required transformation, such as a change of scale, an interpolation or decimation. The
ﬁlter is the component that knows the scale requirements of both subsystems, whereas the sub-model are thought of
as being stand-alone and ready to be used in any diﬀerent context.
Second, when more than two models are coupled a simple link is not enough and another component called
mapper is needed. A mapper acts as a central element which receives information from all connected sub-models
(through their operators O), combines this information as required by the nature of the coupling, and sends it to the
adequate operators of the recipient sub-models.
2.2. ISR application
To illustrate better the MML language we shall deﬁne below for describing the implementation of a multiscale
application, we ﬁrst brieﬂy present the in-stent restenosis (ISR) model [1] that was developed in the COAST project
as a demonstrator of the CxA framework.
The ISR application aims at developing a computer model of the proliferation of the smooth muscle cells (SMC)
following the deployment of a stent of a blood vessel [1]. This undesired phenomena is called hyperplasia. SMC
proliferation inside the lumen is the result of an initial injury of the vessel wall by the stent. The blood ﬂow aﬀects
hyperplasia through a coupling between the shear stress and the SMC growth rate. In turn, hyperplasia changes the
geometry of the vessel, thus creating a feedback on the blood ﬂow. A way to reduce SMC proliferation is to use a
drug eluted stent from which some chemical diﬀuses in the wall vessel to prevent hyperplasia.
We have proposed [2] to express graphically the ISR application using the scale separation map (SSM), as illustrated in Fig. 2. This diagram presents the three sub-models (BF for blood ﬂow, DD for drug diﬀusion and SMC for
smooth muscle cell evolution) as a function of their characteristic spatio-temporal scales. This drawing further shows
the coupling between the sub-models. This representation turned out to be very useful when discussing with biologists or clinicians since it helped people to extract the important ingredients of a multiscale problem and to identify
the potential for simulation speedup oﬀered by the separation of scales.
The SSM is therefore the ﬁrst instance of a MML graphical language. It is well adapted to describe the coupling
between sub-models having well separated scales. But it soon will be unreadable when the scales of several models
overlap. For this reason we proposed in the next section additionnal diagram of a multiscale application which
augment the SSM view by providing extra information.
3. Coupling Diagram
MML can be represented as diagrams which help the design and description of a complex, multiscale applications.
These diagrams show the components of the multiscale model, with their respective space and time scale. They also
show the ﬂow of information between these components and, ﬁnally, indicate the execution timeline.
Such a representation has several usages: ﬁrst it can be easily hand-drawn to facilitate scientiﬁc and programming
discussion, then it illustrates coupling speciﬁcations. Finally it provides a standard way of describing a model for
publication.
This visual aspect of MML is similar to Uniﬁed Modelling Language (UML) diagrams well known in software
engineering [9]. Indeed, MML diagrams complement UML models by providing higher level information related to
scientiﬁc coupling of subsystems (notably scale information and coupling approach). Both systems can then be used
side by side. For example, the components of an MML diagram can be speciﬁed further by providing UML class and
activity diagrams giving implementation detais.
All information shown in diagrams can be inferred from the XML representation (see below), so given a particular
MML XML ﬁle, diagrams can be automatically generated.

822

J.-L. J.-L.
Falcone
et al. / Procedia Computer Science 1 (2012) 819–826
Falcone / Procedia Computer Science 00 (2010) 1–8

4

Figure 2: Schematic representation of the in-stent restenosis application on a scale separation map.

Our MML proposition includes two diagrams. The ﬁrst is the scale separation map shown in Fig. 2. The other one
is the coupling diagram detailed below.
In the coupling (or dataﬂow) diagram components are represented by boxes of diﬀerent shapes. Their size and
their position in the diagram do not carry any information. Their relative position in the diagram must be chosen in
order to increase readbility. The shape of components are:
• Submodels are represented by rectangular boxes. The title should lay in the upper part such as to leave the
bottom part open for optional annotations. The center must stay empty because, it may be used to attach
coupling arrows.
• Filters are shown as rectangular boxes with rounded corners. When hand-drawn, oval shapes can be substituted.
Their orientation is not relevant.
• Mappers Mapper are represented by hexagonal boxes. Their orientation is not relevant.
In addition to components, the coupling diagram represents the dataﬂow by an edge (or “arrow”) linking two
components. The symbols at extremities and the point where they attach to the components carry information about
the coupling.
In principle each arrow represents should be labelled to describe the kind of data that is exchanged (i.e. velocity,
pressure, number of cells). However, to increase readability, several arrows linking the same components at the same
points with the same extremities can be showned as one. In this case, the resulting arrow is labeled with a list of
labels, joined by commas.
Arrow ends. The arrow extremity markers show the main loop operators involved in the information exchange. The
extremity attached to the sending submodel can have to markers:

823
5

J.-L. Falcone
et al. / Procedia Computer Science 1 (2012) 819–826
J.-L. Falcone / Procedia Computer Science 00 (2010) 1–8

	


		








	








Figure 3: Coupling arrows marker palette.

• When the information is sent during the submodel computation (operator Oi ) the arrow extremity comes with a
black circle.
• When the information is sent after computation (operator O f ), the symbol is a black diamond.
When the data originates from a ﬁlter or a mapper, the marker is ommited. This simpliﬁcation can also be made
for submodels which do not follow the main loop described in Sec. 2.1 or for preliminary drafts. The diﬀerent markers
are summarized in Fig. 3.
For the marker extremity which is attached to the sending submodel we have four possibilities:
• When the information is used in the initial condition, the arrow ﬁnishes with a white diamond.
• When the information is used to update the domain (operator U), the arrow ﬁnishes with a white half circle.
• When the information is used in collision operator (operator C), the arrow end is a white circle.
• When the information is used to update boundaries (operator B), the arrow end is a white triangle.
When the coupling recipient is a ﬁlter or a mapper the end marker is a simple arrow end. Again, this “default”
marker can also be used for submodels which do not follow the main loop or for preliminary drafts.
Attachement points. The exact places in submodels where coupling arrows are attached inform about the space and
time scale of the exchanged data. As in scale maps, the x axis refers to the time frequency and the y axis to the space
frequency. In both directions we have three possibilities:
• Time axis: data at the same time frequency than the connected submodel (to the left), data at a frequency equals
to the duration length of the connected model (to the right) and data sent at an intermediate frequency (centered
horizontaly).
• Space axis: data at the same space frequency than the connected submodel (to the bottom), data at a frequency
equals to the total size of the connected model (to the right) and data sent at an intermediate frequency (centered
vertically).
Since both scales can be addressed separately, we have a total of nine possible attachment points.
For instance in Fig. 4 the shear stress data ﬂows from the blood ﬂow model to the mapper. The source extremity
is attached to the bottom-right corner to the BF submodel. It means that the data is sent at a ﬁne spatial scale but at a
time resolution equaling the BF total duration (i.e. the time needed to reach the ﬂow steady-state).
The coupling diagram can be completed with additional features. Here we only mention an indication for the
domain relation (multi-domain or single domain). When two or several models share the same physical domain (for
instance one plant growth model and an animal growth model occurring in the same patch of land), we can draw a
dotted rectangle around the submodels. For example, in the ISR coupling diagram (Fig. 4) the smooth muscle cell and
the drug diﬀusion submodels share the same domain (artery wall).

824

J.-L. J.-L.
Falcone
et al. / Procedia Computer Science 1 (2012) 819–826
Falcone / Procedia Computer Science 00 (2010) 1–8



6

	


	

	




	


	

	


	





	



	
 













	


	
	


Figure 4: Coupling diagram for the ISR model presented in Sec. 2.2. BF: blood ﬂow; DD: Drug diﬀusion; SMC: smooth muscle cells.

4. XML representation
In addition to the visual models presented above, MML includes an XML [10] representation called xMML. Using
this representation, users can generate text ﬁles describing formally coupled multi-scale systems. xMML grammar is
designed to allow easy interact with both human users and software. Therefore, they can be written either with a plain
text editor or a dedicated program with GUI. For example, it is possible to write a graphical editor for the diagrams
seen above which can produce the corresponding xMML ﬁles.
Usage of such ﬁles includes the following cases:
• Generating automatically MML diagrams.
• Producing a speciﬁcation skeleton for a given coupled model, in HTML, LATEX, etc.
• Generating coupling “glue-code” for middlewares using ad-hoc generators.
Note that coupling details can be added in xMML documents inside extra sections to ease code generation for a given
framework.
The XML format was chosen because for three main reasons. First XML is now very common and parsing
libraries exists for almost every language used in scientifc computing (XML parsing libraries are avalaible for Fortran
too). Then format based on XML can be automatically validated if a grammar ﬁle is deﬁned (DTD, schemas, etc.).
This simpliﬁes the writing of robust parsers because most checks are done automatically before semantic analysis.
Finally, the Extensible Stylesheet Language family (XSL) allows user to describe complex transformation from XML
to other formats.
The main drawback of XML is its verbosity which can make the ﬁle size bigger than expected and can hinder
human readability. However, this verbosity can be strongly reduced by limiting hierarchical levels and using attributes
instead of inner tags every time it is possible.
The feasibility of coupling code generation was demonstrated by Armstrong et al. [11]. They have realized a
coupling framework called BFG2 (Bespoke Framework Generator 2) used in earth system modelling. BFG2 uses
XML metadata to produce coupling code for submodels written in Fortran. Our xMML approach tries to go beyond
BFG2 by oﬀering a higher level of description and an emphasis on multiscale coupling.

J.-L. Falcone
et al. / Procedia Computer Science 1 (2012) 819–826
J.-L. Falcone / Procedia Computer Science 00 (2010) 1–8

825
7

<model id="suspensionFlow">
<description>
Flow with a suspension of particles. The conentration
of particles affect locally the flow viscosity and the
particles are advected by the flow.
</description>
<submodel id="flow">
<spacescale dimension="2" dx="1 mm" lx="10 cm" ly="30 cm" />
<spacescale dt="1 ms" t="1 min" />
<ports>
<in id="concentration" operator="C" dt="1 ms" dx="1 mm" />
<out id="velocity" operator="Oi" dt="10 ms" dx="1 mm" />
</ports>
</submodel>
<submodel id="advectionDiffusion">
<spacescale dimension="2" dx="1 mm" lx="10 cm" ly="30 cm" />
<spacescale dt="10 ms" t="1 min" />
<ports>
<in id="velocity" operator="C" dt="10 ms" dx="1 mm" />
<out id="concentration" operator="Oi" dt="10 ms" dx="1 mm" />
</ports>
</submodel>
<coupling from="flow.velocity" to="advectionDiffusion.velocity" />
<coupling from="advectionDiffusion.concentration" to="flow.concentration">
<filter kind="timeInterpolation" />
</coupling>b
</model>

Figure 5: xMML ﬁle example.

Here, due to lack of space, we do not present the full proposed grammar speciﬁcations of xMML. Instead we
present in Fig. 5 a typical example, which we expect to be self-explanatory. This example illustrates a multiscale
problem describing the advection-diﬀusion of suspensions due to a ﬂuid ﬂow. In turn, the suspensions locally modify
the ﬂuid viscosity according to a given phenomenological law. The full model is composed of two sub-models which
are not further speciﬁed here.
5. Conclusion
The Multiscale Modeling Language we have presented here aims at giving scientists with diﬀerent backgroud and
geographical locations a better way to co-develop a complex multiscale application with many coupled sub-models.
The current version of MML is a proposition, open to discussion in the community and which can be easily further
speciﬁed or modiﬁed if needed.
This work is supported by the European Commission (COAST project EU-FP6-IST-FET Contract 033664)
[1] D. Evans, P.-V. Lawford, J. Gunn, D. Walker, D.-R. Hose, R. Smallwood, B. Chopard, M. Krafczyk, J. Bernsdorf, A. Hoekstra, The application
of multi-scale modelling to the process of development and prevention of stenosis in a stented coronary artery, Phil. Trans. Roy. Soc.In press.
[2] A. Hoekstra, E. Lorenz, J.-L. Falcone, B. Chopard, Towards a complex automata formalism for multuscale modeling, Int. J. Multiscale
Computational Engineering 5 (6) (2008) 491–502.
[3] A. Hoekstra, F. J.-L, A. Caiazzo, B. Chopard, Multi-scale modeling with cellular automata: The complex automata approach, in: H. U. et al.
(Ed.), ACRI 2008, Vol. LNCS 5191, Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2008, 2008, pp. 192–199.
[4] A. G. Hoekstra, A. Caiazzo, E. Lorenz, J.-L. Falcone, B. Chopard, Complex automata: multi-scale modeling with coupled cellular automata,
in: A. Hoekstra, J. Kroc, P. Sloot (Eds.), Modeling complex systems with cellular automata, Vol. chapter 3, Springer Verlag, 2010.

826

J.-L. J.-L.
Falcone
et al. / Procedia Computer Science 1 (2012) 819–826
Falcone / Procedia Computer Science 00 (2010) 1–8

8

[5] S. Succi, The Lattice Boltzmann Equation, For Fluid Dynamics and Beyond, Oxford University Press, 2001.
[6] B. Chopard, M. Droz, Cellular Automata Modeling of Physical Systems, Cambridge University Press, 1998.
[7] J. Hegewald, M. Krafczyk, J. T¨olke, A. Hoekstra, B. Chopard, An agent-based coupling platform for complex automata, in: M. B. et al. (Ed.),
ICCS 2008, Vol. LNCS 5102, Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2008, 2008, pp. 291–300.
[8] http://developer.berlios.de/projects/muscle/.
[9] Object Management Group, UML 2.0, http://www.omg.org/spec/UML/2.0/ (2005).
[10] World Wide Web Consortium, Extensible markup language 1.0, http://www.w3.org/TR/xml/ (2008).
[11] C. W. Armstrong, R. W. Ford, G. D. Riley, Coupling integrated earth system model components with bfg2, Concurr. Comput. : Pract. Exper.
21 (6) (2009) 767–791. doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/cpe.v21:6.

