Procedia Computer Science
Volume 51, 2015, Pages 2367–2376
ICCS 2015 International Conference On Computational Science

Multiscale agent-based simulation in large city areas:
emergency evacuation use case
Vladislav Karbovskii1*, Daniil Voloshin1, Andrey Karsakov1,
Alexey Bezgodov1 and Aleksandr Zagarskikh1
1

ITMO University, Saint Petersburg, Russia
vladislav.k.work@gmail.com

Abstract
Complex phenomena are increasingly attracting the interest of researchers from various branches of
computational science. So far, this interest has conditioned the demand not only for more sophisticated
autonomous models, but also for mechanisms that would bring them together. This paper presents a
multiscale agent-based modeling and simulation technique based on the incorporation of multiple
modules. Two key principles are presented as guiding such an integration: common abstract space as a
space, where entities of different models interact, and commonly controlled agents – abstract actors
operating in a common space, which can be handled by different agent-based models. The proposed
approach is evaluated through a series of experiments simulating the emergency evacuation from a
cinema building to the city streets, where building and street levels are reproduced in heterogeneous
models.
Keywords: Multiscale modeling, model integration, agent-based modeling, emergency evacuation, urgent
computing

1 Introduction & related works
Computer modeling and simulation as a branch of computational science has become an essential
part of today’s research and analysis methodologies. Models describe real systems and processes and
thus can vary from simple projections to exposing high levels of complexity. A large variety of tasks
(e.g. simulation of emergency situations and crisis events in order to inform decision-making and
planning) requires the modeling of the second type, where a number of processes and factor are being
taken into account. At the same time, a great number of models reconstructing the constituent parts of
the model and their software implementations have already been developed.
Though the use of the multilevel agent-based models is by no means limited to the domains of
computational social science, evacuation behavior simulation, urban planning and pedestrian
*

Corresponding author.

Selection and peer-review under responsibility of the Scientiﬁc Programme Committee of ICCS 2015
c The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V.

doi:10.1016/j.procs.2015.05.407

2367

Multiscale agent-based simulation in large city areas

V. Karbovskii, et al

modeling, the outlook of the present paper is focused primarily on the models, frameworks and
environments that address the issues topical for these spheres of scientific investigation. For the
analytical survey of existing approaches, typical issues and theoretical basics of the multi-level
simulation in a broader sense, one might refer to Morvan [1], Gil-Quijano [2], N. Gilbert and K.
Troitzsch [3]. Multi-level (as well as multiscale and multi-model) simulations has already received
significant interest from researchers in different fields [2]. However, the understanding of the very
terms multi-model or multi-level simulation is rather ambiguous as comprehensive conceptual papers
remain few and the choice of terminology is commonly left to the discretion of the researcher. The
state-of-the-art in multi-level modeling can be characterized as lacking ready-to-use solutions and
languages and tending toward context- or domain- specific systems [4]. More specifically, as [5]
claims, currently-utilized models do not exhibit the potential of simultaneous representation of agents
and the interactions between the agents do not receive proper articulation, which are the points being
partially addressed in the present paper.
The most widely-accepted approach in the emergency evacuation research simulations is the
coupling of the human behavior-related models with the ones that represent the physical properties of
the hazard. For instance, Jalali et al [6] propose reflective middleware (or a meta-model) that would
link and synchronize the existing heterogeneous models through loose coupling in such a way that
could help overcome the limitations of the existing approaches to model integration (represented by
the standards that allow the coupling of the freshly-developed simulators). As a result, they obtain a
multi-level emergency simulator capable of reproducing the interaction of such factors as the spread of
fire (and its by-products), evacuation behavior and the dynamics of communication systems. B.
Camus et al [7] also propose to integrate models into common systems through the use of a metamodel but the domain for its implementation is specific – they aim at reproducing the behavior of
evacuees in the case of a tsunami-triggered evacuation. It is worth mentioning that the absence of postproductive integration of models is widely discussed in the domain of multi-level and multi-model
simulations since the previously-presented approaches are built around highly abstract languages (for
instance, MIMOSE and SmallTalk [8]) and do not provide such a capability which might strongly
affect the effectiveness of the developmental process in a negative way. T. Korhonen et al [9] look
into a problem analogous to the one described in [6] yet they consider only two components to be
integrated into the simulator – the already-existing fire dynamics simulator is extended with the
evacuation behavior module. Filippoupolitis et al [10] go even further in their attempt to specify the
approach for integration of the models representing the physical space of a tall building, fire hazard
dynamics and the complex evacuation behavior of intelligent agents and propose an augmented
reality-based solution that allows the processing of real-world sensor data. It may be claimed that the
ambition of creating complex multi-level models for single-hazard or single-case use nowadays
coexists with attempts to produce complex interactive “serious game” architectures and training
environments that consider a large variety of scenarios, levels and scales aimed to meet the demands
formulated by the military and civic authorities [11].
To position the present paper in the multi-level discourse, a comparison with a few conceptual
elaborations of the approach in the field is presented. For instance, Gilbert et al [3] characterizes multilevel models as being able to reproduce more than two levels of abstraction with each of them
inhabited by complex, but not necessarily numerous, communicating agents. The model described
herein may be considered as partially complying with this description, since the number of simulated
agents is significant and the communication between the agents of different levels might be described
as replication of agents leaving one level of the model for the another one. As Morvan claims in his
extensive research on state-of-the art multi-level simulations [1], there are three predominating
problems that multi-level simulation seeks to address: (a) modeling of the cross-level interactions, (b)
heterogeneous models coupling, (c) contextual adaptation of different levels of detail (for instance, in
order to optimize the computational resources). Nevertheless, the question of defining multi-level
modeling and conceptualizing the corresponding approaches is still open, and as Gil-Quijano [2]

2368

Multiscale agent-based simulation in large city areas

V. Karbovskii, et al

claims, many of the self-proclaimed multi-level models are in fact focused on the reproduction of a
predefined single level, whereas other perspectives emerge in the observers’ view (which may be as
well interpreted as a criterion). Moreover, he insists that the so-called “emergentist” approach is not
reasonable on a large scale. Contrary to this statement, it is assumed in the present paper that there are
cases that require and allow detailed simulations of different levels that consider agents (as opposed to
flows and aggregated groups) as the primary simulated entities. Considering the distinction between
the weak and strong integrated simulators, proposed in [1], it might be mentioned herein that the
environment proposed in the present paper does not strictly belong to any of them as the levels of the
model do share agents as entities but the only environmental properties that match in both levels are
the portals between the levels.

2 Problem Statement & Theoretical Backgrounds
To solve the problem of modeling and simulation of the complex interplay of the persistent and
emerging processes taking place within modern urbanized areas, we propose to use an integrated
conglomerate of agent-based models where different levels are represented by a single model or a
combination of multiple models. Such techniques as (a) common space and (b) commonly controlled
agents have been proposed so far to facilitate the integration of these models into an organized system.
Quite often models utilize different formats of data representation while pursuing the same
purposes. For example, one model uses latitude and longitude to formalize spatial coordinates, while
another one operates within the Cartesian coordinate system. Thus, the major issues of integrating
different models are the following: (a) ensuring the interaction between the common space (or the
basic model as it is) and the complementary models (if necessary and possible, in both directions); (b)
compatibility of different implementation technologies of the models; and (c) ensuring a unified
representation of data and common space. In an attempt to address these issues (and to ensure the
simultaneous performance and interaction of the entities of the different models) a somewhat abstract
shared virtual simulation environment with a unified data representation has been defined as an
advantageous solution. The use of such a common virtual simulation space (referred to as “common
space”), represented in the basic model is proposed herein. Following this approach, it is necessary to
“teach” the basic model to use the data from the complementary models mapped on its space. As a
basic model, we use the pedestrian virtual society simulator extended with support of the plug-in
mechanism. The plug-in determines the interaction of basic model entities with the ones of the
complementary model. Integration preprocessing is performed through a sequence of steps: (a)
acquisition of the required metadata from the models of interest, and (b) definition of the rules of data
exchange and interaction between the models. A reservation needs to be made here about the
flexibility of the common space approach: it is assumed that it may be both fully and partially mapped
on the model chosen as the basic one and implemented on the outside.
Sometimes there is a need for expansion of the initial functionality of the model. For example,
when a researcher possesses a default pedestrian model, and has an ambition to simulate not only
pedestrian agent flows, but also their subsequent vehicular relocations. Here he/she faces two options:
(a) implement the required logic in the basic pedestrian model, (b) take an already-existing vehicle
transportation model and integrate it with the primary one.

2369

Multiscale agent-based simulation in large city areas

V. Karbovskii, et al

To support the exchange of data between models in real time execution (important for timestepped models, such as agent-based models), it is necessary to implement additional mechanisms of
interaction. For these purposes, the concept of the abstract commonly controlled agent (fig. 1) was
introduced for the research in question. Its key feature is the possibility of agent representation in an
independent model space (common space), and the ability to manage this agent by a number of
models.
Common virtual space

A1

A1,p

A2,p

Traffic model

A3

A1,T

A2

Vehicle agents

Pedestrian agents

Pedestrian model

Abstract agents, A

Figure 1: Spatial integration by agents

The abstract commonly controlled agents ‫ ܣ‬ൌ ሼ‫ܣ‬ଵ ǡ ‫ܣ‬ଶ ǡ ǥ ‫ܣ‬௡ ሽ are the agents operating in the
common space, and ܴ – the rules of abstract agents. For example, ‫ – ܴ ؿ ܯ‬movement, is the rule that
the agent finds the path and tries to move from the starting point to the destination.
Referring to the case observed herein, the commonly controlled agent can be handled by the
pedestrian model (walk) on the first iteration, but after a few iterations the relocations of the same
agent can be administered by the traffic model (implying its “in vehicle” status). The synchronization
of agents can be described by simple algorithm (table 1).
1:
2:
3:
4:
5:

Foreach A in AbstractAgents:
If (IsTimeToChangeModel)
A.ChangeControlModel(requiredModel)
A.step()

Table 1: Integration by agents, control loop

The synchronization by time is described by a simple algorithm (table 2). Different models have
their own internal representation of time. The time representation can be absolute or relative, time
steps can be regular (time-stepped models) or irregular (models, providing the set of events). If
necessary, it is possible to use the offset or multiplier of time. All these factors contribute to the
variable isTimeForStep for each model at each step. The step M.step()includes receiving data from
the model, sending new data to the model and the actual execution of the step.
1:
2:
3:

Foreach M in Models:
If (isTimeForStep)
M.step()

Table 2: Integration by time, control loop

3 Models
Two agent-based models have been used for prototyping the multi-level environment incorporating
multi-agent simulators for investigation of the evacuation use case. The building-scale model was built
“from the ground up” and the district-scale one is a result of modifying the model from the authors’

2370

Multiscale agent-based simulation in large city areas

V. Karbovskii, et al

previous work [1]. The purpose of the building-scale model is to simulate the residential dynamics in
buildings (and other closed spaces) of various purpose while the district-scale model aims at a higher
level of representation. These models are both multi-agent, utilize the activity approach to path
planning and common mechanisms of representing the heterogeneity of physical profiles of agents.
Despite that, there are differences between the models that are related to the variance in scales of
representation of the corresponding simulated environments (i.e. the district-scale model does not
presuppose the level of detailization of agents’ pedestrian behavior that cannot be neglected in the
building evacuation model). The coupling of the models in question has been performed with the use
of PULSE - the multi-model integration framework. The following subsections are dedicated to the
description of the models that have been used for the simulation of the case investigated in the present
paper and the tool that has been used for their interaction and integration.

3.1 Building Model
Model environment E is presented as a pseudo-3D continuous space, i.e. a set of interconnected
two-dimensional levels. It is composed from the following elements: (a) points of interest, (b)
navigation route graph that links the points of interest, (c) impenetrable obstacles and (d) so-called
portals (uni- and bidirectional). Points of interest are the objects that attract agents and imply potential
interaction (for instance, seats, bar counters, tables at the waiting area or ticket office in the cinema
case described herein) that can take various amounts of time. The route graph facilitates the
connection of the points of interest that reflect the most common relocation patterns and sequences.
Obstacles are solid objects such as walls through which agents cannot pass through. Portals, allow
agents to move between the two-dimensional levels (using the stairs and elevators), around the same
level or out of the building.
The model utilized the following types of input data:
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.

The building floorplans (composition of levels in a building). Each floorplan includes
information on the walls, obstacles, points of interest and waypoint-based route graph.
Cinema movie sessions schedule.
The description of the agent role structure (cinema activities for visitors and staff).
The description of physical classes of agents represented in the simulation (which lays the
foundations for the estimation of the max speed and other movement attributes).
Data on amounts and characteristics of agents entering the building.

It is worth mentioning that datasets, matching the types of data 1-4, are static and thus configured
as separate files, whereas data on agents entering the building can be both static and dynamic. In the
latter case, the generation of agents on a particular level is dependent on the input from another model
(for instance, an agent leaving the district-scale modeled space through the portal that marks the
entrance to the cinema is transferred to the cinema-scale model). The example of the cinema building
floorplan is presented in figure 2. The following are the key objects that it is composed of: 1 – main
entrance, 2 – ticket offices, 3 – waiting area, 4 – bar, 6 – cloakroom, 5 – service entrance, 7 – toilets, 8
– seat places, 9 – staff rooms, 10 – second floor stairs (staff only), 11 – emergency exits, 12 – screen.

2371

Multiscale agent-based simulation in large city areas

11

11
7

7

V. Karbovskii, et al

8

8

12

10

2

2

5

8

8

6

9

3

4

1
Figure 2: Cinema plan

Agents operating within the environment of the building scale model are virtual “staff” and
“visitors” of the physical space that is being modeled: ‫ܣ‬௕ ൌ ൛‫ܣ‬ଵǡ௕ ǡ ‫ܣ‬ଶǡ௕ ǡ ǥ ‫ܣ‬௡ǡ௕ ൟ ‫ܣ ك‬. Each agent is
described through a combination of internal features (its current position, the nearest desired position
or point of interest, present speed, maximum speed, performed and scheduled activities) and
behavioral rules. The latter are linked to the functional roles (representing the generalized “purposes”
of agents’ presence and aims of the corresponding relocations within the modeled environment)
allocated to the agents’ population. Each agent is allocated strictly to a single role at a time. For the
cinema case a function-based composition of the population of agents has been developed with two
major classes (visitors and cinema staff members) defining the attributed mandatory primary points
that set the basic route (for a cinema visitor these points are the entrance, seat place and an entrance or
exit portals). Complementary to them, a number of subdivisions (based on gender, intention to visit
the bar, the necessity and purpose of visiting the toilets, type of ticket, etc.) has been elaborated to
demarcate the probabilistic alternatives for secondary activities (after the movie is over, an agent may
either visit the toilet and the cloakroom or proceed straight to the exit).
In order to bind the behavioral patterns of the simulated agents to the physical environment that
they are operating in, a set of navigational and path-planning mechanisms has been composed based
upon the adaptation of the solutions presented in [2]. The resulting multilayer navigation approach is
built from the activity scheduling, path planning and micro-level components. Since each agent has a
functional role and an appropriate schedule, his path is merged from the sequences of primary and
secondary activity points that are thus linked by the operational waypoints of the navigation graph.
Because two waypoints can communicate in a number of ways, in order to facilitate optimal
relocations, agents’ travel along the graph vertices is informed by the A* algorithm. Potential
collisions with stationary objects and other agents are solved with the use of the modified Social Force

2372

Multiscale agent-based simulation in large city areas

V. Karbovskii, et al

approach first presented by Helbing in [3]. All the interactions between the atomized agents and the
environmental objects are regulated by the dynamic interplay of the multiplicity of forces.
ܴ௕ – Building scale model rules:
ܹ௕ ‫ܴ ؿ‬௕ – In-building warning behavior rules - the rules whose execution is triggered as soon as
an agent receives the warning message urging it to leave the building immediately.
‫ܥ‬௕ ‫ܴ ؿ‬௕ – In-cinema general behavior rules. The execution of this set of rules flows from the very
moment an agent enters the cinema building. Each visiting agent is obliged to buy a ticket (or to
collect a pre-booked one) and proceed to the designated seat place. With a certain probability that is
imposed imperatively, an agent can use the cloakroom, go to the bar, waiting area or the toilet.
‫ܮ‬௕ ‫ܴ ؿ‬௕ – Leaving-the-cinema rules. The rule in-question is brought into execution with the agent
leaving the building. Further regulations of the agent as well as his coordinates are delegated to the
district model.

3.2 District Model
The district/city scale model is an elaborated version of the multi-agent model described in [12]. In
its current state, the model has not only received a significant degree of autonomy but has served as
the cornerstone for the integration of other models within the PULSE environment.
The inputs for model are:
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.

The city infrastructure data. Includes information on the walls, obstacles, buildings, points of
interest and road graph.
Cinema movie sessions schedule.
The description of the agent role structure (activity chains for social-economy classes).
The description of physical classes of agents represented in the simulation.
The initial distribution of agents in the modeled area.

‫ܣ‬ௗ ൌ ൛‫ܣ‬ଵǡௗ ǡ ‫ܣ‬ଶǡௗ ǡ ǥ ‫ܣ‬௡ǡௗ ൟ ‫ – ܣ ك‬District
scale model agents, ܴௗ – district scale model
rules:
‫ܦ‬௕ ‫ܴ ؿ‬ௗ – Daily behavior rules. Following
these rules agents visit only those points of
activity that correlate with their socioeconomic status (for instance, office buildings,
universities, specific shops, leisure facilities
etc.)
‫ܥ‬ௗ ‫ܴ ؿ‬ௗ – Entering-building rules. The
described type of rules serves as the basis for
the regulation of the behavior of agents
entering the cinema building. Having entered
the building, agents’ properties (such as
coordinates) migrate to the building-scale
model.

Home
Office

Cinema
Figure 3: Example of agent’s daily schedule

3.3 Software
To resolve the model integration problem, PULSE (recursive acronym, Pulse – urban life
simulation environment) was used. PULSE is our research and it is under development, however it has
already reached a level that allows us to use its features: (a) common space and (b) commonly
controlled agents.

2373

Multiscale agent-based simulation in large city areas

V. Karbovskii, et al

In order to satisfy high computational performance and urgent computing [15] requirements that
derive from the specificity of the utilized models and the potential users’ activity workload, the
CLAVIRE cloud platform [16] has been integrated as a computational systems background
infrastructure. The CLAVIRE includes a workflow management system module that allows for the
representation of the estimated PULSE scenarios in the form of a workflow project.
Dynamic visualization is obtained through the interaction with the project_Fusion framework. The
goal of project_Fusion is to provide a framework that facilitates rapid development of visualization. A
client-server architecture with asynchronous requests was used to facilitate the interaction between
PULSE and the project_Fusion solution.

4 Use case research
The aim of the present section is to illustrate the idea that a wide variety of research can be carried
out by using a set of integrated models, where specific scales and levels (as well as points of view) are
represented by the designated modules. The district scale model is used as common space, whereas the
building scale model serves as a secondary model and the commonly controlled agents technique is
applied to ensure the integration of the both models’ agents. Moreover, the latter provides the models
with a capacity to exchange data in real time. We do not pursue the objective of presenting the original
research results on the emergency evacuation dynamics in this paper, however as a use case, the
models were extended with a simple model of emergency evacuation.

Figure 4: Spatial integration by agents

According to the scenario, the daily population dynamics on Vasilyevsky Island, St. Petersburg
were simulated with the district scale model. As a form of social and recreational activity, some agents
attend the cinema. In the midst of the session agents receive the warning notification of an immediate
evacuation from the building. Agents (both staff and visitors) attempt to follow the warning and leave
the building.
‫ ܣ‬ൌ ‫ܣ‬௕  ‫ܣ  ׫‬ௗ , because we used only two models (building and district scale). ‫ܣ‬௖ ‫ – ܣ ك‬cinema
visitors agents. In the experiment it is true that each agent ‫ܣ ג‬௖ keeps his affiliation with the set ‫ܣ‬௖
even after leaving the cinema building.
We track the evolution of the agents’ states for the presented scenario, the results are shown in
figure 5.

2374

Multiscale agent-based simulation in large city areas

Cinema visitors abstract agents, Ac

Building scale agents, Ac ‫ك‬b

V. Karbovskii, et al

Movie starts

Emergency notification

District scale agents, Ac ‫ك‬d

t, s

Figure 5: Spatial integration by agents

In terms of Kendall's notation (arrival process/the service time distribution/the number of services)
[17] of queueing theory [18] the system can be classified as M/D/1 or similar. The arrival process,
presented on the plot, is not random. It is determined by district/city scale model and agents’ daily
activities and visually it is similar to the Poisson process. The service time is deterministic and the
number of services is one (the cinema). After the warning notification is disseminated, all agents
quickly leave the building. When an agent leaves the cinema, he loses the connection to the building
model, but connects with the city/district scale model.

5 Discussion & conclusion
In this paper we have presented a technique to address multiscale agent-based modeling and
simulation of processes. To solve the problem we proposed a method of model integration using
common virtual space and abstract common agents. The presented common space and agents help us
to achieve a clear interaction between different models and their entities, particularly agents. The
described techniques were implemented in the PULSE, by means of which the models have been
integrated. Two models were used: (a) the building scale model to simulate the cinema and (b) the
city/district scale model to simulate the daily activity at Vasilyevsky Island. The presented study is
confirmed by the use case.
In future we plan to make a few important extensions to PULSE and the related models. One of
our current works in-progress is the one focused on PULSE, its infrastructure and code base. We plan
to improve the agents’ navigation system and extend it by introduction of new levels and scales (in
addition to planning, pathfinding and collision avoidance). One of the most recent future works is the
integration of the district/city model (also known as the virtual society model) and traffic model (the
theoretical example from P2).
This paper is supported by Russian Scientific Foundation, grant #14-21-00137 "Supercomputer
simulation of critical phenomena in complex social systems". The research is done in Advanced
Computing Lab (ITMO University), which is opened in frame of 220 Decree of Russian Government,
contract #11.G34.31.0019

2375

Multiscale agent-based simulation in large city areas

V. Karbovskii, et al

References
[1]
[2]
[3]
[4]

[5]
[6]
[7]
[8]
[9]
[10]
[11]
[12]
[13]
[14]
[15]
[16]
[17]
[18]

2376

G. Morvan, “Multi-level agent-based modeling-a literature survey,” arXiv Prepr.
arXiv1205.0561, 2012.
J. Gil-Quijano, T. Louail, and G. Hutzler, “From biological to urban cells: lessons from three
multilevel agent-based models,” in Principles and Practice of Multi-Agent Systems, Springer,
2012, pp. 620–635.
N. Gilbert and K. Troitzsch, Simulation for the social scientist. McGraw-Hill International,
2005.
D.-A. Vo, A. Drogoul, and J.-D. Zucker, “An operational meta-model for handling multiple
scales in agent-based simulations,” in Computing and Communication Technologies,
Research, Innovation, and Vision for the Future (RIVF), 2012 IEEE RIVF International
Conference on, 2012, pp. 1–6.
T. Huraux, N. Sabouret, and Y. Haradji, “A Multi-Level Model for Multi-Agent Based
Simulation,” in Proc. of the 6th International Conference on Agents and Artificial Intelligence
(ICAART), Angers, France, 2014.
L. Jalali, S. Mehrotra, and N. Venkatasubramanian, “Multisimulations: towards next
generation integrated simulation environments,” in Formal Modeling: Actors, Open Systems,
Biological Systems, Springer, 2011, pp. 352–367.
B. Camus, C. Bourjot, and V. Chevrier, “Multi-level modeling as a society of interacting
models,” in Proceedings of the Agent-Directed Simulation Symposium, 2013, p. 3.
R. Suleiman, K. G. Troitzsch, N. Gilbert, and U. Mueller, “Social Science Microsimulation.
Tools for Modeling, Parameter Optimization, and Sensitivity Analysis.” Springer,
forthcoming, 1998.
T. Korhonen, S. Hostikka, S. Heliövaara, H. Ehtamo, and K. Matikainen, “Integration of an
agent based evacuation simulation and the state-of-the-art fire simulation,” in Proceedings of
the 7th Asia-Oceania symposium on fire science & technology, 2007, pp. 20–22.
A. Filippoupolitis, L. Hey, G. Loukas, E. Gelenbe, and S. Timotheou, “Emergency response
simulation using wireless sensor networks,” in Proceedings of the 1st international conference
on Ambient media and systems, 2008, p. 21.
S. Jain and C. R. McLean, “An Integrated Gaming and Simulation Architecture for Incident
Management Training,” Natl. Inst. Stand. Technol. Technol. Adm. US Dep. Commer., 2006.
V. A. Karbovskii, D. V Voloshin, K. A. Puzyreva, and A. S. Zagarskikh, “Personal Decision
Support Mobile Service for Extreme Situations,” Procedia Comput. Sci., vol. 29, pp. 1646–
1655, 2014.
D. V Voloshin, K. A. Puzyreva, and V. A. Karbovskii, “Agent-based Virtual Society Polygon
for Simulation and Evaluation in Massive Mobile Services,” IERI Procedia, vol. 10, pp. 231–
238, 2014.
D. Helbing and P. Molnar, “Social force model for pedestrian dynamics,” Phys. Rev. E, vol.
51, no. 5, p. 4282, 1995.
S. V. Kovalchuk, P. a. Smirnov, S. V. Maryin, T. N. Tchurov, and V. a. Karbovskiy,
“Deadline-driven Resource Management within Urgent Computing Cyberinfrastructure,”
Procedia Comput. Sci., vol. 18, pp. 2203–2212, Jan. 2013.
K. V. Knyazkov, S. V. Kovalchuk, T. N. Tchurov, S. V. Maryin, and A. V. Boukhanovsky,
“CLAVIRE: e-Science infrastructure for data-driven computing,” J. Comput. Sci., vol. 3, no.
6, pp. 504–510, Nov. 2012.
D. G. Kendall, “Stochastic processes occurring in the theory of queues and their analysis by
the method of the imbedded Markov chain,” Ann. Math. Stat., pp. 338–354, 1953.
T. L. Saaty, Elements of queueing theory, vol. 423. McGraw-Hill New York, 1961.

