Available online at www.sciencedirect.com

Procedia Computer Science 18 (2013) 835 – 844

International Conference on Computational Science, ICCS 2013

Performance Analysis of Two Quantum Reaction Dynamics Codes:
Time-Dependent and Time-Independent Strategies
Pablo Gamalloa, Miguel González, and Fermín Huarte-Larrañagab
Departament de Química Física and IQTCUB, Universitat de Barcelona, Martí i Franqués 1, Barcelona 08028, Spain

Abstract
The computer simulation of reaction dynamics has nowadays reached a remarkable degree of accuracy. Triatomic elementary
reactions are rigorously studied with great detail on a straightforward basis using a considerable variety of Quantum Dynamics
computational tools available to the scientific community. In our contribution we compare the performance of two quantum
scattering codes in the computation of reaction cross sections of a triatomic benchmark reaction such as the gas phase reaction Ne
+ H2+ → NeH++ H. The computational codes are selected as representative of time-dependent (Real Wave Packet [1]) and timeindependent (ABC [2]) methodologies. The main conclusion to be drawn from our study is that both strategies are, to a great
extent, not competing but rather complementary. While time-dependent calculations advantages with respect to the energy range
that can be covered in a single simulation, time-independent approaches offer much more detailed information from each single
energy calculation. Further details such as the calculation of reactivity at very low collision energies or the computational effort
related to account for the Coriolis couplings are analyzed in this paper.

Keywords: Reaction Dynamics, Time-Dependent Dynamics, Time-Independent Dynamics, Quantum Scattering, Wave packets

1. Introduction
Chemical reaction dynamics is the microscopic basis of chemical reaction kinetics and quantum mechanics
determines their evolution at the fundamental level. According to this, the development of theoretical methods as
well as the implementation of the corresponding computational tools is a key element for obtaining detailed
dynamical information (i.e., cross sections, product state distributions, differential cross sections, rate constants,
characterization of the microscopic mechanism, …) that enable the understanding of elementary chemical reactions
from the microscopic point of view [3].
Reaction Dynamics has contributed significantly to the progress of physical chemistry and chemical physics
during last decades, especially after 1980s, thanks to the development of many new experimental and theoretical
techniques that have provided important support for atmospheric, astrophysical as well as combustion chemistry [4].
At the same time, advances in computer technology and quantum dynamics methods have allowed new possibilities

a
b

gamallo@ub.edu
fermin.huarte@ub.edu

1877-0509 © 2013 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. Open access under CC BY-NC-ND license.
Selection and peer review under responsibility of the organizers of the 2013 International Conference on Computational Science
doi:10.1016/j.procs.2013.05.248

836

Pablo Gamallo et al. / Procedia Computer Science 18 (2013) 835 – 844

for theoretical studies. The arrival of competitive ab initio quantum chemistry packages became an important tool
for obtaining accurate energies as well as structural information. Thus, accurate ab initio based global potential
energy surfaces (PESs) may now be constructed for elementary reactions and used in reaction dynamics studies. The
Schrödinger equation characterizing the rearrangement evolution of the atomic nuclei over PES can be solved using
time-dependent (TD) or time-independent (TI) methods. In either case, solving the Schrödinger equation is a
formidable task, and many interesting chemical systems challenge the present capabilities of exact quantum
dynamics techniques.
In this context, our contribution presents the comparison of two computational codes based on TD and TI
quantum scattering methods in the study of a gas-phase atom + diatom reaction. In particular, we have studied the
collision dynamics of the benchmark reaction,
Ne + H2+ (v0, j0) → NeH+ + H
for a set of selected rovibrational initial states of the diatomic H2+ (v0=0-2, j0=1) molecule on the recent accurate
LZHH PES [5]. The dynamics of this reaction has been investigated in the past by some of us [6, 7, 8] either using
the LZHH or an older PES [9]. The reactivity of this system exhibits a strong oscillatory behavior as a function of
the collision energy (Ecol) independently of the PES used.
Our contribution focuses on the computational aspects of both quantum dynamics studies, analyzing the
computer time consumed to obtain initial-state resolved reaction probabilities and cross sections. In order to
compare TD and TI strategies we have chosen two representative programs. In particular, we employ a parallel
version of the time-dependent real wave packet (TDRWP) method of Gray and Balint-Kurti [1] and the timeindependent ABC quantum scattering code developed by Skouteris, Castillo, and Manolopoulos [2]. In Section 2 we
briefly present both approaches, paying more attention to practical implementation aspects rather than formal
derivations. The results obtained in the quantum dynamics studies are commented in Section 3 together with the
associated computer resources employed. Our main conclusions are listed in Section 4.

2. Methodology
Both quantum methods solve exactly the same equations although some differences appear depending on the set
of coordinates that is chosen to solve the problem. The body fixed (BF) Hamiltonian for a triatomic system is widely
developed in Ref. [10] in Jacobi coordinates and in Ref. [11] in hyperspherical coordinates. It is composed by the
radial and the angular kinetic energy term, the potential energy surface term, the centrifugal energy term (associated
with the value of the total angular momentum J) and the Coriolis term (associated with the value of K, the projection
of J). Since the Coriolis term is considered accurately (i.e., using coupled channel (CC) equations), the dynamics of
the system couples the different K values.
2.1. Time-Independent ABC method
The ABC time-independent quantum scattering programa [2] integrates the Schrödinger equation for an atomdiatom elementary reaction using the CC method [11]. The program makes use of a TI method to integrate the
nuclear Schrödinger equation on a single potential energy surface (PES), within the framework of the BornOppenheimer approach. The nuclear wave function, ψ, is expanded in terms of the hyperspherical arrangement
a

Available at http://www.ccp6.ac.uk

Pablo Gamallo et al. / Procedia Computer Science 18 (2013) 835 – 844

837

JM
channel α basis functions Bv j K with J being the total angular momentum quantum number, M and Kα the space-

and BF projections of J, respectively, and vα, jα the asymptotic vibrational and rotational quantum numbers. The
quantum reactive scattering boundary conditions are applied exactly, without the use of an imaginary absorbing
potential [12], and taking also into account the coupling between the initial and final orbital and rotational angular
momenta implemented rigorously for each value of J.
To integrate the set of coupled differential equations the propagation along the hyperradius is divided into various
sectors with a constant-ρ reference potential. In each sector, local bound state functions are obtained by
diagonalizing the (fixed ρ) Hamiltonian. The CC equations are integrated starting from small values of ρ (by
propagating within each sector and chaining adjacent sectors propagations) to the asymptotes where the solutions
are matched to the product states. Given that the total angular momentum is a constant of motion and the triatomic
parity (σ) is conserved, the optimal choice to run a complete quantum scattering calculation using ABC is to launch
independent runs of ABC program for specified values of (J,σ). In the case of a diatomic homonuclear molecule,
calculations can also be run independently for even (p=+1) and odd (p=-1) rotational states, optimizing the
computational effort in the rotational basis. Each (J,σ,p) set therefore requires a different calculation.
The execution of a single ABC calculation consists of the following tasks:
A. Determination of the basis set. In each sector, the one-dimensional Schrödinger equation associated with
the reference potential in each arrangement channel is solved employing a finite difference method,
obtaining vibrational functions. These potentials are usually chosen along fixed hyperangle (Θα) cuts of the
full potential for a ρ value chosen at the midpoint of the sector. However, to obtain an efficient
convergence of the solution it is important pay attention to overcompleteness issues.
B. Construction of overlap and coupling matrices between adjacent sectors. The most time consuming
integrals involve interchannel (α≠α’) matrix elements, this is usually the most time-consuming part of the
calculation.
C. The coupled equation set is solved using the constant reference potential log derivative method [13].
D. Matching from hyperspherical (ρα,χα,θα) to Jacobi coordinates (Rα,rα,θα) being Rα the distance from the
atom to the molecule center of mass, rα the internuclear molecular distance and θα the angle between both
distances. A substantial saving in computer time is gained by this swicth as the propagation moves away
from the strong interaction region.
E. Asymptotic analysis. Once the Jacobi coordinate solutions have been integrated to the asymptotic region
(Rα is large enough to consider the potential constant), the scattering matrix can be evaluated by applying
the usual scattering boundary conditions [14].
The resulting output files contain parity-adapted scattering matrix elements of the form SJ'v' j'K 'vjK ( E ) where α
and α’ are arrangement labels, (v’,j’) and (v,j) are rovibrational quantum numbers of products and reactants,
respectively. Finally K and K′ are helicity (intermolecular axis angular momentum projection) quantum numbers. In
order to compute observables the parity-adapted S-matrix needs to be converted into the standard helicityrepresentation. Several observable properties can be constructed out of the S-matrix, such as state-to-state
probabilities (square modulus of the S-matrix element). However, more useful information can be obtained by
considering multiple values of the total angular momentum and calculating properties such as integral or differential
cross section for a given range of energies. This means that ABC calculations need to be run for all J values between
0 and a given Jmax. The fact that these (J,σ), -independent calculations can be distributed over a high throughputcomputing infrastructure is a key factor for the study of relevant reactive processes.

838

Pablo Gamallo et al. / Procedia Computer Science 18 (2013) 835 – 844

2.2. Time-Dependent Real Wave Packet (TDRWP) Method
In the TD quantum dynamics applications an initial wave packet (WP) is set up in a given set of coordinates,
propagated in time by solving the TD Schrödinger equation and analyzed to extract relevant dynamical quantities.
The WP approach differs from the TI scattering one in the fact that a single propagation generally does not yield
information about all possible transitions, but rather about certain specific ones. Such information is, however,
obtained over a range of energies. The method used in this work is the time-dependent real wave packet (TDRWP)
method [1] that only propagates the real part of the WP thus halving the computational effort with respect to the
propagation of a complex one. This WP is then propagated by means of a Chebyshev recursion of an arccosine
functional mapping of the Hamiltonian and performed a flux analysis [15] along the analysis line. We would like to
highlight at this point a version CC-TDRWP that allows for the calculation of highly detailed information such as
state-to-state differential cross section (DIFFREALWAVE) [16]. Both approaches share common features with the
TI work of Chen and Guo [17] and of Kroes and Neuhauser, [18] and it is essentially the same as the Chebyshev real
WP approach of Lin and Guo [19]. Since a finite grid is used to represent the scattering coordinates the use of
absorbing potentials is necessary in order to prevent the WP reflection back into the interaction region.
From a general point of view, the TDRWP methodology allows for several procedures, depending on what kind
of information is desired to obtain. Thus, the WP can be propagated in either reactant or product Jacobi coordinates
and consequently analyzed by means of mainly two general methods: flux [15] or asymptotic [20] analysis methods,
based in obtaining the components of either the transition or the scattering matrix, respectively. When the analysis is
done in the reactant channel and through the asymptotic method, the initial wave packet is placed in the entrance
channel and the analysis line is placed between the initial wave packet and the absorption region of reactants. With
this setup, the inelastic event is considered and analyzed yielding all relevant inelastic state-to-state non-reactive
probabilities. It is known that this approach is quite unstable numerically, especially at low energies. However, the
advantage of this set up is that the part of the wave packet which moves from the interaction region into the product
channel and is absorbed there is assumed to be reactive, reducing considerable the grid size and giving only
information about the total reaction probability since no information about the products and products rovibrational
states is obtained. If the flux based method is used the analysis line can be placed in R or r, providing the total nonreactive or the total reaction probability, respectively.
If product Jacobi coordinates are used along with the asymptotic method, the WP propagation allows obtaining
directly the reaction probability, because the analysis line is located in the product channel. However, to perform the
analysis in one of the product channels the WP has to be set initially in reactant coordinates and next it has to be reexpressed using the coordinates of the corresponding product channel. The whole propagation is then carried out in
this product coordinates. Employing product Jacobi coordinates makes the problem technically more challenging
and numerically more difficult. However, it allows computing state-to-state reaction probabilities. If the flux method
is applied, the analysis surface it must be placed in the reactant channel, giving thus total non-reactive probability
whereas with the surface placed in the product channel the total reaction probability is obtained.
Given the long-range nature of the interactions in the Ne + H2+ reactive system, large representation grids are
required in the quantum dynamics simulations. This fact makes it adequate to use Jacobi reactant coordinates in the
propagation and the flux method in the analysis. Therefore, it will not be possible to extract state-to-state reaction
probabilities from our TDRWP calculations and these will rather come from the TI quantum scattering calculations.
The execution of a single TDRWP calculation consists of the following tasks:

A. Set up an initial wave packet  v0 j0 ( x 0 , t = 0 ) in the appropriate Jacobi coordinates with the reactants in

839

Pablo Gamallo et al. / Procedia Computer Science 18 (2013) 835 – 844

some particular internal rovibrational state (v0,j0) and a given compatible pair of values for J and K0.
B. Propagation of the real WP in time through the recursive Chebyshev iteration (i.e., using a shifted and
scaled Hamiltonian operator).
C. The flux operator ( Fˆ ) is evaluated along a “slice” of the total grid at every iteration time once the
propagated WP  v0 j0 ( x, t ) is expanded in TI wave functions  v0 j0 ( x, E ) by means of a Fourier transform.

D. Repeat point B and C until the final propagation time is reached.
E. The total reaction probability for a given initial state is calculated by means of Eq. (1).

Pv0 j0 ( E ) =  v0 j0 ( x, E ) Fˆ  v0 j0 ( x, E )

(1)

Due to the Coriolis coupling, the initial WP with total angular momentum BF-projection K0 will spread among
all possible K values (below a given Kmax parameter) and these WPs will be coupled together [21]. For each J>0 as
many as 2J+1 coupled WPs must be propagated (this is reduced to J or J+1 if the parity is taken into account). The
version of TDRWP code that we have employed make use of MPI directives to distribute the computational effort
among J+1 (or Kmax+1) processors [22].
3. Results
3.1. Computational details
The LZHH PES [5] is an analytical many-body expansion based on the Aguado-Paniagua [23] functional form.
It is derived from ab initio data computed using the complete active space self-consistent field (CASSCF) method
and the internally contracted multireference configuration interaction (icMRCI) method with inclusion of the
Davidson correction. The main feature of this PES is the presence of a potential energy well at the collinear
geometry (0.54 eV deep with respect to the reactant asymptote). The well becomes shallower and a barrier rises
when the Ne-H-H angle is decreased.
The parameters used for the time-independent ABC calculations are listed in Table 1. Individual reaction
probabilities are converged better than 99% using these parameters, and the error is expected to be significantly
smaller for more averaged quantities such as integral cross sections. As indicated in the previous section, a separate
ABC calculation was carried out for each value of the total angular momentum J and the triatomic parity. Only
calculations for para-hydrogen as initial reactant have been carried out.
Although partial waves up to J = 55 have been included in the calculation, values of J greater than 40 have nearly
no contribution to the reaction cross sections in the energy range of interest for the present study. Great care has
been taken in the convergence of the maximum helicity quantum number. Test calculations have been run for a
specific J=30 value with Kmax=30, 25, 20, 15, 10, 0 and no significant differences were observed for Kmax≥20. Using
the parameters shown in Table 1, the maximum number of channel functions was 2123. The lowest total energy
included in the calculation was 0.670 eV, which is smaller than the reaction threshold for any initial rovibrational
state of the H2 molecule. Concerning the grid of energies at which calculations have been done, a particularly dense
energy grid (0.4 meV) has been taken in the threshold region (0.678-0.716 eV) while the spacing has been increased
to 2.6 meV for total energy values greater than 0.710 eV.

840

Pablo Gamallo et al. / Procedia Computer Science 18 (2013) 835 – 844

Table 1. Parameters employed in the ABC production runs. See Ref. [2] for details.
Parameter

value

Jmax

55

Kmax

Min(J,20)

jmax

20

Emax/ eV

2.3

ρmax/ a.u.

15.0

nsec

150

Concerning the TDRWP calculations, the parameters used in the propagations are listed in Table 2, considering H2+
in the v0=2, j0=1 rovibrational state and employing a symmetry adapted representation [24]. We have selected here
all J values up to 7, and then J=10, 15, 20, 30 for both K0=0 and 1 and Ecol from 0.004 to 2.0 eV. Reaction
probabilities were converged within 1 % by propagating the initial wave packet during 80000 steps. The CCTDRWP calculations are very expensive and we approximate other partial-wave probabilities via a J-shifting
technique [25,26,27,28] that does not depend on the existence of a reaction barrier. In this approximation,
probability thresholds are shifted with J and K0, according to an analytically fitted expression, Eq. (2). If
probabilities

P J1 and P J2 are known and J ∈ [J1, J2], we then estimate PJ via linear interpolation (Eq. (3)).
SJpj0 K 0 = a Jpj0 K 0 J + b Jpj0 K 0 J 2 + c Jpj0 K 0 K 20

(

PjJp0 K 0 ( E col )  PjJ01Kp 0 E col  SJpj0 K 0  SJj01pK 0 

) JJ JJ + P (E
J2p
j0 K 0

2

2

1

col

(2)

+ SJj02Kp 0  SJpj0 K 0 

) JJ JJ

1

2

(3)

1

Table 2. Parameters employed in the TDRWP production run. See Ref. [8] for details.
Parameter

value

Parameter

value

Scattering coordinate (R) range

0.1-20

Potential cutoff

0.44

Number of grid points in R

167

R and r absorption start at

17.0 14.0

Internal coordinate (r) range

0.5-17.0

R and r absorption strength

0.01

Number of grid points in r

153

Center and width of initial wave packet

13.5 0.15

Number of associated Legendre polynomials

100

Translational energy center of the initial WP / eV

0.70

Propagation time / fs

920 (80 000 iterations)

3.2. Reaction Cross Sections
The reaction cross section of the Ne + H2+ reaction has been calculated for the first three vibrational states of the
para-H2+(j0=1) molecule, v0=0, 1, 2 using the CC-TDRWP and ABC codes. The results obtained by means of both
methodologies are plotted in Figure 1 as a function of the collision energy. The agreement between both methods is
overall excellent, as it should be expected for two numerically converged calculations based on exact
methodologies. It is however worthwhile pointing out that some discrepancies can be noticed in the region close to
the reaction threshold energy. These differences are more visible in the v0=2, j0=1 cross section and they can be

841

Pablo Gamallo et al. / Procedia Computer Science 18 (2013) 835 – 844

explained by the difficulty of TD techniques to explore vey low collision energies.
On the other hand, the ABC calculation has produced reaction cross sections for a shorter collision energy range,
approximately 0.25eV. In spite of these minor differences, the main conclusion to be drawn from Figure 1 is that
both methodologies fully coincide if they are appropriately converged. The choice of one technique over the other
will be determined by whether one is interested in a broad range of energies or rather a specific value, in the low
collision energy regime, for instance. As pointed out in the introductory section, this paper focuses on the
computational performance. Thus, for the sake of briefness, we only highlight, as most relevant physical features,
the strong vibrational enhancement in the reaction and the marked resonance structure in the v0=2, j0=1 reaction
cross section. Both effects have been studied in detail previously [8]. It is also worthwhile noticing that the behavior
of the reaction cross section clearly changes with the reactants vibrational level. Cross sections present a threshold
collision energy for v0 < 2 that practically disappears for higher vibrational states. This effect has been interpreted in
terms of the late barrier character of the PES. The cross sections with threshold present a similar behavior,
increasing until they reach a quasi plateau region. In the case of v0=2 cross section, this behavior is masqueraded by
the more sophisticated pattern detected at low energy values.

Figure 1: State-selected CC-TDRWP (light dashed line) and TI-ABC (strong solid line) reaction cross sections

σ v0 j0 ( E col ) for

+

Ne + H2 (v0=0-2, j0=1). Red, blue and black lines stand for initial vibrational levels v0 = 0, 1 and 2, respectively.

3.3. Computational performance of CC-TDRWP and ABC
The comparable accuracy of TD and TI quantum scattering approaches, which was just proven for the title
system, has been acknowledged for some time in the reaction dynamics community [29]. Let us thus focus our
attention rather on the computational effort associated to the calculations. In order to produce the data shown in
Figure 1 using the TD approach, a specific simulation needed to be carried out for each of the three initial reactant
states (v0=0,1,2 and j0=1). Given that the rotational j0=1 state has three compatible values of the quantum number
associated to its projection on the quantization axis (helicity quantum number, K) the CC-TDRWP calculations are
actually three for each state (v0,j0=1,K0=0,±1). On the other hand, being the reactant molecule H2+ homonuclear one
can safely assume that the same reaction probability will be obtained for a K0=+1 and a K0=-1 calculation.

842

Pablo Gamallo et al. / Procedia Computer Science 18 (2013) 835 – 844

Therefore, in order to produce the results shown in Figure 1 using the CC-TDRWP method we have run 6 wave
packet propagations for each value of the total angular momentum explicitly considered. Considering that we have
estimated a value of Jmax=55 to obtain numerically converged results and that only the K0=0 value is compatible
with J=0, the computational campaign to generate Figure 1 would imply a total of 333 CC-TDRWP calculations.
The cost of each individual calculation critically depends on Kmax since the Coriolis term in the Hamiltonian couples
different K values as mentioned previously in the methodology section. Moreover, as it has been explained in the
previous section, only some selected J values have been calculated and a J-interpolation scheme has been applied.
The time-independent ABC code yields the full state-to-state scattering matrix and therefore one single
calculation is enough to produce reaction probabilities for all three rovibrational states of the H2+ molecule. Two
calculations need to be performed for each value of the total angular momentum for both possible values of the
triatomic parity. Thus, to obtain the three excitations functions shown in Figure 1 the TI ABC needs to be executed
111 times (only the even parity is compatible with J=0). In the case of the TI calculation we have indeed carried out
explicitly the calculations for all values of J between 0 and 55. The crude comparison between the number of TD
and TI calculations is however misleading. The formal resolution of the reactive scattering problem using a TI
strategy produces the full scattering matrix but restricted to a given value of the total energy. This would mean that a
simple minded application of a TI method would require of 111 calculation for each point in the curves. The ABC
code was cleverly designed to avoid such an inefficient strategy and makes use of the fact that steps A and B (see
Section 2) are independent of the total energy (below a given value Emax) and only steps C to D need to be repeated.
The computational effort of each ABC calculation thus depends on the Kmax value, already pointed out in the CCTDRWP case, and the density of the energy grid.
As it has been pointed out previously, probably the most critical parameter to be converged, from the
computational cost point of view is the maximum value of the total angular momentum projection, Kmax. In order to
illustrate this, Figure 2 shows the CPU time consumed in getting the TI and TD cross sections for a value of the total
angular momentum J=30. Both calculations are run on the same infrastructure, a cluster of two [dual] six core Intel
Xeon X5650 at 2.66 GHz nodes connected by Infiniband QDR 4X. Although the total CPU consumed time is
accounted for in Figure 2, the CC-TDRWP code benefits from MPI parallelization and the Kmax=30 calculation was
distributed among 31 cores. Obviously, the comparison may not be done straightforwardly, so some considerations
have been taken into account. In order to make the comparison in the same conditions, and since the number of
discrete energy values of TD cross sections plotted in Figure 1 is 500, this is concretely the total number of
individual TI calculations performed. As mentioned above the CC-TDRWP propagation needs to be repeated for
each value of K0=0, 1 and v0= 0, 1, 2 (the TD curve in Figure 2 corresponds to the v0=2, j0=1, K0=1 calculation),
while the TI-ABC requires the calculation of the even and odd parities (the TI curve in Figure 2 corresponds to the
even calculation). Moreover, another sink of time is the number of rotational basis set used (Legendre polynomials).
In particular, CC-TDRWP execution time has been scaled in order to use the same number of basis set as the ABC
method. According to Table 2, TD propagations have used 50 Legendre polynomials whereas only 20 functions
were used in the TI code. Some checks have evidenced that the time consumed is reduced in a half so this factor has
been applied to the CC-TDRWP CPU time consumed. The last consideration is that we have estimated the time
needed to perform all the propagations at each J value until 30 since in the TD procedure only propagations at
selected J values were performed, obtaining the rest of probabilities by means of the J-shifting technique described
in the computational details section. Taken all these considerations into account, a similar CPU time is consumed for
each of the methods compared. In the case of CC-TDRWP method a total of 6730 CPU hours are consumed for a
single K0=1 projection using the MPI parallel code whereas a total of 6890 CPU hours are needed in the case of
time-independent ABC code.

Pablo Gamallo et al. / Procedia Computer Science 18 (2013) 835 – 844

843

Figure 2: CPU time used in the computation of a single partial wave calculation as a function of the total angular momentum
projection, Kmax. The TI-ABC CPU time has been obtained by estimating a single calculation with 500 energy values.

The CPU time curves plotted in Figure 2 illustrate how the computational effort in the calculation critically depends
on the maximum helicity quantum number, the Kmax parameter. This increase in both TD and TI calculations is
mainly due to the evaluation of the Coriolis term in the accurate Hamiltonian. The Coriolis term couples wave
packets in the TD approach (basis functions in the TI one) associated to a quantum number K with those with
quantum number K1. The increase is especially dramatic in the case of the TI-ABC program when the CPU time is
doubled with respect to the TDRWP for Kmax20. On the other hand, this scenario reverses its tendency for Kmax ≤
20 where the ABC method manages more efficiently this number of coupled K values than the CC-TDRWP method.
4. Conclusions
The Reaction Dynamics community possesses two highly competitive tools for the accurate quantum simulation
of elementary reactions. To our judgment, it cannot be straightforwardly stated whether time-dependent strategies
offer more advantages rather than time-independent ones. These techniques are rather complementary in our view,
offering a continuous range of energies in the case of TD (depending on the initial WP) and the full scattering matrix
in the case of TI. While it can be claimed that the WP approach encounters some difficulties propagating initial
wave packets with very low collision energies, it might also be argued that it leads to an easier interpretation of the
microscopic mechanism of the reaction. That is to say, it leads to a clearer (intuitive) picture of what happens when
a reactive collision occurs. Numerically, it cannot be firmly stated whether TD approaches is computationally more
efficient than TI, or vice versa. In both cases, the critical factor determining the cost of an accurate simulation is the
maximum value of the helicity quantum number, Kmax. This increase is particularly dramatic in the case of reaction
with large potential energy wells where the insertion mechanism is clearly dominant and all helicity quantum
numbers need to be considered, i.e. Kmax=J [30, 31]. In the case of the Ne + H2+ → NeH++ H reaction the ABC code
scaled worse in the evaluation of the Coriolis coupling for values of K higher than 20, whereas the method was
faster than TDRWP for lower values. The conclusions of our study are, for the time being, restricted to triatomic
reactions given that no TI quantum scattering code for higher dimensionality reactions has been made available for
its general straightforward use.

844

Pablo Gamallo et al. / Procedia Computer Science 18 (2013) 835 – 844

Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the Spanish Ministry of Science and Innovation (MICINN projects CTQ201127857-C02-01 and CTQ2009-12215/BQU). Thanks are also given to the “Generalitat de Catalunya” (Autonomous
Government of Catalonia, ref. 2009SGR 17 and Xarxa de Referència en Química Teòrica i Computacional de
Catalunya (XRQTC)).

References
[1] S. K. Gray, G. G. Balint-Kurti, J. Chem. Phys., 108, 950 (1998).
[2] D. Skouteris, J. F. Castillo, D. E. Manolopoulos Comp. Phys. Comm., 133, 128 (2000).
[3] A. Laganà, A. Riganelli, Eds., “Reaction and Molecular Dynamics, Lecture Notes in Chemistry, V.75, Springer, Berlin, Germany (2000).
[4] R. D. Levine, “Molecular Reaction Dynamics”, Cambridge University Press, UK, 2005.
[5] S. J. Lv, P. –Y. Zhang, K. L. Han, G. –Z. He, J. Chem. Phys., 132, 014303 (2010).
[6] F. Huarte-Larrañaga, X. Giménez, J. M. Lucas, A. Aguilar, J.-M. Launay, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 1, 1125 (1999).
[7] F. Huarte-Larrañaga, X. Giménez, J. M. Lucas, A. Aguilar, J.-M. Launay, J. Phys. Chem. A 104, 10227 (2000).
[8] P. Gamallo, P. Defazio, M. González, J. Phys. Chem. A 115, 11525 (2011).
[9] P. Pendergast, J. M. Heck, E. F. Hayes, R. Jaquet, J. Chem. Phys., 98, 4543 (1993).
[10] C. Petrongolo, J. Chem. Phys., 89, 1297 (1988).
[11] G. C. Schatz, Chem. Phys. Lett., 150, 92 (1988).
[12] F. Huarte-Larrañaga, X. Giménez, A. Aguilar, M. Baer, Chem. Phys. Lett., 291, 346 (1998).
[13] D. E. Manolopoulos, J. Chem. Phys., 85, 6425 (1986).
[14] R. T. Pack, G. A. Parker, J. Chem. Phys., 87, 3888 (1987).
[15] J. H. M. Meijer, E. M. Goldfield, S. K. Gray, G. G. Balint-Kurti, Chem. Phys. Lett., 293, 270 (1998).
[16]M. Hankel, S.C. Smith, S. K. Gray, G. G. Balint-Kurti, Comp. Phys. Comm., 179, 569 (2008)
[17] R. Chen, H. Guo, J. Chem. Phys., 105, 3569 (1996).
[18] G.-J- Kroes, D. Neuhauser, J. Chem. Phys., 105,8690 (1996).
[19] S. Y. Lin, H. Guo, Phys. Rev. A 74, 022703 (2006).
[20] G. G. Balint Kurti, R. N. Dixon, C. C. Marston, J. Chem. Soc., Faraday Trans. 86, 1741 (1990).
[21] P. Defazio, P. Petrongolo, J. Chem. Phys. 127, 204311 (2007).
[22] C. Petrongolo, P. Defazio, unpublished work.
[23] A. Aguado, M. Paniagua, J. Chem. Phys., 96, 1265 (1992).
[24] P. Defazio, B. Bussery-Honvault, P. Honvault, C. Petrongolo, J. Chem. Phys., 135, 114308 (2011).
[25] J. M. Bowman, J. Phys. Chem. 95, 4960 (1991).
[26] S. K. Gray, G. G. Balint Kurti, G. C. Schatz, J. J. Lin, X. Liu, S. Harich, X. Jang, J. Chem. Phys., 113, 7330 (2000).
[27] I. Miquel, M. González, R. Sayós, G. G. Balint Kurti, S. K. Gray, E. M. Goldfield, J. Chem. Phys., 118, 3111 (2003).
[28] P. Gamallo, P. Defazio, M. González, C. Petrongolo, J. Chem. Phys., 129, 244307 (2008).
[29] S. C. Althorpe, D. C. Clary, Ann. Rev. Chem., 54, 493 (2003).
[30] N. Balucani, G. Capozza, L. Cartechini, A. Bergeat, R. Bobbenkamp, P. Casavecchia, F.J. Aoiz, L. Bañares, P. Honvault, B. BusseryHonvault, J.M. Launay, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 6, 4957 (2004).
[31] T. González-Lezana, Int. Revs. in Phys. Chem., 26, 29 (2007).

