Procedia Computer Science
Volume 80, 2016, Pages 1989–1999
ICCS 2016. The International Conference on Computational
Science

Modeling Knowledge Transfer and the
Transdisciplinary Effect on Project-based Learning
Activities
Nikita Kogtikov, Alexey Dukhanov, and Klavdiya Bochenina
ITMO University, Saint Petersburg, Russia
kogtikovn@mail.ru, dukhanov@niuitmo.ru, k.bochenina@gmail.com

Abstract
Each scientific project or publication can be attributed to several fields of study with different degrees.
Call interdisciplinary distribution the set of the degrees. If we have fixed number of fields of study, the
set can be written in vector form. Each component of the vector corresponds to one of the fields of
study*. Call the vector the interdisciplinary vector. If we consider a scientist to be a set of his or her
publications we can get the vector for a scientist as a weighted sum of a vector of his or her
publications. This paper is devoted to an approach to the evaluation of the interdisciplinary
distribution of professional or research objects (RO), and the transdisciplinary effects of their changes.
RO and professionals can be evaluated on the basis of keywords in relevant scientific papers, reports,
surveys, proposals, CVs, and so on. The transdisciplinary effect is apparent when the
interdisciplinarity distribution has been changed. We propose formulas to evaluate this
transdisciplinary effect. This approach was implemented using participants in group projects at the
fourth Young Scientists Conference (YSC) † on High-Performance Computing and Computer
Simulation. The accuracy of the interdisciplinary vector of several participants was examined by the
survey about their involvement in the team projects. This approach can be used to evaluate the
compliance of a scientific team with the transdisciplinary research project (problem), as well as to
assess the students' skills in transdisciplinary environments.

Keywords: Interdisciplinary
transdisciplinary effect.

*
†

distribution,

optimization

problem,

transfer

of

knowledge,

teamwork,

Fields of study of the Microsoft Academic Search http://academic.research.microsoft.com/
The 4th Young Scientists Conference, 2015, Athens, Greece http://ysc.escience.ifmo.ru/

Selection and peer-review under responsibility of the Scientiﬁc Programme Committee of ICCS 2016
c The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V.

doi:10.1016/j.procs.2016.05.519

1989

Modeling Knowledge Transfer...

Nikita Kogtikov, Alexey Dukhanov and Klavdiya Bochenina

1 Introduction
Transdisciplinarity means that, if two or more fields of study are combined in one research
problem, they can find a result or a solution that cannot be obtained solely by part of these fields of
study. In this paper, we aim to evaluate how student/scientist knowledge in the basic fields of study is
changed by participation in an transdisciplinary project (the transdisciplinary effect). In addition, we
assess the compliance of a group of scientists with regard to an transdisciplinary project.
At present, high-performance computing resources are becoming increasingly available. The
number of computational platforms and tools that allow scientists and other professionals to solve
interdisciplinary problem simply, for example, CLAVIRE [1], is growing. Hence, the number of
projects that are devoted to interdisciplinary problems in real life (mainly poorly formalized problems
such as multiscale systems simulation [2]) becomes immense. With regards to such problems, the
basic sciences such as chemistry or computer science overlap, and new areas of science are formed;
for example, bioinformatics, bio-nano research, social problems of urban societies and so on.
Contemporary researchers use methods and involve professionals from different fields of study.
Therefore, during an encounter with a specific scientific problem, we should evaluate the fields of
study it includes before we start to involve scientists and professionals. In addition, it is important to
have techniques to evaluate student skills that are required for learning/scientific activities in inter- and
transdisciplinary environments. In this paper, we answer the following questions:
Q1. How can the transdisciplinary effect of scientific projects, scientific publications or scientists
be evaluated?
Q2. How can a scientist's transfer of knowledge after participation in a project be evaluated?
Q3. How can the degree conformity of a scientific team with regard to a project be evaluated?
Q4. How can the significance of participation in a project be determined?
After answering the questions mentioned above, we verified our approach in a case study: the
involvement of young scientists and professionals in short-term interdisciplinary projects.
We begin our discussion with literature review and a formulation of the problem (Section 2). Then
we explain what transdisciplinarity means, why it is so important, why we should pay close attention
to transdisciplinarity in education, and finally, we formulate our goal. After that, we explain our model
(Section 3), which can evaluate transdisciplinary effects as a difference between two interdisciplinary
vectors (before and after the transdisciplinary event) of the same person. We also offer a method to
show how a team of scientists and their skills correspond to the topic of the scientific project in this
section. When we get the model, we test it with the participants of the 4th Young Scientists
Conference. In Section 4, we represent the results of the experiment and also compare them with jury
marks. In Section 5, we discuss the results and offer reasons for them. Finally, we conclude (Section
6), noting the disadvantages of the model that could be solved in future works.

2 Background and Related Works
The concept of transdisciplinarity, in itself, is considered from different perspectives. In [3],
authors define transdisciplinarity as the coordination of four hierarchical levels (empirical, pragmatic,
normative, and value) that must be maintained in scientific research. According to [12], the
distinguishing feature of transdisciplinarity in comparison with multi- and interdisciplinarity is
crossing the borders of individual subject fields in addressing complex real-world problems. A shining
example of a domain when a transdisciplinary approach naturally arises is socio-ecological systems
research [5]. These systems can be studied by the means of, for example, chaos and complexity,
system dynamics, sustainability, and decision support theories; however, the holistic research outcome
lays at the intersection of all these subject fields. To perform transdisciplinary research, a specialist
should have a special kind of competencies which are related to his or her ability to combine theories,

1990

Modeling Knowledge Transfer...

Nikita Kogtikov, Alexey Dukhanov and Klavdiya Bochenina

methods and tools from different areas on a high level of abstraction during collaboration with other
researchers. Having such competencies is one of key factors of the successful solution of multidomain scientific problems. This is why issues of transdisciplinary higher education are of increasing
importance (see, e.g. [6][7]).
Scientific conferences and schools that consider transdisciplinary questions are one of the ways to
create a transdisciplinary environment. An example of this can be found in [8]. Young scientists,
beginning experts from different fields of studies, should meet in one place to participate in different
scientific events such as excursions, scientific discussions and so on. They must communicate with
one another to share information. The process of sharing information is described in [9]. The main
goal of paper was to evaluate people's knowledge using various indicators once the type of
cooperation in which they were engaged was identified. If the work can only be done by only one
person, he/she has more information (knowledge) than the rest. This means that there is no synergy.
However, if each person knows something, that another does not know, this leads to useful
cooperation. In this case, the assessment of the usefulness of such cooperation was calculated. The
mathematical model of cooperation is also described in [10]. This work shows that the optimal size of
a group of people in order to achieve the best synergetic effect must not be too small or too big, but
medium. The number of participants in a medium-sized group depends on many of conditions. Also
[10] indicates the quantitative assessment of productivity of collaboration. In our paper, knowledge
transfer is described. The same problem was shown in [11]. It proposes a knowledge transfer cycle
that does not vary for any of the subjects. It repeats the main knowledge processes that can be found
during the creation of knowledge in modern society. The application of this cycle during the
educational process gives students the opportunity to acquire research skills and the motivation for
life-long learning.
Although transdisciplinarity is quite well-described theoretically, there are only several
publications that attempt to quantitatively evaluate transdisciplinarity or transdisciplinary effects in
scientific publications or projects. Even organizations that identify scientific work to one of fields of
study have trouble with it sometimes [12]. Also [13] gives us the direction that may be used to identify
transdisciplinarity in scientific research. Here we can find several components that are features of
transdisciplinarity, and they can be used to evaluate this, but there are no formulas or ways to do it.
The concept of an interdisciplinary vector is based on evaluating the transfer of knowledge. A detailed
description of this object and the way to get it can be found in [14]. Our task is to offer a method that
is able to quantitatively evaluate the transfer of knowledge after transdisciplinary scientific events.

3 Modeling
If we want to evaluate the progress of a scientist after he or she has written a new article or has
completed participation in a conference or a scientific project, we can do this using only previous
experience and the article or finished project that shows the changes. We can read all the publications
written by the author and learn about his or her project, but this requires a lot of time; thus, we should
evaluate the progress automatically. The main idea in an article or a project can be obtained using a
list of keywords and references to other works. This method is described in [14].
We have a set of keywords for a project. For each keyword e, we can determine an
interdisciplinary vector ܸ௘ that contains several components (in our case, there are 15). Each
component of ܸ௘ corresponds to a field of study and represents a percentage of the correspondence of
keyword in the field of study multiplied by one hundred. The sum of the components of each
interdisciplinary vector is equal to 1. Therefore, for a project that has k keywords, we can determine
the interdisciplinary vector using (1).

1991

Modeling Knowledge Transfer...

Nikita Kogtikov, Alexey Dukhanov and Klavdiya Bochenina
௞

ܲ ൌ  ෍ ܸ௘ ‫݌‬௘

(1)

௘ୀଵ

Where ܸ௘ is the vector for a keyword that is determined for the project and variables ‫݌‬௘ are the
relative importance of keywords in the project; thus, σ௞௘ୀଵ ‫݌‬௘ ൌ ͳ . In this paper, we consider that
ଵ
‫݌݁׊‬௘ ൌ Ǥ Similarly, we can determine the same vector for a scientific paper or for a scientist. For a
௞
paper we use the same formula (1), but we can consider P as the vector for a paper and ܸ௘ as the
vectors of keywords in the paper as described above. If a scientist is young, we will use only the mean
value of the vectors of his or her publications but, if he or she is not, we will then use the weighted
sum of the vectors. Vectors for keywords are determined automatically using a special program that
counts the number of articles that use a particular word, and monitors the fields of study described by
the articles. Therefore, once we have the vectors for the project (scientist, paper) P and for each
participant in the project ‫ܤ‬௝ , we can determine a function, which describes how successfully the
participants can execute the project (2)
݂ሺ‫ݑ‬ଵ ǡ ‫ݑ‬ଶ ǡ ǥ ǡ ‫ݑ‬௡ ሻ ൌ  ȁȁܲ െ ‫ݑ‬ଵ ‫ܤ כ‬ଵ െ ‫ݑ‬ଶ ‫ܤ כ‬ଶ െ ‫ ڮ‬െ ‫ݑ‬௡ ‫ܤ כ‬௡ ȁȁଶ

(2)

where ‫ݑ‬ଵ ǡ ‫ݑ‬ଶ ǡ ǥ ǡ ‫ݑ‬௡ are the degrees of participation, and n is a number of participants. The norm ȁȁ‫ݒ‬ȁȁଶ
is the standard designation of the Euclidean norm of vector v. Thus, the smaller value of the function
means that the team is better suited to solving the problem that corresponds to the project. Finally, we
can solve an optimization problem for the project and the participants in order to determine the
optimal load sharing among the participants. This problem is described in (3)–(5).
݂ሺ‫ݑ‬ଵ ǡ ‫ݑ‬ଶ ǡ ǥ ǡ ‫ݑ‬௡ ሻ ՜ ݉݅݊

(3)

‫ݑ‬ଵ ൅  ‫ݑ‬ଶ ൅  ǥ ൅  ‫ݑ‬௡ ൌ ͳ

(4)

‫ݑ‬ଵ ൒ Ͳǡ ‫ݑ‬ଶ ൒ Ͳǡ ǥ ǡ ‫ݑ‬௡ ൒ Ͳ

(5)

The optimization problem is included in the class of convex programming, and it can be solved by
using the Lagrange Multiplier Method to take limitation into account (4). After using this method, we
have a new goal function and use a derivation of it to find extremum points. If the global minimum
does not belong to the area described in (5), we reduce the dimensionality of space by equating one of
the variables ‫ ݑ‬to zero.
In fact, the activity of a scientist in the project can also be described by an interdisciplinary vector
(designated it as ‫ܥ‬௝ for participant j); thus, we can calculate a change in the vector of the
interdisciplinarity of a scientist. Note that, if the scientist has extensive experience in science, he or
she will not be subject to changing interests (the interdisciplinary vector in our case). If the scientist is
young, then he or she is still determining his or her science career; and accordingly, each of his or her
publications is an attempt to determine this direction. Therefore, the publications are equal to each
other. Thus, young scientists are more susceptible to change. We can now calculate the
interdisciplinary vector of scientists after participation in the project, using (6)
‫ܣ‬௝ ൌ

1992

݉ ‫ܤ כ‬௝ ൅ ‫ܥ כ ݏ‬௝
݉൅‫ݏ‬

(6)

Modeling Knowledge Transfer...

Nikita Kogtikov, Alexey Dukhanov and Klavdiya Bochenina

Furthermore, if we use vectors ‫ܣ‬௝ ǡ ‫ܤ‬௝ ǡ ‫ܥ‬௝ without a subscript we will imply by default that the
vector corresponds with the scientists. ‫ ܣ‬ൌ ሺܽଵ ǡ ܽଶ ǡ ǥ ǡ ܽிௌ ሻǡ ‫ ܤ‬ൌ ሺܾଵ ǡ ܾଶ ǡ ǥ ǡ ܾிௌ ሻ . Vector B is the
interdisciplinary vector of a participant at a conference before participation, and vector A is the vector
after the event. FS is the number of fields of study (Agriculture, Arts, Biology, Chemistry, Computer
Science, Economics, Engineering, Environmental Sciences, Geosciences, Material Sciences,
Mathematics, Medicine, Multidisciplinarity, Physics, and Social Sciences). In (6), m is a number of
publications by scientist j and s is importance of a project. In our case s is equal to 0.5.
Let FS be a number of fields of study; in our case, there are 15. We can visualize our vectors as a
radar chart. Let ܵொ be a square of the chart of vector Q. Thus, the difference between vectors A and B
is equal to ‫ܤ ת ܣ̳ܤ ׫ ܣ‬. This means that the difference is the square of the part of the charts that
belongs to only one of the sets: only to A or only to B. This change in the of chart’s radar is the
transdisciplinary effect of participation in a conference.
Obviously, if we solve the optimization problem described by (7) – (9), and use (6) as a limitation
of the optimization problem, we will get the maximum value by changing the vectors of the participant
at of the conference.
ܵሺ‫ܣ‬ǡ ‫ܤ‬ǡ ‫ܵܨ‬ሻ ՜ ݉ܽ‫ݔ‬
෍ ܽ௜ ൌ ͳǡ

෍ ܾ௜ ൌ ͳ

‫ܽ݅׊‬௜ ൒ Ͳǡ ‫ܾ݅׊‬௜ ൒ Ͳ

(7)
(8)
(9)

where S is a square of area that contains only one of areas of radar charts. Also, vectors A and B must
be connected by (6); this is an additional limitation of the optimization problem in (7) – (9).

4 Experimental Study
4.1 Goals
In this experiment, we intend to evaluate how the model matches a real situation. Thus, the model
must give marks that are similar to those given by a jury for the result to be recognized as being
effective. Furthermore, we want to learn how to divide the work among participants, and to evaluate
changes of interdisciplinary vectors of the participants to determine whether the conference will be
useful for them.

4.2 Procedure
Each participant at the 4th International Young Scientists Conference and Summer School in
Computer Modeling and Simulation (YSC-2015) was surveyed. There were six teams, three of them
consist of three participants and the other three teams consist of five participants. The total number of
participants of the experiment is 24 persons. They answered several questions and, specifically, they
evaluated their skills and knowledge regarding different methods of computer modeling. They were
asked to choose a number ‫ݐ‬ௗ from one to five that corresponded to each method ݀ in computer
science. Each method listed on the questionnaire had as multidisciplinary vector ܸௗ . We then
ଵ ௤
calculated ܼ ൌ σௗୀଵ ‫ݐ‬ௗ ܸௗ , where q is the total number of questions on the questionnaire. If a
௤
scientist had publications, we calculated vector ‫ܤ‬෨௖ for each of his or her publications c using (1).
ଵ
෨
ሺሺσ௠
Following this, we calculated ‫ ܤ‬ൌ
௖ୀଵ ‫ܤ‬௖ ሻ ൅ ܼሻ for each participant, where m is a total
௠ାଵ

number of his or her publications.

1993

Modeling Knowledge Transfer...

Nikita Kogtikov, Alexey Dukhanov and Klavdiya Bochenina

All participants had been divided into several teams with three to five members on each. Teams
chose a project that also has an interdisciplinary vector that can be obtained using keywords associated
with the project. We also used (1) to obtain this vector for each project.
We then solved the optimization problem that was described above in (3) – (5) with a goal function
(2) describing the distance between the combination of the vectors of the members of a team and the
vector of the team’s project. We then obtained the optimal distance and the optimal way for the work
of the project to be allocated among members. Optimal distance means how effectively the problem
that was described in the project can be solved by the team that undertook the task. The higher value
of the goal function (2) means that a team coped with its project less effectively.
We obtained two marks for all the teams. One of them, X, is the mark that was given by the jury,
and the second, Y, is the mark that is equal to the value of the goal function (2). ܺ ൌ ሺ‫ݔ‬ଵ ǡ ‫ݔ‬ଶ ǡ ǥ ǡ ‫ ଺ݔ‬ሻ
and ܻ ൌ ሺ‫ݕ‬ଵ ǡ ‫ݕ‬ଶ ǡ ǥ ǡ ‫ ଺ݕ‬ሻ for the six teams in our scenario. However, as the teams did not perform
optimally, we asked them about the contribution of each member (variables ‫ݑ‬ଵ ǡ ‫ݑ‬ଶ ǡ ǥ ǡ ‫ݑ‬௡ ). We then
calculated the value of function (2), and achieved results that described the real work done on the
project for each team.
We then asked all the teams to describe the role of each member in the project (we needed three
keywords that described the work of a member). After using (1) and (6), we obtained vector A for
each participant at the conference, and this described the interdisciplinary vector after participation in
the conference’s projects. We then calculated how much the interdisciplinary vector had changed
using the difference between two radar charts - before the conference and after it. Finally, solving the
optimization problem in (7) – (9), we obtained the maximum possible change to the interdisciplinary
vector for each participant.
For example, using survey results and a list of publications (if a participant has published) we can
get an interdisciplinary vector for each of them. Take one team that has three participants, their vectors
are ‫ܤ‬ଵ ൌ ሺͳǤͷͻǡ ͳǤ͵ͻǡ ǥ ǡ ͸Ǥͺͷሻ,‫ܤ‬ଶ ൌ ሺͳǤ͹ǡ ͳǤ14ǡ ǥ ǡ ͷǤʹ͵ሻ, ‫ܤ‬ଷ ൌ ሺͶǤͷͶǡ ʹǤ͹͹ǡ ǥ ǡ͵ǤͶ͵ሻ, where each
component of the vectors corresponds to Agriculture Sciences, Arts and Humanities, Biology,
Chemistry, Computer Science, Economics and Business, Engineering, Environmental Sciences,
Geosciences, Material Science, Mathematics, Medicine, Multidisciplinarity, Physics, Social Science
respectively. These vectors were obtained by summing of results of the survey and interdisciplinary
vectors of publications of these authors. The questionnaire contains several areas of sciences
predominantly computer science and mathematics (such as parallel programming, Python, C# and so
on). Each of these areas correspond to interdisciplinary vector. The participants measured their skills
in each of these areas on the scale from one to five, where one is equal to "do not know" and five is
equal to "excellent know".
Also using keywords of the project of this team we obtain an interdisciplinary vector for the
projectܲ ൌ ሺʹǤ͵͸ǡ ʹǤͺ͵ǡ ǥ ǡ ͶǤͺͷሻǤ The vector P was obtained by using keywords of the project of the
team. The jury evaluated this project considering corresponding of topic and research problem,
presentation of the project. Each of participants of the team reported his part of project. Also, jury
evaluated team collaboration. The groups received interdisciplinary problems and offered their
solutions. After we solve optimization problem (3) – (5) and find ‫ݑ‬ଵ ൌ Ͳǡ ‫ݑ‬ଶ ൌ ͲǤͳͶǡ ‫ݑ‬ଷ ൌ ͲǤͺ͸and
the value of the target function (3) is 18.61. When we solved optimization problem, we implied
thereby that the team worked optimally. But actually, it was not the case. We asked participants of the
team about their role in work process and get the following values of variables ‫ݑ‬ଵ ൌ ͲǤͶǡ ‫ݑ‬ଶ ൌ
ͲǤ͵ͷǡ ‫ݑ‬ଷ ൌ ͲǤʹͷ, so the value of goal function (3) in this case is equal to 20.23. And if we change the
condition of goal function and find the maximum value of it with the same restrictions we get that the
value is 22.15. Now if we consider 22.15 as 0% effectiveness and 18.61 as 100%, effectiveness we get
that 20.23 correspond to 54.24% effectiveness. We also asked participants to describe their role in the
team with several keywords and obtained the following vectors ‫ܥ‬ଵ ൌ ሺʹǤͶͷǡ ͲǤͻʹǡ ǥ ǡ ͸Ǥͳͻሻ , ‫ܥ‬ଶ ൌ
ሺͳǤ͹͹ǡ ͲǤ͸ ǥ ǡ ʹǤͶ͹ሻ, ‫ܥ‬ଷ ൌ ሺʹǤͺͺǡ ͳǤͲʹǡ ǥ ǡ ͸Ǥͳ͹ሻ. The vectors‫ܥ‬ଵ ǡ ‫ܥ‬ଶ ǡ ‫ܥ‬ଷ were obtained by asking one of
the participants of the group about the role of each person in this group. They described the roles with

1994

Modeling Knowledge Transfer...

Nikita Kogtikov, Alexey Dukhanov and Klavdiya Bochenina

using several keywords, and for each of keywords an interdisciplinary vector was obtained. After we
used (6) to calculate interdisciplinary vector of the participants after the conference, the first
participant has 0 publications, the second one has 20, the third one has 10. We got the following
vectors, for all participants the value of s in (6) was equal to 0.5: ‫ܣ‬ଵ ൌ ሺͳǤͺͺǡ ͳǤʹ͵ǡ ǥ ǡ ͸Ǥ͸͵ሻǡ ‫ܣ‬ଶ ൌ
ሺͳǤ͹ǡ ͳǤͳ͵ǡ ǥ ǡ ͷǤͳ͹ሻǡ ‫ܣ‬ଷ ൌ ሺͶǤͶ͹ǡ ʹǤ͸ͻǡ ǥ ǡ ͵ǤͷሻǤ Finally, we can visualize interdisciplinary vectors
before and after the conference for each participant with radar charts and find the total square of parts
that belong only one of the radar charts. This is a metric to estimate knowledge transfer. For the first
participant it is 75.71, for the second one it is 1.61, and for the third it is 2.75.

4.3 Results
The values of the goal function and the marks given by the jury can be seen in Table 1. There are
two versions of the values of the function in (2). Optimal values (the fourth column) were obtained
from the optimization problem in (3) – (5). Real values (the third column) were obtained after asking
the members of the teams about their roles in the teams. We obtained variables ‫ݑ‬௜ , and then put it into
the function in (2). Column five (non-optimal work) contains the solutions to the optimization problem
in (7) – (9). The zero value of this function means that a team complied with the project perfectly
(value of OW). The higher the value of this function, the lower the team’s compliance with the project.
The jury’s marks were evaluated in the same way.
Team
Team A
Team B
Team C
Team D
Team E
Team F

Jury’s
Mark
0.20
0.70
0.50
0,00
0.75
0.75

Real Work
(RW)
11.75
37.84
20.23
14.15
18.35
35.66

Optimal work
(OW)
8.59
36.31
18.61
12.53
16.50
28.64

Non-optimal work
(NOW)
22.23
46.31
22.15
18.04
23.52
41.25

Effectiveness,
%
76.80
88.30
54.24
70.60
73.65
44.33

Table 1: Results for teams at the conference

The effectiveness of the work of the team (Table 1, the last column) was calculated using (10).
൬ͳ െ

ܴܹ െ ܱܹ
൰ ‫ͲͲͳ כ‬Ψ
ܱܹܰ െ ܱܹ

(10)

The parameters of (10) are shown in Table 1.
Now we wanted to ensure that the results obtained were relevant to the reality; in other words, the
participants should also feel the effect of having improved their skills following the conference. Thus,
as the list of changing fields in the study was obtained for the model from each participant, the list of
their feelings regarding the respective growth in the disciplines should be essentially the same. We
questioned some of the participants after the conference, and they answered a simple question: "In
which fields of study do you feel your skills have improved after attending the conference?" A list of
possible responses was provided. All the participants made choices that corresponded to the short-list
of fields of study. For participant labeled j, we can obtain components from the corresponding vector
‫ܤ‬௝ and the numbers that correspond to the fields of study that were been chosen. After we sum all the
components of the vector, we get a number ܴ௝ . After we calculate another number ܶ௝ that is equal to
choosing the same number of fields of study of the vector with the biggest components, we can
evaluate the conformity of our approach using the next formula (11):
ܴ௝
‫݊݋ܥ‬௝ ൌ 
(11)
ܶ௝

1995

Modeling Knowledge Transfer...

Nikita Kogtikov, Alexey Dukhanov and Klavdiya Bochenina

Using (11), we can see that, if a field of study was not chosen, this means that we would not get a
high result; accordingly, the main disciplines must have been chosen by the participants. However, as
fields that do not have a marked influence do not make a significant contribution to the overall result,
it is particularly unfortunate if they were not chosen. We get the following results (Table 2):
Participant
3.a (young)
2.c (experienced)
6.c (young)
4.e (young)
4.d (young)
1.a (experienced)
1.e (experienced)
5.c (experienced)

Conformity
0.176
0.649
0.805
0.806
0.808
0.846
0.882
0.955

Table 2: Evaluation of the efficiency of the method

Young participants, such as master’s students, are designated in the table as being young; others,
who already have a master’s degree are denoted as experienced. Thus, young participants evaluated
the changes in their vectors as having less value of conformity than did experienced participants. This
can be related to inexperience. They cannot evaluate their skills yet. All of them had the same value of
conformity, which is around 0.8. However, people with more experience are better at evaluating their
skills.

5 Discussion
We can see that the jury identified three types of teams: leaders (teams D and A), middling (team
C), and outsiders (teams B, E and F). The theoretical marks are similar, and we can also determinate
three groups of teams: leaders (teams D and A), middling (teams C and E) and outsiders (teams B and
F). Thus, there is a slight little difference between the jury’s marks and the value of the function in (2)
for team E. There could be several reasons for this. However, this theory predicted that this team
should and could work better than it did. It is possible that the members did not try hard enough, or
were excitable when they presented their results.
The radar chart “Before” (marked in blue) was obtained using the vectors of participants derived
from their questionnaire answers, and their publications before participation in the conference. The
radar chart “After” (marked in red) was obtained using information about the role of a participant in a
team as characterized by three keywords (6). The radar chart “Maximum” (marked in black) is the
solution of the optimization problem in (7) – (9).
With regard to participants at the conference, please see the black line in the radar charts in Figures
1 and 2.This line represents the potential of a participant and his or her experience. If a person had
little experience, the conference could change his or her view of the world, and increase some areas of
knowledge significantly. However, if he or she were very experienced, at one-and-half-weeks long,
the conference is not sufficient to increase his or her area of knowledge. The blue line on the radar
charts shows the real changes by showing how a participant’s project differed relative to the
knowledge of the participant.
Figure 1 shows the change in the vectors of two experienced scientists. For scientist 1.a, the
change is equal to 5.86, and the maximum change is equal to 74.21. This means that the real change is
7.9% of the maximum available. For scientist 1.b, this value is equal to 6.5%, but the real change is
1.61, and the maximum is 24.67. The main reason of this is the higher value of variable m (number of
papers) leads to the lower value of the changeable part of interdisciplinary vectors (therefore the

1996

Modeling Knowledge Transfer...

Nikita Kogtikov, Alexey Dukhanov and Klavdiya Bochenina

vector can not be significantly changed). Formula (6) was developed under the assumption that more
experienced participants have more established scientific interests, but young participants can change
their research direction after memorable event.

Figure 1: Experienced participants with a low degree of change in the interdisciplinary vector.

Figure 2: Young scientists (master’s and new Ph.D. students) with high interdisciplinary vector change.

1997

Modeling Knowledge Transfer...

Participant
1.a
1.b
2.a
2.b
2.c
2.d

Nikita Kogtikov, Alexey Dukhanov and Klavdiya Bochenina

Real change
5.86
1.61
38.49
37.00
75.71
43.03

Maximum change
74.21
24.67
100.91
239.68
258.57
248.92

Relation %
7.90
6.52
38.14
15.44
29.28
17.29

Table 3: Transdisciplinary effects for participants at the conference

With regard to the participant represented by Figure 2.a, we can see that the vector has a different
shape. Instead of one explicit direction in science, this participant has two. The reason is that the
participant change jobs less than a year ago. In one period of life he was engaged in one direction of
research, but, after changing jobs he had another. Table 2 shows that his value of maximum change is
nearer to that of experienced participants, but his relation and real change are nearer to those of
inexperienced people. This means that he is experienced in his first area of research (Geosciences), but
is not particularly experienced in the second area (Computer Science).
Table 2 shows that all the young participants at the conference had the same result of conformity,
with one exception. However, we can assume that the one who had only 0,176 was not interested in
the question and chose the fields of study almost randomly, but the others had not determined their
scientific interests and had a little scientific experience. Thus, the results of the conformity are the
same. On the other hand, experienced participants had predominantly high efficiency, which means
that they can evaluate their skills more accurately. This method can also be used to determine the real
level of scientists, using 0.8 as a level for master’s students.
We considered the only short-term project, assuming that there is no influence of an event’s
duration on coefficients of the model. In the future, we plan to include time dependencies to the
model (e.g. how long time ago an article was written and how long the scientific event was). This
approach will allow us to obtain more accurate estimates of changes in interdisciplinary vectors.

6 Conclusion
In this paper, we offered an approach to the mathematical modeling of an interdisciplinary
distribution for scientific papers, scientists, science projects based on keywords, and questionnaire
data. In addition, we proposed a technique to evaluate the transdisciplinary effect in the knowledge
transfer process that takes place during a project devoted to a transdisciplinary problem.
We applied the approach and the technique to evaluate how the participants of the YSC 2015
developed their knowledge during short-term transdisciplinary projects. We found that the experienced
participants had minor changes, but the inexperienced participants, who had not published scientific
papers, had significant changes in their research areas. Hence, we confirmed the benefits of the
students’ engagement in transdisciplinary projects.
In addition, the model presented can be generalized to other educational processes. In particular,
we can use our approach to evaluate the effectiveness of transdisciplinary learning activities in some
educational programs. Furthermore, we have provided a method that allows for the evaluation of the
quality of teamwork. If we have a project that has a defined problem, we can form a group of people
(project team) that will have a better chance of solving the problem. Moreover, we can evaluate the
significance of each team member in order to perform the project more efficiently.
The model produces interesting results, but it has disadvantages such as ignoring the psychological
atmosphere among members of a group or their unwillingness to work hard. This problem will be a
topic for future work.

1998

Modeling Knowledge Transfer...

Nikita Kogtikov, Alexey Dukhanov and Klavdiya Bochenina

7 Acknowledgements
This paper is financially supported by Government of Russian Federation, project “Big data
management for computationally intensive applications” (project #14613). This work was partly
performed by the Master student (Kogtikov Nikita) of the Master’s Programme in Computational
Science [15].

References
[1]

[2]

[3]
[4]
[5]

[6]
[7]
[8]

[9]
[10]
[11]

[12]
[13]
[14]

[15]

K. V. Knyazkov, S. V. Kovalchuk, T. N. Tchurov, S. V. Maryin, and A. V. Boukhanovsky,
“CLAVIRE: e-Science infrastructure for data-driven computing,” J. Comput. Sci., vol. 3, no.
6, pp. 504–510, Nov. 2012.
V. Karbovskii, D. Voloshin, A. Karsakov, A. Bezgodov, and A. Zagarskikh, “Multiscale
Agent-based Simulation in Large City Areas: Emergency Evacuation use Case,” Procedia
Comput. Sci., vol. 51, pp. 2367–2376, 2015.
M. A. Max-Neef, “Foundations of transdisciplinarity,” Ecol. Econ., vol. 53, no. 1, pp. 5–16,
Apr. 2005.
B. Nicolescu, "Towards transdisciplinary education," , 2005.
G. N. R. Cundill, C.Fabricius, N. Marti "Foghorns to the future: using knowledge and
transdisciplinarity to navigate complex systems," Ecology and Society,vol. 10,no. 2, pp. 8,
2005
E. Hyun,"Transdisciplinary higher education curriculum: a complicated cultural artifact,"
Research in Higher Education Journal, vol. 11,pp. 1, 2011.
G.Domik, G. Fischer,"Transdisciplinary collaboration and lifelong learning: fostering and
supporting new learning opportunities,"Springer Berlin Heidelberg, pp. 129-143, 2011.
M. A. Sheard, L. Zdrazilova-Dubska,"Knowledge Transfer at the RECAMO Summer School
of 2013", Klinicka onkologie: casopis Ceske a Slovenske onkologicke spolecnosti, vol. 27,
no. 1, pp. 60-63, 2013.
M. Yoshimura and K. Yoshikawa, “Synergy Effects of Sharing Knowledge During
Cooperative Product Design,” Concurr. Eng., vol. 6, no. 1, pp. 7–14, 1998.
G. WEI, L. YU, S. WANG, and K. K. LAI, “Study on Incentive Factors of Team Cooperation
based on Synergy Effect,” Syst. Eng. - Theory Pract., vol. 27, no. 1, pp. 1–9, Jan. 2007.
K. Bochenina, I. Boukhanovskaya, A. Bilyatdinova, A. Dukhanov, and A. Lutsenko, “Using a
cyclic model of knowledge transfer for the development of transdisciplinary learning
environments,” in Proceedings of the 44th IEEE Frontiers in Education Conference, 2014,
pp. 1836–1843.
W. Colon, P. Chitnis, J. P. Collins, J. Hicks, T. Chan, and J. S. Tornow, “Chemical biology at
the National Science Foundation,” Nat. Chem. Biol., no. 4, pp. 511–514, 2008.
F.Wickson, A. L. Carew, A. W. Russell,"Transdisciplinary research: characteristics,
quandaries and quality," Futures, vol. 38, no. 9, pp. 1046 - 1059, 2006.
N. Kogtikov, A. Dukhanov, and T. Trofimenko, “Evaluation based on databases of scientific
publications measuring the transdisciplinarity of scientific problems,” in 9th IEEE
International Conference on Application of Information and Communication Technologies,
AICT 2015 - Conference Proceedings, 2015, pp. 496–500.
V.V. Krzhizhanovskaya, A.V. Dukhanov, A. Bilyatdinova, A.V. Boukhanovsky,
P.M.A. Sloot, Russian-Dutch double-degree Master’s programme in computational science in
the age of global education, Journal of Computational Science, Volume 10, September 2015,
Pages 288-298, http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jocs.2015.05.001

1999

