Available online at www.sciencedirect.com

Procedia Computer Science 18 (2013) 2008 – 2017

International Conference on Computational Science, ICCS 2013

An Energy-Aware Airborne Dynamic Data-Driven Application
System for Persistent Sampling and Surveillance
Eric W. Frewa,∗, Brian Argrowa , Adam Houstonb , Chris Weissc , Jack Elstona
a University

of Colorado, 429 UCB, Boulder, CO, 80309, U.S.A.
of Nebraska, 214 Bessey Hall, Lincoln, NE 68588-0340, U.S.A
c Texas Tech University, Box 41053, Lubbock, TX 79409, U.S.A

b University

Abstract
This paper describes an energy-aware, airborne, dynamic data-driven application systems for persistent sensing in complex
atmospheric conditions. The work combines i.) new onboard and remote real-time, wind sensing capabilities; ii.) online
models for planning based on Gaussian processes for onboard data and dynamic atmospheric models that assimilate Doppler
radar data; and iii.) a hierarchical guidance and control framework with algorithms that can adapt to environmental, sensing,
and computational resources. The novel aspects of this work include real-time synthesis of multiple Doppler radar data into
wind ﬁeld measurements; creation of atmospheric models for online planning that can be run inside guidance loops; guidance
algorithms based on stochastic dynamic programming and ordered upwind methods that can adapt planning horizons, cost
function approximations, and mesh representations of the environment; and throttling algorithms that manage the adaptation
of the models and guidance algorithms in response to computational resources.
Keywords: dynamic data-driven application system; unmanned aircraft system; atmospheric models; planning and control

1. Introduction
Unmanned aircraft technology has advanced to the point where platforms ﬂy sensing missions far from remote operators. Likewise, atmospheric phenomena can be simulated in near real-time with increasing levels of
ﬁdelity. Combining autonomous airborne sensors with environmental models enables the collection of data essential for examining the fundamental behavior of the atmosphere. Future airborne sampling and surveillance
missions will require performance that exceeds that derived from traditional internal-combustion and gas-turbine
engines. In addition to low radar cross section, low acoustic and thermal emissions from unconventional UAS
designs employing electric propulsion and power systems will enable stealthiness and ease of operation. Two
major challenges for small and medium UAS operating at low to medium altitudes are range and endurance, and
operations in adverse weather. While traditional energy management meant monitoring hydrocarbon fuel levels,
future advanced energy management systems will employ in situ and networked remote sensing integrated with
atmospheric modeling to implement strategies to harvest energy from the environment; energy to supplement that
stored onboard prior to launch. Integrated sensing and modeling coupled with autonomous low-level control will
∗ Corresponding

author. Tel.: +1-303-735-1285 ; fax: +1-303-492-7881.
E-mail address: eric.frew@colorado.edu.

1877-0509 © 2013 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. Open access under CC BY-NC-ND license.
Selection and peer review under responsibility of the organizers of the 2013 International Conference on Computational Science
doi:10.1016/j.procs.2013.05.370

Eric W. Frew et al. / Procedia Computer Science 18 (2013) 2008 – 2017

2009

enable trajectory planning to revolutionize in-weather operations by detecting and avoiding mesoscale weather
features that degrade performance or pose unacceptable risk to the aircraft.
The main challenge for future airborne sampling and surveillance missions is operation with tight integration of
physical and computational resources over wireless communication networks, in complex atmospheric conditions.
The physical resources considered here include sensor platforms, particularly mobile Doppler radar and unmanned
aircraft, the complex conditions in which they operate, and targets or region of interest. Autonomous operation requires distributed computational effort connected by layered wireless communication. Onboard decision-making
and coordination algorithms can be enhanced by atmospheric models that assimilate input from physics-based
models and wind ﬁelds derived from multiple sources. These models are generally too complex to be run onboard
the aircraft, so they will need to be executed in ground vehicles in the ﬁeld or on high-performance computing in
the lab, and connected over broadband or other wireless links back to the ﬁeld. Finally, the wind ﬁeld environment
drives strong interaction between the computational and physical systems, both as a challenge to autonomous path
planning algorithms and as a novel energy source that can be exploited to improve system range and endurance.
This paper describes an energy-aware airborne dynamic, data-driven application system (EA-DDDAS) that
can perform persistent sampling and surveillance in complex atmospheric conditions. The main challenges that
are addressed by the EA-DDDAS include tighter integration of sensor-based processing into online prediction
tools; use of these tools inside planning loops that exploit available wind energy; and improved estimation of
onboard energy states for higher degrees of autonomous learning. The EA-DDDAS presented here embodies the
dynamic data-driven application system (DDDAS) concept and spans four key technology frontiers:
• Decision-making over different application modeling layers that include local aircraft energy and wind
state dynamic models; spatio-temporal wind ﬁeld models learned from onboard measurements; dual-Doppler
synthesis of regional wind ﬁelds; and on-line models for atmospheric planning that assimilate (remote) dualDoppler and (in situ) UAS measurements.
• Mathematical algorithms that provide high degree of autonomy with control loops closed over multiple
spatial and temporal scales. Sampling-based optimization strategies will be combined with ordered upwind
methods to create a planning framework that can adaptively balance between solution quality and computational resources devoted to the problem.
• New measurement systems and methods whereby multiple disparate information sources (in situ data
from unmanned aircraft and remote dual-Doppler radar measurements) are assimilated by online models,
mobile sensors are targeted to relevant measurements in real time, and data ﬂow and processing rates are
throttled in response to computation resource availability.
• Net-centric middleware systems software that connects multiple subsystems with computation and control
resources dispersed over wireless communication networks, using multiple communication channels such
as IEEE 802.11 (WiFI) or cellular broadband, while transmitting heterogeneous data sets that include highpriority commands as well as large-volume sensor measurements.
The overall EA-DDDAS concept for persistent sensing is shown in Figure 1. Mission objectives determine
targets or regions of interest for persistent sensing. Online simulation models are fed by in situ measurements from
unmanned aircraft and real-time data from Doppler radar that when available are fused to provide wind ﬁeld data
aloft (Section 2). An autonomy architecture (Section 4) switches between algorithms that use the wind ﬁeld data
and simpliﬁed models (Section 3) to plan paths that guide the aircraft into the region of interest while maximizing
endurance through extraction of wind energy. All of these components are combined into a hierarchical framework
that can select between default or resource-driven algorithms, that can direct the sensor platforms, and that can
throttle processing rates in response to changes in measurement and computational resource availability.
2. Wind Sensing and Energy Estimation
This section describes new wind sensing and onboard energy estimation capabilities. Integration of a multihole probe enables in situ wind velocity measurements that can be fused with other sensors to estimate the aircraft
total energy state. Ground-based Doppler radar processing provides additional wind ﬁeld measurements over a
much larger scale. Novel algorithms enable on-line processing such that the derived wind ﬁelds can feed into the
atmospheric models (Section 3) that then enable the guidance and control architecture (Section 4).

2010

Eric W. Frew et al. / Procedia Computer Science 18 (2013) 2008 – 2017

Sensor observation zobs
Wind field: [u,w,v]
Area or Target
of Interest

T3. Aircraft Planning
and Control

Motion
command
umotion

Wireless networked
communication

T1. Real-Time
Doppler Wind Data

T2. Atmospheric Models
for On-line Planning

Airborne Sensor
Platform

In situ data: P, T, H, Vw

T1. Wind and
Energy Estimation

Telemetry
measurements
zhealth

Energy state
xenergy

Fig. 1. An energy-aware, airborne DDDAS for persistent sensing in complex atmospheric conditions.

2.1. Energy Estimation
The total energy state of the EA-DDDAS is determined from the sum of the kinetic (based on true airspeed),
potential (based on altitude), and internal (based on onboard storage) energy. As was obvious during the VORTEX2 ﬁeld campaign [1], one of the major energy-monitoring challenges is a strategy to accurately monitor
instantaneous power draw and stored-energy level (battery charge for the Tempest UAS used in VORTEX2). The
total energy state of the EA-DDDAS, including instantaneous power consumption and stored-energy levels, must
be accurately determined for any energy-management control algorithm. The principal sources of error in determining the energy state are based on the accuracy in the measurement of airspeed, altitude, and battery charge.
2.2. Airborne In Situ Wind Measurement
The true airspeed of a low-speed aircraft is computed from the dynamic pressure measured with a pitot-static
probe, standard equipment in most UAS autopilots. The aircraft velocity in the ﬁxed-ground reference frame is
estimated from the autopilot inertial measurement unit (IMU) data, supplemented with GPS. Air-data probes are
used for in-situ sampling of the local wind. An “alpha-beta” probe combines a conventional pitot-static probe with
mechanical vanes to measure angle-of-attack and side-slip. The system developed here uses a miniaturized multihole probe, a pitot-static probe with additional pressure ports to sense angle-dependent differential pressures.
Compared to the alpha-beta probe, the multi-hole probe provides superior wind-ﬁeld resolution [2]. Subtracting
this in-situ air velocity measurement from the IMU velocity estimate gives the local wind velocity.
2.3. Real-time Dual-Doppler Wind Field Retrieval
A robust initial wind ﬁeld is essential to any atmospheric model for online planning tasked with the prediction
of the 3D winds. Mobile Doppler radars can collect radial velocity data capable of resolving meso-γ scale and
even micro-scale phenomena. When the data from multiple radars are combined, triangulation of radial velocities
can yield 2D (x-y) wind ﬁelds and through mass continuity, the vertical component can also be deduced. The

2011

Eric W. Frew et al. / Procedia Computer Science 18 (2013) 2008 – 2017









	




	


	




	








		






	



 !"




!


	
























	






Fig. 2. a.) Training points {xi , yi }, new input x, and correlation distance ls for a Gaussian process (GP). b.) The output of the GP is a
probability distribution function of the measurement at input x.

techniques of computing 3D wind ﬁelds from two or more Doppler radars are well established [3]. However,
these analyses have never been produced in near realtime in the context of mobile radar operations. To accomplish
this objective, Doppler radial velocity measurements will ﬁrst be passed through automated algorithms to detect
and remove data artifacts such as non-meteorological returns (“ground clutter”) and aliased velocities. The latter
amounts to placing the velocity in the correct Nyquist interval. The velocity data will then be mapped to a
Cartesian grid, along with radar pointing angle information, using a two-pass Barnes analysis [4, 5, 6]. The grid
resolution will be tailored to the available communications bandwidth in the mobile platforms, as the gridded data
from all radars will then be communicated to the mobile ground station. The gridded data from each radar will then
be combined through triangulation, utilizing an upward integration of the mass continuity equation [7], followed
by a ﬁnal quality check of the analyzed velocity. The computed 3D velocity ﬁeld will then be communicated to
those processes that require near real-time velocity data, such as the models described below. The main technical
challenges of this approach include sufﬁcient automated removal of artifacts in the raw radar data (a step typically
performed by a human analyst), and communication of the gridded data between platforms.
3. Models for Online Planning
This section describes the modeling approaches that provide predictions of the complex atmospheric conditions to closed loop guidance and control algorithms. Gaussian processes are used onboard the aircraft to provide
near-term predictions based on correlations with previous measurements. The representational power of these
methods tend to diminish with the age of the previous measurements, but provide sufﬁcient predictions for myopic planning. When Doppler radar data is available, atmospheric models for online planning are used to predict
the evolution of the wind ﬁeld over larger temporal and spatial scales. These approaches require sufﬁcient computation resources so they are run only on dedicated systems on the ground.
3.1. Models Learned from Onboard Data
When the wind ﬁeld is measured onboard the aircraft but Doppler radar data is not available, a wind ﬁeld model
can be derived based on stochastic learning. Rather than derive a physics-based model, geospatial regression
techniques are utilized to correlate predicted values with previous measurements. In complex weather phenomena
wind velocity will depend on a variety of effects that lead to local variations in time and location, which will
be captured by a spatio-temporal Gaussian process (GP). Spatio-temporal GPs use correlation between training
samples (Figure 2a) to model the underlying process [8]. The relationship between the training samples and their
corresponding measurements is captured by learning the hyperparameters of the GP. Using these hyperparameters,
the probability distribution (Figure 2b) of the wind velocity at an unseen location at another time can be predicted
by computing its correlation with the training samples [8, 9]. As the environment evolves (i.e. the operating region
and time of interest changes), the correlation of the test samples with the training samples decreases. Consequently
the applicability of the GP decreases, and sample collection and GP training can be repeated.
Gaussian processes have been shown to model wind ﬁelds well enough for aircraft path planning for energy
extraction while performing exploration missions [10]. One of the main beneﬁts of the GP is that it provides

2012

Eric W. Frew et al. / Procedia Computer Science 18 (2013) 2008 – 2017

a probability distribution function for future measurements, not just a single mean value. This output enables
planning approaches to consider the risk involved with predictions of future wind energy availability.
3.2. Atmospheric Models for Online Planning
As with most dynamic systems, the principal sources of error in forecasts of the atmosphere emerge from the
observations used to deﬁne the initial state and the models used to develop the forecast. Errors in the initial observations notwithstanding, it is the paucity of atmospheric data that has the most control over forecast accuracy. This
is particularly true when the focus is on small, rapidly-evolving atmospheric phenomena that need to be resolved
for energy-aware UAS. Even if a perfect initial state can be assumed, model errors must also be considered. When
constrained by the need to produce timely predictions, the computational expense of a forecast model places an
implicit restriction on model complexity/accuracy and thus an implicit restriction on the predictability that can
be expected. Therefore, model errors will also degrade forecast skill. Data and model errors become convolved
when data limitations prevent the explicit modeling of certain properties or scales. Such conditions necessitate the
parameterization of these unresolved features which introduces additional errors.
Remotely-sensed observations of the atmosphere collected by instruments such as Doppler radars have the
potential to provide the dense observations required to initialize predictions for use in path planning. This potential
is embraced by the warn-on forecast initiative (http://www.nssl.noaa.gov/projects/wof/) which aims to develop a
system for assimilating surveillance observations of the atmosphere into numerical weather prediction models for
the purpose of generating real-time guidance for short-term forecasts of meteorological phenomena, particularly
thunderstorms and their attendant hazards [11]. The efﬁcient and accurate assimilation of surveillance data into
numerical weather prediction models for warn-on forecasting is a challenge whose horizon is years away [11].
Furthermore, the forecast skill required to predict the weather is likely much higher than the skill required to
guide autonomous path planning. Thus, advances can be made incorporating Doppler radar observations into
numerical weather prediction models to provide sufﬁciently accurate guidance for UA path planning.
Even with a successful technique for assimilating Doppler radar-derived wind ﬁelds into a dynamic model,
predicting the evolution of the 3D wind ﬁeld requires an initial mass (pressure, density) ﬁeld as well. Surveillance
observations of mass do not possess the spatio-temporal resolution to initialize a weather prediction model. UAS
have the potential to ﬁll the data void in the thermodynamic/mass variables observed within the lowest 2 km
of the atmosphere with a sufﬁcient density to enable ex post facto analysis of the structure and evolution of
atmospheric phenomena. However, the data collected by a single UA alone cannot be used in dynamic models for
the purpose of online UA ﬂight planning. Ultimately, omission of the mass ﬁeld renders the governing equations
of any dynamic model open, and thus, predicting the evolution of the 3D wind ﬁeld requires inventive ways of
diagnosing the poorly-resolved mass ﬁelds.
We are examining ﬁve approaches to modeling the atmosphere for the purpose of UAS ﬂight planning. Each
of the methods, referred to as atmospheric models for online planning (AMOP), contain three components: 1) a
strategy for diagnosing the mass ﬁeld, 2) a method used to initialize the dynamic model with the available data,
and 3) the dynamic model. While the schemes are presented in order of increasing complexity, there is no assurance that AMOP accuracy scales directly with complexity. Since the computational cost of each method is
likely to scale directly with complexity, performance throttling requires careful consideration of the sacriﬁces in
accuracy that must be made in the presence of dynamic communication and computational resources.
Simple Translation of Linear Boundary Layer Structures: The convective boundary layer is often characterized by coherent meso-γ-scale circulations organized into linear structures with lifetimes on the order of 10s
of minutes. These lifetimes enable a level predictability that can be exploited with even simple dynamic models.
In this ﬁrst AMOP, linear boundary layer structures (LBLS) are identiﬁed at both t = t0 and t = t0 + δt, each
LBLS is tracked using well-established feature tracking algorithms, and the mean motion is used to advect the
features forward in time. The 3D wind ﬁeld derived from multiple Doppler radars is not used in this AMOP,
thereby greatly simplifying the logistics of ﬁeld deployments and data processing time required for initialization.
Persistence of 3D Wind Field: In contrast to the previous AMOP, this approach predicts the evolution of the
full wind ﬁeld. As such, this model requires the wind ﬁeld derived through synthesis of multiple Doppler radars.
In this AMOP, the wind ﬁeld is assumed to remain unchanged in time. Each new update of radar data ( 1 min

Eric W. Frew et al. / Procedia Computer Science 18 (2013) 2008 – 2017

2013

Fig. 3. Full Prediction of the 3D Wind Field AMOP

interval) will be used to initialize a new prediction based on a new distribution of the wind ﬁeld. As in the Simple
Translation of LBLS AMOP, each execution of the Persistence AMOP will be independent of prior predictions.
Simple Translation of the 3D Wind Field: In this AMOP, the feature identiﬁcation and tracking used in
the Simple Translation of Linear Boundary Layer Structures AMOP is used to advance the 3D wind ﬁeld derived
through synthesis of radial velocity data collected by multiple Doppler radars. The feature-relative wind ﬁeld does
not change in time. Eulerian changes in the winds are therefore a consequence of the advection of the wind ﬁeld by
an imposed ﬂow equivalent to the translation of the LBLS. As in the Simple Translation of Linear Boundary Layer
Structures AMOP, each new update of radar data will be used to initialize a new prediction but each execution of
this AMOP will be independent of prior predictions.
NAS Translation of the 3D Wind Field: As in the Simple Translation of the 3D Wind Field AMOP, the
NAS (not as simple) Translation AMOP is based on the assumption that a balanced ﬂow ﬁeld involving mass is
present and juxtaposed upon the initial wind ﬁeld. As such, the NAS Translation method adopts the same strategy
for feature identiﬁcation and adopts the same dynamic model that were used in the Simple Translation of the
3D Wind Field AMOP and also neglects the diagnosis of mass. However, the NAS method develops an initial
ﬁeld that is constrained by solutions from prior forecasts. That is, not only is the dual-Doppler derived wind
ﬁeld used for both feature identiﬁcation and for creating the initial state at t = t0 , but data from previous forecasts
(initialized at t− nδt) and valid at t0 are also used. Blending observed data and forecast data is standard procedure
for operational numerical weather prediction models.
Full Prediction of the 3D Wind Field: In contrast to the Simple and NAS Translation of the 3D Wind
Field AMOPs, the Full Prediction of the 3D Wind Field AMOP retains the essential terms in the governing
equations used to predict the state of the wind ﬁeld. The dynamic model used in this AMOP is the anelastic
form of the Navier-Stokes equations in an inviscid, inertial frame of reference, along with the anelastic continuity
equation and adiabatic thermodynamic energy equation. The initial mass ﬁeld required to apply this dynamic
model will be diagnosed from the forecasts of the Rapid Refresh numerical weather prediction model [12]. The
initialization of the dynamic model in the Full Prediction of the 3D Wind Field AMOP will rely on a variational
method that develops an initial state that is based on the objectively analyzed data but constrained by both the
governing equations and a background state from previous forecasts (Figure 3). By using data from prior forecasts,
a dynamically consistent solution, one that has developed from the adjustment of mass to momentum and vice
versa, is used to inform subsequent forecasts.

2014

Eric W. Frew et al. / Procedia Computer Science 18 (2013) 2008 – 2017

Fig. 4. Hierarchical guidance and control architecture with different modeling abstractions feeding control laws that act on different temporal
and spatial scales based on resource availability.

4. Hierarchical Guidance and Control
Aircraft guidance and control provides mission-speciﬁc autonomy while accounting for the different temporal
and spatial scales in the measurements and models described in Section 2 and Section 3, respectively. A hierarchical control approach (Figure 4) is implemented whereby different planning algorithms are run at the different
scales using different abstractions of the system, with the output of each level serving as input to the next. The
novelty of the approach derives from the overall hierarchy as well as new algorithms for mid- and long-term planning in complex atmospheric phenomena. Embedded in these algorithms are approaches to mission enhancement
from wind-energy extraction.
For more than a decade, wind-ﬁeld estimation has been a focus for small UAS applications, both for atmospheric science and for energy extraction strategies to enhance small UAS mission capabilities [13, 14, 15, 16, 10,
17, 18]. Inspired by soaring birds, static and dynamic soaring are well established methods to extend the endurance
of unpowered gliders, of both manned and unmanned aircraft, and radio-controlled model aircraft. Static soaring
refers to the use of columns of rising air created by atmospheric waves, local ground heating, or the deﬂection of
winds by orographic features such as the windward side of hills. Dynamic soaring opportunities are created in regions with vertical gradients in the horizontal wind component created in the atmospheric boundary layer (ABL),
leeward-slope separated ﬂow, and gusts [18]. Langelaan [16] extends the notion of wind-ﬁeld energy extraction to
include that from short-duration turbulent wind gusts, showing simulation results for an unpowered glider, slightly
larger than the Tempest airframe, that implement feedback control laws for energy extraction, without the need
for full a priori knowledge of the gust ﬁeld.
The overall guidance and control approach employed here will combine the energetics and informatics of
the sensing platforms into a single dynamic optimization framework. We will consider objective functions of
the form J(x) = αJerg (x) + (1 − α)Jinf o (x) where Jerg (x) and Jinf o (x) are energy and information costs,
respectively, and α ≤ 1 is a parameter that balances between them. Lawrance [9] showed that this approach
yields good performance when the sensing task is to recreate the wind ﬁeld itself. In this work we will extend our
own previous work developing autonomous information-gathering algorithms to derive Jinf o (x) while leveraging
other work to derive Jerg (x) for a general wind ﬁeld, i.e. without focusing on a speciﬁc type of wind energy
[13, 14, 15, 16, 10, 17, 18]. The exploration/exploitation trade-off that is inherent is environmental prediction

Eric W. Frew et al. / Procedia Computer Science 18 (2013) 2008 – 2017

2015

problems [19, 9] can be addressed by including energy model terms in the information-gathering cost and by
formulating information-gathering tasks in terms that depend on the energetics, e.g. total mission duration.
EA-DDDAS guidance and control is accomplished via a hierarchical control architecture (Figure 4). The
lowest, bottom layers assume the entire wind ﬁeld is unknown and rely on feedback control based on local state
information. They require the least amount of processing and can be performed using information available
onboard the aircraft. The higher, top layers of the hierarchy can exploit wind ﬁeld data and atmospheric models
for longer-term predictions. Default algorithms are deﬁned for the aircraft that can be run onboard based on
high-level commands that specify the mission area or target of interest. At each layer in the hierarchy the Default
algorithm can be replaced with the Resource-Driven algorithm when sensing and computational resources are
available. Issues of stability as different sensor measurements and computational resources are made available are
mitigated by using the default algorithms, by running the algorithms at different (slower) rates toward the top of
the architecture, and by passing outputs at one layer to inputs of the next.
At the lowest, inner-most level, local ﬂight control algorithms will respond to wind estimates derived from
the new onboard measurements in order to reject gust disturbances while reacting to rising air and periodic wind
shear to extract energy. At the next layer, geospatial estimation algorithms are used to convert the local wind
measurements into predictive maps of the local wind ﬁeld. Spatio-temporal Gaussian processes [20] will provide
probability distribution functions of the wind as inputs into myopic stochastic dynamic programming algorithms
for computing local control policies. The third layer combines real-time wind ﬁeld data from dual Doppler synthesis with quasi-static ordered upwind planning methods [21]. Here, planning occurs via interpolation over the
Cartesian grid provided with the Doppler radar data. Adaptive grid reﬁnement [21] will be used to throttle communication and computational effort in response to available resources while maintaining mission-level performance
requirements. At the outer layer, sample-based planning methods will utilize the AMOP to generate trajectories
over a receding time horizon. The ordered upwind methods of the previous layer are too computationally expensive for planning into the future, so sample-based methods will be used that trade expensive, optimal solutions for
efﬁcient, feasible results. Existing methods such as Rapidly-exploring Random Trees (RRT) will be augmented
with new schemes that adapt plan length, search time, and the representations of uncertainty in the system models.
Recent work has shown that sample-based methods can approach optimal results by properly reforming the tree
after new nodes are added [22], and that distributed approaches that generate a forest of trees that can achieve
super-linear efﬁciencies [23, 24]. Adaptation will be based on available computational resources as well as new
“information acceleration” measures that provide predictions of the rate of change of the belief state of the planner.
4.1. Activating and Throttling Algorithms
The guidance and control algorithms are activated and throttled based on a combination of available resources.
In this work all modeling and control layers are activated during system execution. The different atmospheric
models are instantiated based on the availability of environmental, sensing, computation, and communication
resources. For guidance and control, Default algorithms are switched for Resource-Driven algorithms based on
resource availability.
For the EA-DDDAS considered here, the main separation of resources occurs between layers onboard the
aircraft and layers executed on the ground. As a result, communication factors include the presence of a wireless
link between multiple dispersed Doppler radar and the quality of the link between the aircraft and the ground
control station. It is assumed that command and control of the UAS is maintained at all times, so the air-toground link is not a signiﬁcant bottleneck for the EA-DDDAS framework. Plans are generated on the ground and
transmitted to the aircraft as low bandwidth commands. The most signiﬁcant communication bottleneck is the
link between the radar, as it enables the calculation of wind ﬁeld data from the radar measurements. Table 1 lists
the type of communication required for each sensing and control layer.
Environmental conditions, available sensor measurements, and computational resources play a more varied
role in the EA-DDDAS framework. Table 1 lists the environmental, sensing, and computing conditions and
resources needed to activate the different layers. At the lowest layer, the presence of the wind sensor is the only
signiﬁcant resource. The estimation and control algorithms can be incorporated into existing autopilot schemes
and hence require minimal additional computation. The presence of wind gusts are not needed as the control laws
automatically act like the default algorithms in the absence of gust disturbances. Modeling and control at the next
layer requires more computation and the presence of environmental features that can be exploited. The Gaussian

2016

Eric W. Frew et al. / Procedia Computer Science 18 (2013) 2008 – 2017

Table 1. Conditions and resources needed to activate the different model and control layers.

Energy Estimation
Gust Responsive
Gaussian Process
Adaptive RHC
Wind Field
Dynamic OUM
AMOP
Planning Forest

Environment
None
None
Non-uniform wind
Non-uniform wind
“Dirty” air
Non-uniform wind
Atmos. Features
Non-uniform wind

Sensing
Onboard wind
Onboard wind
Onboard wind
GP
Doppler radar
Wind ﬁeld
Wind ﬁeld
AMOP

Computation
Micro-processor
Micro-processor
Embedded proc.
Embedded proc.
Workstation
Workstation
Workstation
Workstation

Communication
Internal
Internal
Internal
Internal
Wireless R2R
Wired G2G, wireless G2A
Wired G2G
Wired G2G, wireless G2A

Fig. 5. Layered design approach for NetUAS architecture.

process model and adaptive receding horizon control will not be useful if there is not signiﬁcant variation in the
wind ﬁeld. A constant background wind can be represented without the complexity of the GP and the adaptive
receding horizon control algorithm requires vertical wind as a minimum for energy extraction. The next layer is
executed on the ground using output from multiple Doppler radar. The radar require “dirty” air in order to generate
a signal and signiﬁcant computational processing to derive wind ﬁelds in real-time. The ordered upwind methods
require this wind data and features in the wind to make the computation worthwhile. Finally, the highest layers
require the output of the Doppler radar processing and even more computational resources. It should be noted
that the presence of the Doppler radar and ground-based computational resources can be known in advance of
mission execution. However, the EA-DDDAS architecture does not rely on this fact and still waits until execution
to determine the system conﬁguration.
Guidance and control algorithm throttling will be based exclusively on computational resources. A novel feature of the hierarchical guidance and control framework described here is the ability to throttle computation of the
adaptive receding horizon controller, the dynamic ordered upwind method planner, and the rapidly-exploring random forest planner. The exact computational requirements for each algorithm are unknown and will be measured
empirically. For given ﬁeld hardware the computational resources are ﬁxed, so planning time will be used as the
metric for computation. Variations in planning time will be recorded over multiple guidance and control loops,
and the algorithms will adapt in response to averages over rolling time windows.
5. Net-Centric Middleware
The dispersed sensing, modeling, and planning resources within the EA-DDDAS are connected by net-centric
middleware software. The Networked Unmanned Aircraft System Communication, Command, and Control (NetUASC3) software is designed to automate communication of system messages and parameters between individual
subsystems and so that each node can easily recognize the capabilities of other components in the environment
[25, 1]. NetUASC3 is distinguished by its ability to manage mobile ad hoc networking and service discovery
protocols that integrate different network tiers and heterogeneous platforms [25, 1]. Telemetry and payload sensor
data are provided in a publish-subscribe manner, and can be subscribed to by any network participant.
To address the difﬁculties associated with communications in complex UAS, the development of an inter and
intra-vehicle network has been decomposed using a bottom-up layered design approach [25, 1]. This approach
allows for the design of UA and supporting systems to reﬂect and enhance design decisions made at the lower
layers. Given that the success of a UAS is based heavily on networked communications, this approach ensures
the mission level control algorithms can be implemented on the underlying network architecture. Subsequent decisions at higher levels of the design process are based in part on the decisions made below. The layers designed
here include: Physical / Transport; Data Routing and Network Conﬁguration; integration of intra-vehicle communication for Sensor, Communication, and Control Fusion; application layer communication protocols for Service
Implementation and Discovery with data stream publication; and Mission Level Control [25, 1].

Eric W. Frew et al. / Procedia Computer Science 18 (2013) 2008 – 2017

2017

6. Conclusion
This paper described an energy-aware, airborne, dynamic data-driven application systems for persistent sensing in complex atmospheric conditions. The work combines i.) new onboard and remote real-time, wind sensing
capabilities; ii.) online models for planning based on Gaussian processes for onboard data and dynamic atmospheric models that assimilate Doppler radar data; and iii.) a hierarchical guidance and control framework with
algorithms that can adapt to environmental, sensing, and computational resources. Strategies for activating different algorithms based on computational resources, communication performance, and environmental conditions
were discussed. Net-centric middleware software needed to implement the energy-aware, airborne, dynamic datadriven application system was also presented.
References
[1] J. S. Elston, J. Roadman, M. Stachura, B. Argrow, A. Houston, E. W. Frew, The tempest unmanned aircraft system for in situ observations
of tornadic supercells: Design and vortex2 ﬂight results, Journal of Field Robotics 28 (4) (2011) 461–483.
[2] Aeroprobe (2011).
URL http://www.aeroprobe.com/docs/Conventional-Probes-for-web.pdf
[3] E. A. Brandes, Flow in severe thunderstorms observed bu dual-doppler radar, Mon. Wea. Rev 105 (1977) 113–120.
[4] S. L. Barnes, A technique for maximizing details in numerical weather map analysis, J. Appl. Meteor. 3 (1964) 396–409.
[5] S. E. Koch, M. DesJardins, P. J. Kocin, An interactive barnes objective map analysis scheme for use with satellite and conventional data,
J. Clim. Appl. Meteor. 22 (1983) 1487–1503.
[6] M. P. Majcen, P. Markowski, Y. Richardson, D. Dowell, J. Wurman, Multi-pass objective analyses of radar data, J. Atmos. Oceanic Tech.
25 (2008) 18451858.
[7] P. Markowski, M. Majcen, Y. Richardson, J. Marquis, Characteristics of the wind ﬁeld in three nontornadic low-level mesocyclones
observed by the doppler on wheels radars, Electronic J. Severe Storms Meteor. 5(7) (2011) 1–24.
[8] C. Rasmussen, Gaussian processes in machine learning, Advanced Lectures on Machine Learning (2004) 63–71.
[9] N. Lawrance, S. Sukkarieh, Simultaneous exploration and exploitation of a wind ﬁeld for a small gliding uav, in: AIAA Guidance,
Navigation, and Control Conference, Toronto, Ontario, 2010.
[10] N. R. Lawrance, S. Sukkarieh, A guidance and control strategy for dynamic soaring with a gliding uav, in: IEEE International Conference
on Robotics and Automation, kobe, japan Edition, 2009.
[11] D. J. Stensrud, Coauthors, Convective-scale warn-on-forecast system, Bulletin of the American Meteorological Society 90 (2009) 1487–
1499.
[12] S. S. Weygandt, Coauthors, The rapid refreshreplacement for the ruc, pre-implementation, development, and evaluation, in: 24th Conference on Weather and Forecasting/20th Conference on Numerical Weather Prediction, seattle, wa Edition, 2011.
[13] O. Ariff, T. H. Go, Waypoint navigation of small-scale uav incorporating dynamic soaring, Journal of Navigation 64 (2011) 29–44.
[14] M. J. Cutler, T. W. McLain, R. W. Beard, B. Capozzi, Energy harvesting and mission effectiveness for small unmanned aircraft, in:
AIAA Guidance, Navigation, and Control Conference, toronto, canada Edition, 2010.
[15] A. Chakrabarty, J. W. Langelaan, Flight path planning for uav atmospheric energy harvesting using heuristic search, in: AIAA Guidance,
Navigation, and Control Conference, toronto, canada Edition, 2010.
[16] J. W. Langelaan, Gust energy extraction for mini- and micro- uninhabited aerial vehicles, Journal of Guidance, Control and Dynamics
32 (2).
[17] J. Kyle, K. Evans, M. Costello, Atmospheric wind energy extraction by a small autonomous glider, in: AIAA Atmospheric Flight
Mechanics Conference and Exhibit, san francisco, ca Edition, 2005.
[18] M. B. Boslough, Autonomous dynamic soaring platform for distributed mobile sensor arrays, in: Sandia National Laboratories Report:
SAND2002-1896, big sky, mt Edition, 2002.
[19] A. Singh, A. Krause, W. J. Kaiser, Nonmyopic adaptive informative path planning for multiple robots, in: Proceedings of the 21st
International Joint Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence, 2009, pp. 1843–1850.
[20] N. Wagle, E. W. Frew, Spatio-temporal characterization of airborne radio frequency environments, in: Wireless Networking for Unmanned Autonomous Vehicles, Houston, TX, 2011.
[21] J. Elston, E. W. Frew, Reduction of computational complexity for guidance of unmanned aircraft through strong wind ﬁelds, in: AIAA
Guidance, Navigation, and Control Conference, Chicago, IL, 2009.
[22] S. Karaman, E. Frazzoli, Sampling-based algorithms for optimal motion planning, International Journal of Robotics Research 30 (7)
(2011) 846–894.
[23] M. Otte, Any-com multi-robot path planning, Ph.D. thesis, University of Colorado at Boulder (2011).
[24] M. Otte, N. Correll, Any-com multi-robot path-planning: Maximizing collaboration for variable bandwidth, in: Proc. 10th International
Symposium on Distributed Autonomous Robotics Systems, 2010.
[25] J. Elston, E. W. Frew, D. Lawrence, P. Gray, B. Argrow, Net-centric communication and control for a heterogeneous unmanned aircraft
system, Journal of Intelligent and Robotic Systems 56 (2009) 199–232.

