Procedia Computer Science
Volume 51, 2015, Pages 1705–1713
ICCS 2015 International Conference On Computational Science

Steps Towards Bridging the HPC and
Computational Science Talent Gap
Based on Ontology Engineering Methods
Svetlana Chuprina
Perm State University, Bukireva Str. 15, 614990, Perm, Russia
chuprinas@inbox.ru

Abstract
The paper describes an ontology-based methods and framework for design of learning courses
covering the HPC and Big Data areas and how to include these into Computational Science training
within the remit of existing courses of Master Programme entitled “Applied Mathematics and
Computer Science” (Faculty of Mechanics and Mathematics, Perm State University, Russia). It helped
bringing together the university and IT-companies around a real industry projects in the field of Big
Data with active participation of master’s students. In this paper, the visual tools and ontology-based
methods for computer-supported collaborative learning environment will be also presented.
Keywords: Big Data, HPC, talent gap, ontologies, ontology engineering methods, collaborative learning,
contextual semantic search, adaptable visual ontological editor

1 Introduction
Nowadays Big Data analytics is an area of rapidly growing technological diversity. Changes in the
curricula of relevant areas of training in universities do not keep pace with the rapid growth in demand
for specialists in the area of Big Data and rapid hardware and software platforms’ updates in HPC.
The success of Big Data initiatives will depend upon the ability of companies and organizations to
find the right talent, as well as their ability to effectively integrate this talent into the business
infrastructure. According to the often-quoted definition of Big Data we define Big Data technologies
as a new generation of technologies and architectures designed to economically extract value from
very large volumes of a wide variety of data by enabling high-velocity capture, discovery, and/or
analysis (IDC, 2012).
To help tackling the problems mentioned above we must try to find a comprehensive solution
based on unique conceptual platform, which is adequate to students’ backgrounds from different

Selection and peer-review under responsibility of the Scientiﬁc Programme Committee of ICCS 2015
c The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V.

doi:10.1016/j.procs.2015.05.308

1705

Steps Towards Bridging the HPC and Computational Science Talent Gap Based on Ontology
Engineering Methods
Svetlana Chuprina

faculties. It is a very complex problem because educational process in the universities involves a big
amount of very different departments, which is also present in our university. The structure of Perm
State University (PSU) comprises 12 faculties (Biology, Chemistry, Economics, Geography, Geology,
History and Politology, Law, Mechanics and Mathematics, Modern Foreign Languages and
Literatures, Philosophy and Sociology, Physics) and every faculty has a number of departments and
several programmes for Bachelor and Master Degree. Totally there are 80 departments in PSU which
are also responsible for the postgraduate studies and the research work of the staff in very different
research areas. How to find in this case the common conceptual platform in context of
interdisciplinary projects in Big Data area with students’ participation?
Working with big data involves proficiency in number of disciplines. At least, big data analytics
requires skills in mathematics, data analysis, statistics, data cleaning, applied problem solving
combined with programming and computational skills. Many universities are launching new
programmes in Big Data and Data Science in order to meet the growing demand. In particular, there
are several educational programs in Mechanics and Mathematics faculty of PSU directly aimed at
training students in the field of HPC. But to achieve success in interdisciplinary projects it is necessary
to change the existing education programs in a big variety of different areas of training in university.
We believe that, one way or another, this must affect the educational process at all faculties of the
university, and not just those who teach students in IT areas only.
This paper presents how the problems mentioned above have been tackled within the remit of
existing courses of Master Programme entitled “Applied Mathematics and Computer Science” in Perm
State University. It demonstrates the results of ontology designing within Adaptable Visual Ontology
Editor ONTOLIS environment and the usage of designed ontologies in student learning projects as
well as in industry projects.

2 Bridging the HPC and Computational Science Talent Gap
The concept of integration of the basic part of different undergraduate programs in Computer
Science and Information Technologies in the universities conducting training in several IT-programs
is suggested. Analysis of relevant educational programs showed that at the initial stage of training this
integrated base part may provide the formation of general and professional competencies of the
students of these categories of up to 40% for bachelor's programs. The concept is realized in the Perm
State University for set of six educational programs on bachelor in computer science and information
technology (Rusakov S., Khenner E., & Chuprina S., 2014).
Because Big Data, inter alia, is the process of changing data into information, which then changes
into knowledge, and every learning discipline can have her own application domain, the development
of student skills in ontology design can be considered as a common conceptual platform for
collaboration within interdisciplinary projects and a common repository of application domain
ontologies can be developed by students from different departments. The ontology design process
should be managed under a highly qualified supervision. The supervisor may be from university, as
well as from industry.
To use the common repository of application domain ontologies as a platform for collaboration is
reasonable because one of the more common goals in ontologies developing is to specify in explicit
form common understanding of the structure of information from some application domain among
people or software (Gruber T. R., 1993). Therefore, we offer all the faculties to introduce the special
issues into existing training courses in computer science and/or database area devoted to designing and
development of application domain ontologies related to fields of different faculties’ research and
education interests. It will be a good conceptual basis to support the participating students from
different faculties in interdisciplinary projects and to help to provide the collaboration between

1706

Steps Towards Bridging the HPC and Computational Science Talent Gap Based on Ontology
Engineering Methods
Svetlana Chuprina

academia and industry around real-world projects. It is a basis for the integration of different existing
learning tools and systems in a common learning environment in the future.
The computer science department of Mechanics and Mathematics Faculty plays a special role in
this process. A big volume of teaching load of this faculty staff has already included the computer
science teaching in various faculties and departments. Because of the diversity in students'
backgrounds, each syllabus must be tailored to the student's needs based on experience and interest, as
well as available faculty and courses. To simplify the ontology developing process in adaptable way in
accordance with the personal preferences of the students with different backgrounds we have
developed an adaptable visual ontology editor.
To pair Ontology Engineering with Big Data techniques and technologies within educational
process in Computer Science Department we have done a lot of changes in our own curricula and
syllabuses. To make the changes in curricula firstly we have reviewed the local industry proposals for
the introduction of new courses and programmes in Big Data and HPC study areas and after that we
have developed the amendments to the existing courses and programmes and made some restrictions
of existing courses and programmes and closed others.
The Bachelor Programme “Applied Mathematics and Computer Science” additionally to
fundamental mathematical disciplines includes “Parallel architectures”, “Parallel programming”,
“Distributed algorithms” and the Master Programme (of the same title) includes “HPC and Grid
technologies”. In order to suite the local industry proposals we have to focus on the topics related to
Big Data problems.
Besides the topics with common definitions and main conceptual elements among the proposals
for the introduction of new Big Data technologies courses there are the following:
−
−
−
−
−
−
−
−

Tackling Big Data problems with HPC;
MapReduce paradigm and programming model;
Apache Hadoop platform;
Apache Hive data warehousing component;
Apache Spark and Spark SQL;
Machine Learning with Apache Mahout;
Big Data technologies as cloud-based solutions;
Capabilities of NoSQL systems.

To use Big Data technologies for analytics it is needed to master at least data mining, multidimensional analysis and data visualization. Some applications of Big Data technologies are used not
only for analysis of data, but also for operations (deploying Web sites for social media, gaming
applications, processing online orders and so on) and for large content stores that provide information
access to massive amounts of documents. To meet the curricula time limits we were not able to
introduce the new course covering all these topics, therefore we have developed a corresponding
amendments to the syllabus of following existing courses on the Master Programme:
−
−
−
−

Intelligent Systems;
Advanced Internet Technologies;
Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining;
Research Seminar.

To cover the other important aspects of HPC, two years ago we introduced the Master Programme
“Applied Mathematics and Computer Science” the new course titled “Advanced algorithms”.
Ontologies developed under master’s educational process (for example, within Intelligent Systems
course) are used not only as means to better study and systematization of knowledge in Big Data areas
but also as a basis for better understanding among the participants of joint interdisciplinary projects, as
well as artifacts which may be used as a part of content of ontologies repositories suitable to reusing
within Big Data projects. As an example of such a project, we can refer to the successful participation

1707

Steps Towards Bridging the HPC and Computational Science Talent Gap Based on Ontology
Engineering Methods
Svetlana Chuprina

of our students in the project ONTOC2R. Project ONTOC2R was devoted to the development of a
demonstration prototype text mining platform with the possibility of semantically meaningful search
in potentially unlimited amounts of unstructured information based on domain ontologies and cloud
platform repository C2R (Kostarev A., 2014).
The research results of some of our students, achieved in the frame of ONTOC2R project, are
reflected in the following publications (Pleshkova I., 2015) (Postanogov I., 2015).
Now three of our MSc students take part in research project entitled “Development Models and
Tools to Transform Traditional Information Systems to an Intelligent Systems via use of a Bilingual
Ontology in the Computing Area”. The reported study was partially supported by the Government of
Perm Krai, research project No. C-261004.08.
This project was developed with the participation of the author of this paper. Despite of the
significant progress in the domain of modern intelligent IT, widely available unified solutions for
semantic search, adequately aware of the context of the retrieval request, are still missing. Featuring
such unified mechanisms into developed and existing information systems will improve the quality of
solving a wide variety of problems related to pertinent information retrieval. Among such problems,
there are filtering of unwanted mailing, automation of analytic reports construction, automatic
generation of teaching information materials, specific domain text synthesis, etc.
Such instruments will allow transforming the traditional information systems based on relational
model into intellectual ones based on the methods and techniques of ontological engineering and
external linguistic resources reusing. An outstanding feature of the suggested approach within the
mentioned above project is the possibility of automatic handling of the extensible ontology of specific
domain extracting from the database of legacy information system without source code modification.
The enriching of semantic search services is possible due to taking into account synonyms,
hyperoniums and hyponyms in the context of the retrieval request.
The proposed unified solution will be demonstrated by the developing of extensible bilingual
knowledge base in the domain of Computing to increase the semantic power of search engines.
As international users increase rapidly, multilingual systems have become a very important service
for global users. Unlike thesauruses and electronic bilingual definition dictionaries, which translate
and explain concepts using the context predetermined by their authors, the proposed approach allows
dynamically creating new descriptions and automatically selecting required context of the explanation
immediately in the process of the retrieval and automated information analysis. For these purposes we
propose to use the modern approaches from Data and Text Mining. One of the essential results will be
designing the model and creating the bilingual (Russian and English) ontology containing the basic
concepts in the domain of Computing in OWL standard. This will allow not only export/import and
reusing of the ontology within the existing and developed in the future information systems, but
improving the quality of text translation, because nowadays there is lack of available instruments for
adequate context-aware matching between English and Russian concepts in the domain of Computing.
So, we present the approach not only for development of new intelligent information systems but
for the automated transformation of existing traditional information systems to intelligent, without
requiring changes to the source code of the legacy information systems. This transformation is
necessary in order to reuse knowledge extracted from databases and heterogeneous e-learning
resources for semantic retrieval and user activity automation. The proposed approach based on
ontology, topic maps and metadata representation standards shall improve the interoperability and
adoptability of the designed software tools.
The main feature of ontologies used within the learning process is that it is not only the subject of
study, but also the artifact ready to be a basis for research tools development, the mean of
collaboration. If the ontology is represented in standard format it enables semantic search and
reasoning using standard, freely available third-party tools. The most complicated stage is the building
of application domain ontology, however once it is created, it can be reused for solving a wide variety

1708

Steps Towards Bridging the HPC and Computational Science Talent Gap Based on Ontology
Engineering Methods
Svetlana Chuprina

of this application domain problems. For that reason we collected all application domain ontologies
developed by students in common repository.

3 Visualization Tools and Adaptable Visual Ontology Editor
ONTOLIS
The visualization tools are the essential part of collaborative learning. We use not only third-party
software for these purposes, but also the systems developed by our graduate and post-graduate
students within real-world projects. These tools visualize both the working process and the results
within project-based and collaborative learning. We use the open source software Gource (Gource,
2014) to monitor the activity of the students according to the history obtained, for example, from
version control system that tracks their projects. Figure 1 shows the activities of the students while
they are solving different tasks on one collaborative project.

Figure 1: Students’ activity visualization within Gource

The history mentioned above should be converted into the Gource log format (based on XML).
There are standard converters for popular version control systems (for example, git, svn, etc.), but in
the case of other history journal the user will have to implement the converter by himself. Besides
Gource is crossplatform but not multiplatform application: it can run under Windows, GNU / Linux и
OS X, but there is no version for mobile devices. That is why we research another way to visualize the
projects’ activities using our own multiplatform visualization software system SciVi (Ryabinin K. &
Chuprina S., Adaptive Scientific Visualization System for Desktop Computers and Mobile Devices,
2013) (Ryabinin K. & Chuprina S., Development of Multiplatform Adaptive Rendering Tools to
Visualize Scientific Experiments, 2014) that has special tools to adapt to different solvers and sets of

1709

Steps Towards Bridging the HPC and Computational Science Talent Gap Based on Ontology
Engineering Methods
Svetlana Chuprina

data. In this case the solver is the version control system that produces the necessary log file with the
history of students’ activities.
As for the visualization of projects’ results, we usually use visual tools to tackle ontology
engineering problems. According to the Master Programme in our department it is actually important
to use the artificial intelligent means in the projects that are developed by the students. This
corresponds to the needs of the modern IT industry, therefore we have collaborative projects with ITcompanies. The students have opportunity to learn and work at the same time. The main feature of
some of these projects is using ontology engineering methods, data and text mining tools to develop
context-aware search engines adaptive to the wide sphere of different application domains.
MSc students from Computer Science Department in collaboration with their teachers have
developed the adaptive ontological visual editor called ONTOLIS (Chuprina S.I. & Zinenko D.V.,
2013) to simplify the ontology developing process in adaptable way and in accordance with the
personal preferences of students with different backgrounds. Moreover, we used this tool to improve
the adaptive capabilities of SciVi. The adaptation module of SciVi uses different ontologies, for
example the ontology of visual objects. This ontology is used to adapt SciVi to different visualization
techniques. The fragment of this ontology within Ontolis environment is shown in Figure 2.

Figure 2: Fragment of SciVi visual objects ontology within Ontolis

ONTOLIS is a multi-platform software tool for visual creating and editing of ontologies in
adaptable way. This editor implements the original algorithm to adapt the layout capabilities and
visual settings format of the visual editor to the specifics of the domain ontology. It is allowed to
customize the visual editing environment to processing of ontologies presented in standard format
(OWL, RDF) as well as in the custom format. ONTOLIS is adaptable to the representation of an
extensible set of different types of entities visualization features (a certain type of shape, color, etc.)
and relationships between the entities by means of metadata. The business logic associated with the
interpretation of the ontological knowledge is completely separated from the ontology editor. OWL
export / import is available.
The same ontology fragment within popular ontology editor Protégé is shown in Figure 3.
However Ontolis is more suitable for our needs thanks to its high-level adaptation means based on
meta-ontology.
Bellow Figure 4 and Figure 5 present the results of Data Base Models ontology (fragment in
Russian) and Big Data ontology (fragment in Russian) development with different ONTOLIS settings
according to the students’ personalized preferences.

1710

Steps Towards Bridging the HPC and Computational Science Talent Gap Based on Ontology
Engineering Methods
Svetlana Chuprina

Figure 3: Fragment of SciVi visual objects ontology within Protégé

Figure 4: Fragment of students Data Base Models ontology within ONTOLIS

Figure 5: Fragment of students Big Data ontology within ONTOLIS

1711

Steps Towards Bridging the HPC and Computational Science Talent Gap Based on Ontology
Engineering Methods
Svetlana Chuprina

4 Future Work
We hope that the ontologies repository developed by MSc students will be an important part of
future intelligent Learning Management System (LMS), because nowadays we have only traditional
LMS in PSU called ETIS and there are no capabilities to do semantic contextual search within the
educational documents store (Chuprina S. & Statsenko N., 2010). We are planning to build such
intellectual LMS using ETIS as a legacy information system based on the principles that have been
used for designing of DEPTHS (Design Patterns Teaching Help System) environment. DEPTHS
environment is an open-source project. In the paper (Jeremic Z., Jovanovic J., & Gasevic D., 2009), it
is presented how to develop and apply a common ontological foundation for the integration of
different existing learning tools and systems in a common learning environment. In DEPTHS,
Learning Object Context Ontology (LOCO) framework is proposed as an ontology base for the
integration. This is a generic framework capable of formally representing diverse learning contexts.
Accordingly, the framework integrates a number of learning-related ontologies, such as a user model
ontology, a learning content ontology, and domain ontologies.
We think of Big Data as a big opportunity to develop the next generation of technologies to store,
manage, analyze, share, and understand the huge quantities of data we are now collecting. Based on
interactions with our industry partners, from the Small Innovative Enterprise (SIE) KNOVA, we have
gained a unique perspective on the issues posed by large amounts of complex, digital data. Through
the tackling of the challenges of Big Data, participants of SIE will have the opportunity to learn about
the most recent research developments from the scientists behind the work, and gain key insights into
the important new developments that will shape the landscape of data processing in the years to come.

5 Conclusion
In this paper, we have tried to show how to help to narrow the gap between traditional students IT
skills and recently demanded analytics and storage skills in the world of big data via syllabus and
curricula changes in the higher educational setting.
The adaptive visual ontology editor ONTOLIS is presented as a platform that enabled putting
together a local IT business company and master students from Perm State University within Small
Innovative Enterprise. The collaborative work and discussions on the opportunities and challenges in
ontology designing helped to design IT real-world projects in Big Data processing area with master
students participation to develop the context-aware semantic search tools in huge structured and
unstructured data sets. Students’ participation in these projects and the related results as well as the
grant research funding received by students have already proven the validity of our concept how to
bridge the HPC and Computational Science talent gap based on ontology engineering methods.

References
Chuprina S., & Statsenko N. (2010, November 4-5). Using Ontology and Metadata to Integrate
eLearning Resources and Administrative Information System of University. Proceedings of the 9th
European Conference on E-Learning , 171-179.
Chuprina S.I., & Zinenko D.V. (2013). Adaptable Visual Ontology Editor ONTOLIS (in Russian).
Vestnik of Perm State University , 3 (22), 106-110.
Gource. (2014, October 16). Retrieved February 21, 2015, from code.google.com/p/gource/:
https://code.google.com/p/gource/

1712

Steps Towards Bridging the HPC and Computational Science Talent Gap Based on Ontology
Engineering Methods
Svetlana Chuprina

Gruber T. R. (1993). A translation approach to portable ontology specification. Knowledge
Acquisition , 5 (2), 199-220.
IDC. (2012, March). Worldwide Big Data Technology and Services 2012-2015 Forecast, IDC
#233485. Retrieved February 21, 2015, from www.idc.com:
http://www.idc.com/research/viewtoc.jsp?containerId=233485
Jeremic Z., Jovanovic J., & Gasevic D. (2009). Evaluating an Intelligent Tutoring System for
Design Patterns: the DEPTHS Experience. Educational Technology & Society , 12 (2), 111–130.
Kostarev A. (2014, January 25-26). Cloud Content Repository C2R: Text Analysis Based on
Ontology Engineering Methods (in Russian). Proceedings of the 9th Conference "Free Software in
High School" , 23-28.
Pleshkova I. (2015, January 24-25). Using the Genetic Algorithm to Enhance Semantic Search
Quality Within a Large Amount of Unstructured Documents to Improve Scientific Research Results
(in Russian). Proceedings of the 10th Conference "Free Software in High School" , 50-52.
Postanogov I. (2015, January 24-25). Using Apache Spark Technology Stack and Ontology
Engineering Methods to Develop Intelligent Analysis of Complex Network Big Data (in Russian).
Proceedings of the 10th Conference "Free Software in High School" , 52-57.
Rusakov S., Khenner E., & Chuprina S. (2014). Integration of Basic University Training of
Specialists in Computer Science and Information Technologies (in Russian). University Management:
Practice and Analysis (3), 119-125.
Ryabinin K., & Chuprina S. (2013). Adaptive Scientific Visualization System for Desktop
Computers and Mobile Devices. (Elsevier, Ed.) Procedia Computer Science , 18, 722-731.
Ryabinin K., & Chuprina S. (2014). Development of Multiplatform Adaptive Rendering Tools to
Visualize Scientific Experiments. Procedia Computer Science , 29, 1825-1834.

1713

