Procedia Computer
Science
ProcediaComputer
Computer Science
Procedia
Science001 (2010)
(2012)1–9
1455–1463

www.elsevier.com/locate/procedia

International Conference on Computational Science, ICCS 2010

Rule-based Optimization Approach for Airline Load Planning
System
Feng Lia,1 , Chunhua Tiana , Hao Zhanga , Wade Kelleyb
a Business

Analytical and Optimization Department, IBM Research - China, Beijing, 100193, P.R.China
b IBM Global Business Services, Dallas, TX, 75234, U. S. America

Abstract
For a multiple-segment ﬂight with passenger aircraft, the primary objective of commodity load planning is to
improve the operational eﬃciency while satisfying the constraints of weight and balance, aircraft structure limitation
and ﬂight safety. Unfortunately the objective is hard to be measured since commodity information of down-line
stations is unavailable. In order to solve this problem a rule based optimization approach is proposed in this paper.
The approach is a heuristic described by rule ﬂow, which is constructed by high-level business logic and optimization
algorithms. Based on such approach, a system with a visual rule editor, a business object modeler and a rule engine
was developed and implemented in a North American airline. The ﬂexibility, stability and eﬃciency of the system
were illustrated by real cases studies from the client. And the client’s operation results had proved the system can help
the client save about $84 Million per year on fuel consumption and improve its ground operation eﬃciency.

c 2012 Published by Elsevier Ltd. Open access under CC BY-NC-ND license.
⃝

Keywords:
Rule Engine, Optimization, Load Planning

1. INTRODUCTION
Air cargo load planning is the decision process to generate planned Cargo Bin Loading Schedule (CBLS) about
whether a commodity will be loaded to the aircraft and the location of the commodity if loaded [1]. The ﬁnal load
planning is usually done 30 minutes before the ﬂight departure. Ramp agent will follow such CBLS to oﬄoad and load
commodities, although there may be some ad-hoc changes due to late-arriving commodities. In this paper, we will
limit the discussion to passenger aircraft, not pure cargo aircraft. For passenger aircraft, a good loading plan will not
only insure good weight balance to save fuel consumption and ensure ﬂight safety, but also improve the operational
eﬃciency (such as oﬄoading time, moving eﬀort and risk of wrong handling) [2]. The operation eﬃciency will impact
on the turn time (that is, the duration between an aircraft arrival to a gate and its departure from the gate), which will
in turn impact on the aircraft utilization and passenger satisfaction.
Today, in many airlines load planning process is still a manual activity or heavily rely on ramp leader’s experience
with some vague guidelines which will cause ineﬃcient oﬄoading at down-line stations, unnecessary repositioning of
through commodities, mishandled baggage due to mixture, operation eﬃciency etc. The manual processing method
1 Corresponding

author, Email Address: lfeng@cn.ibm.com

c 2012 Published by Elsevier Ltd. Open access under CC BY-NC-ND license.
1877-0509 ⃝
doi:10.1016/j.procs.2010.04.161

1456

F. Li et al. / Procedia Computer Science 1 (2012) 1455–1463
/ Procedia Computer Science 00 (2010) 1–9

2

has been a bottleneck for airlines ground operation performances as the growing cargo transportation business, network and dynamic business requirement. A computer based automatic load planning solution is a key to improve the
performance.
Traditionally there are many optimization algorithms or heuristic algorithm to address this problem [3]. However
such algorithms are usually hard-coded, which cannot be ﬂexibly adjusted according to business logic changes, such as
a new commodity type added, a ﬂight security requirement added, etc.). In this paper, through analyzing the priority of
loading plan objectives for passenger aircraft, we propose a rule based optimization approach for the loading problem.
The remaining parts of this paper are structured as follows. In section 2, we review the related literature and
works. The air cargo loading planning problem and its solution, a rule based optimization approach, are described in
section 3. In section 4 we describe a system based on the proposed approach and illustrate the results of the system
implemented in a North American airline. Finally, conclusions are drawn in Section 5.
2. Literature Survey
Load planning is an important topic in many transportation areas such as container box loading problem, vehicle/ship cargo loading problem [3]. It has several meanings depending on the business scenario. One type of load
planning problem is to determine the right cargo combination and loading order under some structural and business
constraints to optimize some objectives, such as load factor (that is, the ratio of cargo really loaded to the maximum
capacity), return value, safety, etc. For example, LoadPlanner solves the container loading problem [4]. This type
problem can be tracked back to the knapsack problem in operation research. The second type of load planning is
at network level to consolidate commodity to reduce cost or improve service eﬃciency [5]. The air cargo loading
planning discussed in this paper belongs to the ﬁrst type of problem.
2.1. Load Planning Optimization
Fok et al. developed an operational load planning with long-term forecasting based on an analysis of historical
data [1]. Forecasting is important as the data will assist the airline in drafting its long-term contracts and determination
of allotments. Load planning, on the other hand, is for operational term planning of how ULDs (Unit Load Devices)
are loaded into aircraft. Their works was tested in passenger planes of a big airline company. Many previous heuristic
and optimization algorithms are also reviewed by Fok et al. Most of the works try to improve the load factor of
aircraft.
There are also many application packages existed such as Sabre Load Manager [6]. These solutions are well
aligned with the business operation process and aircraft index calculation [2]. The loading planning calculation is
based on heuristic algorithms with limited conﬁgurable parameters.
Compared with the general air cargo load planning, this paper is focused on passenger aircraft, not pure cargo
aircraft. The loading unit for those two types of planes is diﬀerent. The loading unit of pure cargo aircraft is ULDs
such as container or pallet, while the loading unit of passenger aircraft is usually the unit commodity such as bag,
or piece of cargo. Due to such diﬀerence, load factor is not so important for passenger aircraft. The more important
objective is to improve the operational eﬃciency and weight balance.
2.2. Rule Engine Technology
To keep application ﬂexible, rule engine technology becomes a popular approach to separate business logic from
application code [7]. Current the business rules are usually modeled as rule set, decision table, or decision tree. Rule
set is a set of rules in “if. . . then. . . ” sentences, which are independent in data structure perspective but related in
business logic sense. Each rule has two parts, condition and action [8, 9]. For example, the price discount related
logic in a car insurance quotation calculation can be kept as a rule set. Sometimes some rules have similar dimensions
in condition part; rule table is a concise organized structure to present these rules. Decision tree is the other organized
approach to break down the condition step by step. In those three organized rule formats condition and action are
kept as independent parts. There is no mix between condition and actions. Recently, most rule engine packages
provide ﬂows to connect multiple rule sets together as a work ﬂow. This new rule structures can well address most of
business logic problems with simple decision logic, such as customer rating, quotation, target-marketing information,
etc. [10, 11, 12].

1457

F. Li et al. / Procedia Computer Science 1 (2012) 1455–1463

3

/ Procedia Computer Science 00 (2010) 1–9

3. Rule based Air Cargo Load Planning
3.1. Problem Statement
For any airline it will schedule many trips to ship its customers, customer’s baggages and shipments among
designated airports/destination stations. At each airport/station, the airline need to ﬁnd suitable locations for all
commodities on an aircraft in order to ensure the safety of the aircraft, weight and balance of the aircraft and the
eﬃciency of the ground opertion porcesses. That is the air cargo load planning problem. The typical input and output
of an air cargo load planning problem are shown as Figure 1. Obviously, the input of the air cargo load planning
problem includes ﬂight, aircraft, bin, commodities, constraints, business rules, etc.

Air c r af t Model

F

E

D OOR WAY

Figure 1: Air Cargo Load Planning Problem

D

B oei ng 737

C

B

A

D OOR WAY

Figure 2: Aircraft-Boeing 737-700

3.1.1. Flight
A ﬂight is a scheduled trip by aircraft/plane between designated airports/destination stations. Most of time it has
multiple segments. For a n(n ≥ 1) segments ﬂight, the aircraft will stop at an ordered set of stations, denoted with
S = {0, 1, 2, · · · , n}, where station 0 means the origin station of the ﬂight, station n represents the last destination of
the ﬂight, station i(i ∈ S, i 0, i n) denotes the inter-medial station where the aircraft will stop.
3.1.2. Aircraft
For any ﬂight at least one passenger-aircraft will be assigned to ship passengers and customers’ commodities. In
this paper we assume only one passenger-aircraft had been assigned for any ﬂight. For any aircraft, there is a bin set
B including several bins named as A, B, · · · etc. for storing customers’ commodities. Among those bins, some belong
to Forward (FWD) bin set B f , and the others belong to After (AFT) bin set Ba . For example, in Figure 2 the aircraft
Boeing 737’s bin set is B = {A, B, C, D, E, F}, where bin A, B and C belong to FWD bin set B f , bin D, E and F
belong to AFT bin set Ba .
For each bin b ∈ B, let Wbl and Vbl denote its available weight limitation and available volume limitation.
3.1.3. Commodity
At each station there are lots of commodities will be loaded and oﬀ-loaded from the aircraft. Let us use Ci =
{ci1 , ci2 , · · · , cini }, i ∈ S denote the set of commodity group which will be loaded on the aircraft at station i, where
ci j , ( j = 1, 2, · · · , ni ) denotes the element of set Ci , and ni is the element number of set Ci . For any commodity group
all commodities have same properties, which are listed in the following Table 1.
Besides those properties, each commodity group has the other three properties: weight, volume and pieces. Among
those properties, commodity type, load station, destination, ﬁnal destination and transferred are invariable, weight,
volume, pieces, through, removed, location and order are variable. In order to simplify the description, we use di j , d¯i j
and xi j to denote destination, ﬁnal destination and transfered for any commodity group ci j , and use wisj , visj , pisj , lisj , risj ,
tisj and oisj to denote its properties weight, volume, pieces, location, removed, through and order for commodity group
ci j at station s ∈ S, respectively. Obviously,
risj =

1, if ci j was removed at station s, i ≤ s
0, otherwise.

(1)

1458

F. Li et al. / Procedia Computer Science 1 (2012) 1455–1463
4

/ Procedia Computer Science 00 (2010) 1–9
Table 1: Properties of Commodity

Property
Commodity Type
Load Station
Destination
Location
Order
Through
Removed
Final Destination
Transferred

Description
Type of commodity, such as Freight, Bag, and Heavy Bag, etc.
Where the commodity had been loaded on the aircraft.
Where the commodity will be oﬀ-loaded from the aircraft.
Which bin the commodity had been assigned in.
The loading order of the commodity in the assigned bin.
The commodity’s load station is not equal to current station.
The commodity will be removed from the loading list.
Where the commodity will not be loaded anymore.
Whose ﬁnal destination is NOT in the lists of current ﬂight.

3.1.4. Constraints
Just like the constraints shown in Figure 1, we have three kinds of constraints in the air cargo loading planning
problems, which are bin structure limitation, ﬂight safety constraints, and trim requirement/weight and balance constraints.
Bin Structure Limitation
Most of time, the total weight and volume of commodities assigned in any bin should less than the available weight
and volume of that bin relatively. Which means at station i ∈ S, the following structural constraints must be satisﬁed,
nk

i

k=0 j=1 dk j >i;lk j =b
i

wik j · rki j

≤

Wbl ,

vik j · rki j

≤

Vbl ,

nk

k=0 j=1 dk j >i;lk j =b

i ∈ S, b ∈ B
i ∈ S, b ∈ B

(2)

(3)

Flight Safety Constaints
Just as we menioned above, for any ﬂight there should be an aircraft apointed to it. In order to ensure the safety
of the aircraft, airlines will determine the maximal weight of commodities (available payload weight) transported by
assigned aircraft for each station. Denote the Available Payload Weight(APW) for station i of the ﬂight with Ai , which
was calculted by the structure limitation of the aircraft, weather, booked passengers, check-in bags, ﬂight distance,
fuel on board, and operation weight etc. In this paper we suppose we can get Ai for any station i ∈ S. Thus the total
weight of the commodities loaded on the aircraft should never exceed the available payload weight of the ﬂight at any
station i.
i

nk

k=0 j=1 dk j >i

wik j · rki j ≤ Ai ,

(4)

i∈S

Trim Requirement/Weight and Balance Contraints
A suitable weight and balance condition will help the airline to save fuel consumption [2]. In order to save fuel,
the airline ask the load planner to keep the aircraft in an optimal trim range. Figure 3 shows an example of the trim
range for Boeing 737-700, where the blue line is the optimal trim. In practice the load planner always achieves that
target by determining a suitable weight range for the FWD/AFT bins while considering the bins weight and volume
limitation.
For convenient, we will use the weight range for whole commodities assigned in FWD bins to represent the trim
requirment/weight and balance constraints. Let’s use Lw and Uw to denote the lower weight and upper weight of those
range. Therefore, at any station i, the following constraints should be statisﬁed,
i

Lw ≤

nk

k=0 j=1 dk j >i;lk j ∈B f

wik j · rki j ≤ Uw ,

i ∈ S.

(5)

1459

F. Li et al. / Procedia Computer Science 1 (2012) 1455–1463

5

/ Procedia Computer Science 00 (2010) 1–9

Figure 3: Aircraft Weight v.s. Trim

Figure 4: Rule Flow for Load Planning

Where, Lw and Uw are determined by the the following experient equations.
Lw · (P1mac − Fmac ) + (W − Lw ) · (P1mac − Amac )
P2mac · P3mac
Uw · (P1mac − Fmac ) + (W − Uw ) · (P1mac − Amac )
10 ×
P2mac · P3mac
10 ×

Lt

(6)

= Ut

(7)

=

Where W is the total weight of all loading commodities, P1acm , P2acm and P3acm are system parameters given by the
Boeing coorperation, Fmac and Amac are Mean Aerodynamic Chord for FWD bins and AFT bins, Lt and Ut are the
optimal trim range got from Figure 3.
3.1.5. Business Rules
Air cargo loading process is a complext process, which includes four individual handling processes: split, remove,
move and assign. The description of those four processes are listed in Table 2. Among those processes, there exist
commodity priority and grouping rules.
Table 2: Handling Process

Item
Remove
Assign
Move
Split

Description
When the total weight of the commodities exceed the available payload weight or the total
volume exceed the bin structure limitation, we need to remove some commodities from the
loading commodities list.
Load commodities to any bin of the aircraft.
When we assign a far destination commodity group into one bin of the aircraft, we need move
the existing through near destination commodity group out in order to avoid blocking.
There are two scenarios for splitting process. The ﬁrst one is, when we remove commodities
we need to split some commodity group in order to transport as much as possible, the second
one is, when we assign a big group of commodities into ordered multiple bins, we need to split
that big group into several sub-group.

1460

F. Li et al. / Procedia Computer Science 1 (2012) 1455–1463
/ Procedia Computer Science 00 (2010) 1–9

6

Commodity Priority Rules
Because of the diﬀerence of customers and commodities, the airline need to prioritize the commodities while ship
them in order to improve customer satisﬁcation, revenue and operation eﬃciency. Below is the details of the rules
for commodity priority in remove process. The priority for remove process is reverseed in assign process. Here the
commodity with higher priority means it be removed or assigned ﬁrst.
(1). Far destination commodity has higher priority than near destination commodity.
(2). Cargos have higher priority than bags.
(3). Non-transferred commodity has higher priority than transfered commodity
(4). General freight has priority than rush freight
(5). Local commodity has higher priority than through commodity.
Grouping Rules
In order to improve the operation eﬃciency and decrease package mishandled rate, the airlines need to group the
commodity based on its properties and diﬀerent requirements of business process. Below is the priority for grouping
logic.
(1). Grouping all commodity with same destination together,
(2). Grouping all bags with same destination together,
(3). Grouping all local bags or all transfered bags with same destination together
(4). Grouping all cargo with same destination,
(5). Grouping all cargo with same customer/airwaybills and same destination together
For example, in the bin assigning process the airline will try to group all commodities with same destination
together. If the commodity group with same destination can not totally loaded in one bin, then we need to split it
group into at least two subgroups. We will grouping all bags with same destination and verify the satisﬁcation of the
business requirement. If not, we will continue the following ordered logic to group the commodities till we achived the
business requirements. For each destination, the biggest group is whole set of all commodities with that destination,
and the smallest group of the commodities is one piece. Most of time the airline will set a parameter for the pieces
number of its smallest group to decrease the package mishandled rate.
3.1.6. Objectives
According to the business requirement, the business objectives of the load planning can be listed as 1) Improve
operation eﬃciency, 2) Optimize trim index, and 3) Improve the load factor. The latter two objectives can be achieved
easily. For the weight balance, we can optimize the trim index by adjusting the total commodity weight for FWD bins.
Aircraft load factor is usually measured by the percentage of the aircraft maximum payload weight. For passenger
ﬂight, load factor is not so important compared with pure cargo aircraft. Firstly commodities usually are not enough to
ﬁll the bins. Secondly even when there are too many commodities, we need to remove some of them in order to ensure
the ﬂight safety. Because of the following factors, the ﬁrst objective becomes diﬃcult for us. Firstly, it is hard for us to
measure operation eﬃciency. From a local station perspective, the operation eﬃciency can be measured by 3 metrics,
1) the commodity unloading time, 2) the commodity moving and loading time, and 3) mishandling ratios. Secondly,
the information of down-line stations are usually unknown or incomplete at current station. Because passenger’s bag
and transferred-in cargo information cannot be precisely known before 1 hour of the departure.
3.2. Rule based Optimization Approach
Just as we explained above, the airline needs a ﬂexible, stable and eﬀective approach or system to improve its
cargo transportation business, safe fuel consumption and satisfy its dynamice business requirement. It is hard for us
to use a pure mathematical technology to model and solve it. Thus we propose the following heuristic, a rule-based
optimization approach, which is shown in Figure 4.
While determine the answer for ﬁrst question shown in Figure 4, we need to consider equation (4) and the following constraints
i

nk

k=0 j=1 dk j >i

wik j

≤

b∈B

Wbl ,

i ∈ S,

(8)

F. Li et al. / Procedia Computer Science 1 (2012) 1455–1463
/ Procedia Computer Science 00 (2010) 1–9
i

nk

k=0 j=1 dk j >i

vik j

≤

b∈B

Vbl ,

i ∈ S.

1461
7

(9)

Remove Process:
The following processes are used for remove process in Figure 4.
(1). Determine the exceed weight and volume of the commodities;
(2). Sort the commodities group with priorities from high to low;
(3). According to the sorted order and grouping logic, determine removed commodities to maximize the total
weight.
Weight and balance calculation:
Just as we discussed above, we can satisfy the weight and balance contraints and achieve the optimal trim by
adjusting the FWD bins weight. Here we will use equations (8) and (9) to calculate the lower and upper weight range
for optimal trim.
Assign Process:
For assign process, we need to consider the following constraints:
(1). Load commodities with same properties (except weight, pieces and volume) together;
(2). Avoid blocking
(3). Minimize move process;
(4). Enhance the safety / weight and balance of the aircraft.
4. System and Implementation
In order to verify the proposed rule-based approach, we developed a system based on Jave Eclipse environment
and delivered it a North American airline.
4.1. System Architecture
The loading planning system’s architecture is shown in Figure 5, including rule engine suite and load planning
portal. The load planning portal is the user interface to ramp leader for CBLS generation, view, and revision. The
rule engine suite is developed based on Eclipse technology. It has 3 key components, Rule Editor, Business Object
Modeler and Rule Engine.

Figure 5: Cargo Bin Loading Schedule

Figure 6: Rule Engine Process Time

Rule Editor is a visualized environment for rule creation. As shown in Figure 6, user can drag and drop to setup the
rule ﬂow and specify the condition in the formalized OCL (Object Constraint Language) language, a standard from
OMG for object relationship description. Action can be are speciﬁed by method of business object models or other
class package with parameter in OCL expression In the tool palette, there are 6 model element provided, including
condition, action, BeginNode, Endnote, Flow and Messages. Each rules ﬂow should begin with a BeginNode, then

1462

F. Li et al. / Procedia Computer Science 1 (2012) 1455–1463
/ Procedia Computer Science 00 (2010) 1–9

8

a mixture of conditions, actions and message, and end with EndNode or Flow. A ﬂow can be embedded in another
ﬂow as the sub-ﬂow, thus the rule ﬂow can be hierarchical structure. Message can be used to print some warning
information, or value of variables or expressions for debug purpose.
Business Object Modeler developed based on EMF (Eclipse Modeling Framework) technology. We can easily
revise or enhance the business object model based on business logic requirement. For example, in the previous rules,
we may only consider weight constraints. In the new logic, volume constraint is added. We need just add volume
property to commodity and bin model and re-generated the code and change related code or rule accordingly.
Rule Engine parse the rule ﬁle and execute based on the business object context to change commodity and bin’s
status. Rule Engine can be exposed as an API or web service to be called in other applications.
Besides the core components, the system was enbeded with several useful tools, such as, Microsoft Visio Import/Export tool to translate the record business logic in Microsoft Visio, rule ﬁle checking tool including structural
checking, grammar checking and logic checking. Structural checking focuses on block linkage veriﬁcation, including inbound/outbound degree checking and linkage type checking. Grammar checking will judge whether the OCL
expression is illegal and also whether the consistency of OCL expressions over similar blocks. Logic checking will
try to ﬁnd whether the rule ﬂow is complete and whether there are logic bugs in the rule. For example, available payload checking is design to verify the totally loading weight is less than aircraft maximum available payload, blocking
checking is used to check the assigning order of each bin.
4.2. Implementation
The tool was applied in a North America airline company, which is famous for industry leading operation eﬃciency and try to improve its cargo business. The challenge for this company is the increasing number of multiple
segment ﬂights. Pure expert load planning cannot meet the business growth. Therefore a computer based load planning system is needed. Meanwhile the experts in this company expect the load planning system can be ﬂexibly
changed according to business logic since there will be more service levels as cargo business grows. There comes
rule-based optimization approach. We successful delivered the above system and achieved the following results.

Figure 7: Cargo Bin Loading Schedule

Figure 8: Rule Engine Process Time

Figure 7 is the output of our system, which told the ground operator which commodity will be assinged in which
bin and where.
Figure 8 is showing the average process time for 5-segment ﬂight load planning process, which is about 247
milliseconds. The test environment is IBM ThinkCenter M52 with Intel Pentium IV 3.4GHz CPU, 1.48G memory,
and Window XP as its Operation System.
One year after the implementation of Load planning system, the clients told us our system have helped them save
about $84 Million/per year on fuel consumption and improve their operation eﬃciency by decreasing commodity
handling time from 20 minutes to 15 minutes and package mishandled rate from 5.1% to 3.25%.
5. Conclusion
Air cargo load planning is a complex decision process. There are many detailed business logic hard to be captured
in a concise optimization model. It is also very hard for optimization model to provide enough ﬂexibility to the future
business changes. In this paper a rule based optimization approach is proposed to solve it. The approach can provide

F. Li et al. / Procedia Computer Science 1 (2012) 1455–1463
/ Procedia Computer Science 00 (2010) 1–9

1463
9

local optimization capabilities by embedding optimization algorithms into the high-level business logic ﬂows. Based
on this approach we developed a load planning solution including visualized rule editor, rule engine and an extensible
business object interface. The solution was delivered to a cusotmer and had been veriﬁed successfuly by saving about
$84 Million per year on fuel consumption and improving the customer’s operation eﬃciency.
[1] M. Fok and M. Ka (eds.), Optimizing Air Cargo Load Planning and Analysis, Proceeding of the International Conference on Computing,
Communications and Control Technologies, Austin, Texas, USA, 2004.
[2] FAA-H-8083-1A, Aircraft Weight and Balance Handbook, www.faa.gov/library/manuals/aircraft/media/FAA-H-8083-1A.pdf,
2007.
[3] Y.H. Lee and J. Kang (eds.), Optimization of Container Load Sequencing by a Hybrid of Ant Colony Optimization and Tabu Search, LNCS on
Advances in Natural Computation, Springer, 1259-1268, 2005
[4] http://www.loadplanner.com
[5] T. Livernash and J. Heuer, Web-based Load Planning & Optimization www.idii.com/wp/FlowWebBasedFlowPlanningOptimization.
pdf, 2003.
[6] Sabre 2007, www.sabreairlinesolutions.com/products/pdfs/LoadMgr.pdf
[7] R.P. Lu and S. Sadiq, A survey of comparative business process modeling approaches, Lecture Note on Business Information Systems, Springer,
82-94, 2007.
[8] T.M. Mitchell, Machine Learning, McGraw-Hill Inc. 1997.
[9] E. Tsang, Foundations of Constraint Satisfaction, Academic Press Limited, 1993.
[10] http://www-01.ibm.com/software/integration/business-rule-management/jrules-family/
[11] http://www.jboss.org/drools/
[12] http://www.visual-rules.com/

