Available online at www.sciencedirect.com

Procedia Computer Science 18 (2013) 1016 – 1025

International Conference on Computational Science, ICCS 2013

Multiscale Agent-based Model of Tumor Angiogenesis
Megan M. Olsena,∗, Hava T. Siegelmannb
a Loyola
b University

University Maryland, 4501 N. Charles St., Baltimore, MD 21210, USA
of Massachusetts Amherst, 140 Governors Dr., Amherst, MA 01003, USA

Abstract
Computational models of cancer complement the biological study of tumor growth. However, existing modeling approaches
can be both ineﬃcient and inaccurate due to the diﬃculties of representing the complex interactions between cells and tissues.
We present a three-dimensional multiscale agent-based model of tumor growth with angiogenesis. The model is designed to
easily adapt to various cancer types, although we focus on breast cancer. It includes cellular (genetic control), tissue (cells,
blood vessels, angiogenesis), and molecular (VEGF, diﬀusion) levels of representation. Unlike in most cancer models, both
normally functioning tissue cells and tumor cells are included in the model. Tumors grow following the expected spheroid
cluster pattern, with growth limited by available oxygen. Angiogenesis, the process by which tumors may encourage new vessel
growth for nutrient diﬀusion, is modeled with a new discrete approach that we propose will decrease computational cost. Our
results show that despite proposing these new abstractions, we see similar results to previously accepted angiogenesis models.
This may indicate that a more discrete approach should be considered by modelers in the future.
Keywords: multiscale; agent-based; computational biology; tumor growth; angiogenesis

1. Introduction
Cancer incidence is expected to rise worldwide from 12 million new people aﬀected annually in the year 2000
to an anticipated 20 million in the year 2030. Not only are more people being diagnosed each year (adjusted to a
standard population size), but there are also more total deaths from cancer. The only disease that is currently more
deadly than cancer is heart disease; but in ﬁve years cancer is expected to be top of the list for the ﬁrst time.
With the use of computational and mathematical models we can examine how biological systems like cancer
work in multiple scales, as well as create new testable hypotheses [1]. As with simulation models in general,
these models must be based on biological knowledge and data and validated before their results can be used to
direct biological research. Although there is great promise from computational and mathematical techniques for
cancer research, the cancer biology community is still in the process of accepting the potential of these models
[2]. Improved model approaches will increase their trust in this approach, and is part of the goal of this work.
Modeling biological systems such as cancer allows us to analyze them in a diﬀerent way than is traditionally
done by biologists. Ideally, biologists and modelers work together to form a complete cycle where biological
experiments feed into computational/mathematical models, which then feed back into the biological experiments
to continue the cycle[3]. Both ﬁelds are still working to achieve this collaboration and balance. Ideally, models
∗ Corresponding

author. Tel.: +1-410-617-2852 ; fax: +1-410-617-2157.
E-mail address: mmolsen@loyola.edu.

1877-0509 © 2013 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. Open access under CC BY-NC-ND license.
Selection and peer review under responsibility of the organizers of the 2013 International Conference on Computational Science
doi:10.1016/j.procs.2013.05.267

Megan M. Olsen and Hava T. Siegelmann / Procedia Computer Science 18 (2013) 1016 – 1025

1017

are used for their predictive power such as is currently attempted in epidemiology for predicting the spread of
disease with and without vaccines [4].
Many diﬀerent types of models are used to study biological problems, which are usually complex systems:
ordinary diﬀerential equations (ODE), partial diﬀerential equations (PDE), agent-based simulations, event-based
simulations, cellular automata, computational geometry, and more. We introduce a three-dimensional multiscale
agent-based model and simulation of cancer cell growth that incorporates the growth of new blood vessels necessary to support that growth (angiogenesis). It has been suggested that three dimensional models have the most to
oﬀer for bridging the gap between in vivo studies in two-dimensional cultures and the larger animal system [1].
Agent-based models allow each cell to be modeled separately, following some series of rules on its behavior. Our
model abstracts the complex environment of cancer development and progression, and examines it on three scales:
molecular, cellular, and tissue. Although previous agent-based models of cancer growth have been developed, as
have previous models of angiogenesis, these two approaches are rarely combined in a single model. We show
that by using a multiscale agent-based approach, we can represent complex nutrient ﬂow and angiogensis with
similar results to previous models, despite increasing eﬃciency through increased abstraction. This new approach
to modeling nutrient ﬂow may allow more robust and time eﬃcient modeling in the future. In the next section we
will discuss additional related work, then describe the model, followed by results, and conclusions.
2. Related Work
2.1. Cancer Background
Cancer is essentially a disease in which certain cells no longer follow the originally deﬁned genetic rules.
Hanahan and Weinberg deﬁned a set of six properties that represent the failures needed within a cell for it to
become cancerous [5]. All failures occur via mutations to the cell’s DNA, caused by proliferation, i.e. the creation
of a daughter cell, or a variety of other mechanisms. However, not all orderings of mutations will result in a
cancer cell. Since cells are generally able to repair damage to their DNA, or undergo apoptosis (self-death) if
repair fails, the ability to repair genetic mutations and the ability to undergo apoptosis must be some of the ﬁrst
mutations to be sustained. Afterward, the cell must become mutated in the tumor suppressor genes (e.g. p53), as
otherwise the detrimental eﬀects of increased growth will not occur. Next, the cell may be mutated in the ability to
proliferate such that its proliferation is increased. This may include multiple mutations as the rate of proliferation
is controlled in multiple ways. Mutations in a diﬀerent order will not create a cancer cell, but instead will create a
cell that will undergo either repair or apoptosis (self-death) to maintain the system [6, 7].
With these mutations the cell has accomplished four of Hanahan and Weinberg’s requirements. Tumor growth
is monitored by many processes, including the diﬀusion of nutrients. A tumor cluster will slow its growth as
nutrients become scarce. As nutrients are depleted by the tumor, the cells that do not receive enough nutrients
to function normally will be in one of two states: necrotic or hypoxic. A hypoxic cell receives enough nutrient
to continue surviving, but not enough to proliferate. A cell may remain hypoxic indeﬁnitely. A necrotic cell is a
cell that has received even fewer nutrients, such that it does not receive enough nutrients to survive. Once a cell
becomes necrotic, there is no way to revive it; it will eventually die.
Tumor cells, however, are often able to convince nearby vasculatures to grow such that the tumor can receive
enough nutrient to continue growing. This process is called angiogenesis, and is diﬀerent from the growth of
new blood vessels during normal development. Hypoxic tumor cells emit chemicals such as VEGF into the
environment. Once these chemicals meet a vasculature, they can encourage the growth of endothelial cells for the
creation of new vasculatures. These sprouts will only provide nutrient to the tumor once they have created a loop
so that blood can ﬂow. Without angiogenesis, a tumor’s development will be limited, so angiogenesis is necessary
to sustain continued growth. Additionally, angiogenesis is necessary to properly model the growth of the tumor,
as otherwise growth is incorrectly limited.
2.2. Cancer Models
There are many valid techniques for studying cancer; the choice of spatial vs. non-spatial (such as an ODE)
model can have a huge impact on the results. We choose to utilize a spatial representation of cells as it is more
similar to the original biological system and thus allows for the inclusion of a greater number of detailed aspects.

1018

Megan M. Olsen and Hava T. Siegelmann / Procedia Computer Science 18 (2013) 1016 – 1025

To explicitly represent space the primary options are partial-diﬀerential equations (PDE), a cellular automata
model, or an agent-based model. We choose to use agent-based models as they are particularly well suited for
examining multiple scales. They also have the beneﬁt of being able to be simulated in a more accurate way than
how one would simulate a PDE. As there are not a signiﬁcant number of agent-based angiogenesis models, we
will discuss general agent-based cancer models, as well as spatial angiogenesis models.
CancerSim, a three-dimensional agent-based model, begins with a cancer-free system and then models the
growth of the cancerous cells based on the hallmarks of cancer [5, 8]. It therefore takes into account basic cellular
properties such as genetic instability, telomere length, and random apoptosis. Another three-dimensional agentbased tumor model utilizes basic gene-protein interactions and multi-cellular patterns speciﬁc to brain cancer [9].
This model represents internal cellular processes via diﬀerential equations, and the location of cells spatially.
However, neither of the above models incorporate angiogenesis. Models of angiogenesis fall into three categories: models of vasculature growth without tumor or other tissue cells, models of vasculature growth with
only tumor cells, and models of vasculature growth with both tumor and healthy tissue cells. Generally, models
of angiogenesis include the growth of vasculatures to support tumors and the size of tumors with and without
angiogenesis. In some models angiogenesis is just one of the mechanisms modeled in order to answer a diﬀerent
question, such as the shape of growth or time of growth of the tumor.
Various levels of mathematical modeling exist to include how capillaries are formed, the ﬂow of blood, vessel
adaptation, and the extent of which chemical diﬀusion reaches the tissue. McDougall et al. analyze how drugs
can be sent to the tumor via the formed vessel network, based on the quality of the created vessels. They found
that the simulation was sensitive to changes in parameters for haptotactic response of the blood vessel cells, blood
viscosity, and blood pressure, and that the tracer-drug sent through the system was able to travel easiest through
the well formed vessels [10]. A discrete mathematical model based on PDEs has been used to examine the spatiotemporal evolution of capillary networks in two and three dimensions [11]. Capillaries grow by following the
gradient of TAF. They ﬁnd that the model provides capillaries with realistic structure and morphology.
A two-dimensional multi-scale model of angiogenesis where endothelial cell sprouting occurs due to VEGF
diﬀused by healthy cells in an initial development phase, and by tumors that are later implanted into the model,
has been developed [12]. Sprouts grow based on VEGF gradient that occurs when cells do not have enough
oxygen. Sprouts die if they do not create a loop within a given period of time, and are only active once it is a
viable segment. They ﬁnd that a larger number of tumor cells causes a higher vascular density, and that network
remodeling requires a balance between angiogenesis and vessel pruning. A two-dimensional PDE model of tumor
growth with angiogenesis has also been developed [13] . They ﬁnd that asymmetrical tumor growth leads to a
greater degree of branching at the surface of the tumor when compared to symmetrical tumor growth.
Multiple angiogenesis models are based on the cellular Potts model. One such model found that sprout morphology is not aﬀected by how far from the tip the proliferating region is, although the speed of growth is aﬀected
[14]. Another Potts model analyzes tumor growth with and without angiogenesis [15]. The initial vasculature is
represented as a grid. Endothelial sprouts grow in biased random movement toward VEGF secreted by hypoxic
tumor cells, with the only modeled nutrient being oxygen. They ﬁnd that the system goes through six phases of
growth, and that their results are similar to other models. We include similar aspects in our model, although we
use a diﬀerent level of abstraction, and thus will compare our results to [15].
Cellular automata models are also used to investigate branching properties of vessels. Some models focus
on branching rules and how they change the vasculature, with a brief description of how it may be applied to
tumor angiogenesis [16]. Others focus speciﬁcally on tumor angiogenesis, with either a visual comparison to in
vivo endothelial sprouting [17] or a comparison with data on in vivo vascular growth [18]. Both ﬁnd that their
sprouting is similar to what would be expected from tumor angiogenesis.
None of the above models consider how the cancer cells aﬀect the rest of the system, however. An agent-based
approach can be used to investigate the role of the immune system in reacting to and ﬁghting tumor growth, which
includes immune cells in addition to tumor cells [19]. We design our model to include healthy tissue cells instead
of the immune cells. Including other types of cells leads to a more realistic model, as surrounding cells have
already been shown to play a role in aﬀecting cancer growth. The agent-based model described in this paper is
designed to incorporate many aspects of cancer growth including angiogenesis, but with algorithmic choices that
allow a complex model to still be able to be run in only a few hours. We hypothesize that multiscale agent-based
modeling is the desired next direction in cancer growth modeling.

Megan M. Olsen and Hava T. Siegelmann / Procedia Computer Science 18 (2013) 1016 – 1025

1019

Fig. 1. Model overview with the basic relationships between the three scales, including a cellular level ﬂow chart of agent decisions for both
normal and cancer cells, for every time step. Normal and cancer cells also diﬀer
ﬀ by what probabilities are used for decisions. Angiogenesis is
modeled both at the tissue level (branching of new sprouts) and at the molecular level (diﬀusion
ﬀ
of oxygen and VEGF).

3. Modeling Approach
Each agent represents a single cell, and exists on a three-dimensional grid to approximate a tissue. The
system is modeled on three scales (Figure 1): molecular (VEGF, diﬀusion),
ﬀ
cellular (genes, space) and tissue
(vasculatures, branching). Although two-dimensions can also be modeled, three dimensions provides a more
realistic representation. Agents follow individual “life protocols” deﬁned and implemented through probabilities
represented within their computational genes. We consider normal tissue cells to be of size 10μ
0 m, and each time
step to represent approximately one day. Vasculatures in the system give agents nutrients, which they require to
survive. Without tumor growth, the system can self-maintain essentially forever. The basic agent architecture is
based on [20].
3.1. Genes and the Life Protocols
The basic life protocols are based on Hanahan and Weinberg’s hallmarks of cancer [5], and thus reﬂect
proliferation (including rate parameters, generation potential, and space restrictions [21, 22, 23]), proliferationsuppression mechanisms, self-testing at a check point prior to the replication decision, repairing damage, and
apoptosis (self-death). The latter is activated as a random process, secondary to an agent’s decision to die due to
aging or uncorrected defects. The distance regulation protocol maintains shape cohesiveness and allows undisturbed communication ﬂow among agents [24]. These protocols are chosen to approximate the healthy functioning
of phenotypic properties of cycling cells. A ﬂow chart of the decisions by a cell at every time step can be seen in
Figure 1.
Tumor agents develop in the system when all of an agent’s life protocols are damaged. A tumor agent can only
produce tumor agents and cannot back mutate into a normal agent. Since all life protocols are broken, a tumor’s
ability to follow each of those protocols is also broken: it is not able to repair the mutations, it cannot undergo
apoptosis that would occur due to mutations, and it proliferates more frequently than a healthy cell.
The life protocols of the cells are based on the life protocols in [25], where further details can be found. This
work enhances the cellular modeling of that work by the addition of nutrients and angiogenesis to the model. We
do not include the rescue protocols.

1020

Megan M. Olsen and Hava T. Siegelmann / Procedia Computer Science 18 (2013) 1016 – 1025

(a) Normal cells within
a grid

(b) Tumor cells invading
the grid

(c) Simulation

Fig. 2. Relative size of normal and tumor cells at the tissue level, in 2D for easier viewing. (a) Normal cells are by default larger, (b) but
are resized as tumor cells push their way into the system. (c) In the simulation, tumor cells are shown in black and normal cells are colored.
Although cells are not spherical in vivo, this abstraction allows for reasonable modeling without altering results.

3.2. Spatial Representation
Three-dimensional space is represented by a grid. Normally functioning tissue cells generally require more
space than tumor cells (Figure 2). Our model abstracts this necessity by assuming normal cells to be twice the
size of tumor cells. Their location is determined by a set of coordinates (x,y,z) that deﬁne their center point. With
no neighboring tumor cells, the cell retains a radius of 1.5 grid locations. Thus, you can consider each normal cell
to be on every other lattice point.
A spatial chemical is also diﬀused by each cell. This chemical allows normally functioning cells to determine
in what direction the highest proportion of cells exists within their larger neighborhood. If a cell is moving, it will
move toward the highest chemical amount as that indicates the mass of the tissue as opposed to the edge. This
spatial chemical enables normal cells to grow in a spheroid initially as they populate the system prior to any tumor
cell creation.
The addition of tumor cells disrupts this status quo. A tumor cell also has a coordinate (x,y,z) but only a radius
of 0.5 grid locations. Thus, for every normal cell, there may be 27 tumor cells. However, it will take some time
before tumor cells proliferate in such a way that normal cells become reduced to this smaller size. A reduction in
space aﬀects a normal cell’s ability to proliferate and move.
3.3. Nutrients: Oxygen
All cells require nutrients to survive, which they acquire from blood vessels. We speciﬁcally model oxygen as
it is generally the most limiting nutrient sent to cells. Each blood vessel diﬀuses nutrients to nearby agents in all
directions. There is a limited amount of nutrient that can be supplied by a single vessel, and a limited distance that
it can travel from the vessel. Additionally, as agents use nutrient it decreases the amount of nutrient available for
agents further from the vessel. Thus, vessels must occur close enough to sustain all agents, but optimally should
be as far apart as possible to accomplish that goal.
We represent blood vessels at equidistant locations throughout the tissue (every 200μm since oxygen can
diﬀuse up to 100μm), forming a grid. We further view the grid as creating a series of compartments, with each
compartment being bounded on three sides by vessels, one in each of the three directions. These vessels can
supply nutrients to all healthy cells within the tissue, assuming there are no tumor cells present. Nutrients are
distributed to cells from each vessel, ﬁrst to the cells closest to the vessel, then to the next layer of cells past that,
etc, until the maximum number of cells that vessel can support has been reached in each of the three dimensions
surrounding it. We assume blood ﬂows from the zero location to the maximum location for each vessel. Each
vessel also has a maximum number of cells that can be supported overall in the model, in addition to the maximum
amount within each region. Thus, if a region closer to the beginning of the tissue has additional cells that use more
oxygen, the cells further along the vessel will be more likely to become hypoxic.
This technique for representing vessels and their ﬂow is unique among angiogenesis models. Other models
have utilized a grid, but they rely on speciﬁc calculations at every location for the amount of nutrient available.
To decrease the complexity in the model, instead of explicitly modeling the diﬀusion process we model the eﬀect
of diﬀusion. Usually diﬀusion is modeled using PDEs that must then be solved to determine the amount of
gradient available at every location within the grid. Even discretizing this using standard grid diﬀusion techniques

Megan M. Olsen and Hava T. Siegelmann / Procedia Computer Science 18 (2013) 1016 – 1025

1021

Algorithm 1 Diﬀusion of nutrients
1:
2:
3:
4:
5:
6:
7:
8:
9:
10:
11:
12:
13:
14:

compartmentNutrientMax
vesselNutrientMax = compartmentNutrientMax ∗ numberO f Compartments
for each compartment in vessel do
availableNutrient = compartmentNutrientMax
for each diﬀusion radius within di f f usionRadiusMax do
for each location from 0 to compartmentWidth at this radius do
if availableNutrient < 0 then
availableNutrient = 0
end if
send availableNutrient to each of N cells at location
availableNutrient = availableNutrient − N
end for
end for
end for

becomes computationally expensive due to the fact that the amount of nutrient available to a cell not only relies
on the amount of nutrient in its location, but also on how many cells have taken nutrient from the environment
before the nutrient reaches that cell. Thus, the diﬀusion also relies on the number of cells between a cell and
its closest vessels. To take this issue into account, we instead do a stepwise diﬀusion from each vessel as seen
in Algorithm 1. The compartmentNutrientMax is deﬁned as in Equation 1. α represents the number of direct
neighbors in numDimensions − 1 (in the case of three-dimensions, α = 8). The di f f usionRadiusMax is deﬁned
as compartmentHeight/2.
compartmentHeight

(α ∗ i) ∗ compartmentLength

compartmentNutrientMax =

(1)

i

Cells that receive enough nutrients are considered normal and function as described previously. It is expected
that cells will receive nutrients from three vessels: one in the X direction, one in the Y direction, and one in the
Z direction. Thus, the minimum amount of nutrient for a cell to remain normal is three times what each vessels
should give them (λ1 ). Cells that receive nutrients but not enough to remain normal (λ2 ) will become hypoxic, and
thus unable to proliferate until the nutrients increase again. Cells can return from the hypoxic state to a normal
state each time step, if their nutrients are > λ1 . Cells that receive zero nutrients will become necrotic and die
immediately.
3.4. Angiogenesis
Angiogenesis is the creation of new blood vessels, as described in section 2. In the model, all hypoxic tumor
cells diﬀuse VEGF in an attempt to induce angiogenesis (Figure 1). As VEGF travels through the system, it is
spread from its current location within its immediate Moore neighborhood. The amount of VEGF at the location
(currentV EGF) is initially 1 for the hypoxic cell’s (x,y,z), with 90% diﬀusing to neighbors. The amount diﬀused
to an individual neighbor is therefore 0.9 ∗ currentV EGF/(8 ∗ numDimensions + numDimensions − 1), and is
added to any VEGF already at that location. The diﬀusion continues from all locations with VEGF greater than
the minimum of 0.0001, with 0.9 ∗ currentV EGF diﬀusing among the neighbors. VEGF only disappears from the
system when the amount at a particular grid point is below the minimum. Once the chemical reaches a vessel it
will induce the creation of a sprout if there is not already one growing from that vessel within 30μm.
Each sprout can grow by ﬁve endothelial cells every time step, and we assume that endothelial cells are the
size of tumor cells. Sprouts grow by biased random movement based on the gradient of VEGF within the system
(Figure 3). They are also limited in that they can only grow in locations where other cells are not already present,
and they are not allowed to form loops with the same sprout.
A sprout is not viable and thus does not provide nutrients to surrounding cells until it forms a loop with another
sprout or vessel. Once the sprout becomes viable, it will provide nutrients to nearby cells but not to the same extent
that a vessel could provide. Instead, the amount of oxygen diﬀused in total by a sprout (ρ s ) is relative to its length

1022

Megan M. Olsen and Hava T. Siegelmann / Procedia Computer Science 18 (2013) 1016 – 1025

(a) Initial vasculatures

(b) Angiogenesis

Fig. 3. Modeled vasculatures. (a) The initial vessels capable of providing oxygen to the simulated tissue. (b) Vessel growth due to tumor
diﬀusion of VEGF; yellow are viable vessels that have formed a loop and thus diﬀuse oxygen, whereas blue are non-viable endothelial cells.

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

Fig. 4. General growth pattern of modeled cancer cells. Tumor exhibit spheroid growth patterns as well as the expected branching processes.
Normal cells and vasculatures are not shown, although they are inﬂuencing the tumor’s growth.

(l) as seen in Equation 2. This limited nutrient, however, will allow the tumor to grow further, and create more
sprouts as it grows as well. The diﬀusion of this nutrient occurs via an algorithm similar to Algorithm 1, except
that the diﬀusion radius is limited to half of a normal vessel’s diﬀusion radius.
di f f usionRadiusMax/numDimensions

ρs =

(α ∗ i) ∗ l/α + 5

(2)

i

4. Results
In all instances the model is simulated on a size 40x40x40 grid. Compartments have height, width, and depth of
20. Normal cells have the following parameters: proliferation rates in one of three ranges (0.05 − 0.15, 0.03 − 0.09,
or 0.015 − 0.045), and apoptosis rates within 0.0024 − 0.0048. Cancer cells have the following related parameters:
proliferate rates are limited to the range of 0.3 − 0.9, and apoptosis rates are limited to 0.0001 − 0.0002. These
values are chosen to represent breast cancer [25]. Angiogenesis follows the above algorithms when enabled in the
simulation.
The model is ﬁrst analyzed in terms of cellular growth and properties in a system lacking angiogenesis. In
all of the parameter cases we ﬁrst see the expected quick growth of a self-sustaining cellular environment. Once
a tumor cell is introduced into the environment, the tumors then proliferate at an unchecked rate until they reach
the maximum number that can be sustained. The tumor growth pattern is in the expected spheroid growth pattern
although we do not explicitly model this behavior [9, 26], including expected branching (Figure 4). Normal cells
mostly die due to their lack of nutrients and inability to proliferate when surrounded by tumor cells. An example
of this growth pattern can be seen in Figure 5(a).
As expected, cancer cells are able to grow much larger with angiogenesis, which results in normal cells essentially being removed from the system (Figure 5(b)). Angiogenesis enables tumor cells to increase the nutrient
supply around the tumor cell cluster, thus increasing their possible size.
We next compare the model to a previously published angiogenesis model by running the simulation with only
tumor cells, as our comparison model does not contain normal cells [15]. As with the other model, we start with
a single tumor cell, which eventually grows into a tumor that can no longer be sustained by the vasculature. We

Megan M. Olsen and Hava T. Siegelmann / Procedia Computer Science 18 (2013) 1016 – 1025

(a) Without angiogenesis

1023

(b) With angiogenesis

Fig. 5. Change over time in number of cancer (red) and healthy tissue (blue) cells. Note the diﬀerent axes. (a) When angiogenesis is not
activated, cancer cells grow quickly, but are unable to grow large enough to crowd out healthy cells. (b) When angiogenesis is activated, the
cancer cells are able to grow much larger and take nutrients and space away from healthy cells such that they basically disappear.

examine the rates of tumor cells, hypoxic cells, and neovascular cells in this model (Figure 6) over time. The rates
of tumor growth with and without angiogenesis relate as we would expect, with tumor growth increasing much
faster with angiogenesis, reaching 35000 cells in 400 days instead of 15000 cells without angiogenesis (Figure
6(a)). Additionally, the tumor grows in a spheroid pattern with small branchings, which is also expected of tumor
development.
After approximately 100 days the number of hypoxic cells begins to increase (Figure 6(b)). Once the vasculature can’t sustain tumor growth, hypoxic cells diﬀuse VEGF and angiogenesis begins. Notice that the increased
tumor growth rate corresponds to the increase in neovascular and hypoxic cells. We see an increase in hypoxic
cells in both cases, as cells will lack nutrients whether or not the tumor cells can encourage angiogenesis. In the
case of no angiogenesis ability, although the number of hypoxic cells increases the overall growth of tumor cells
is delayed as the cluster can only proliferate in areas where nutrient is still available. Eventually we start to see
a more exponential growth in the case of angiogenesis, showing that the tumor is able to grow but still cannot
support all cells.
These results are as we expect to see, and are very similar to the results from [15]. However, the most
noticeable diﬀerences between our results are the amount of time to see these patterns, as well as the number of
tumor cells simulated. These diﬀerences may be an artifact from our inclusion of normal tissue cells, showing that
to truly model cancer growth we need to include these cells in our simulations.
5. Discussion
We present a new three-dimensional multiscale agent-based model for cancer growth. This model is an improvement over previous models as it explicitly models normal tissue cells in addition to cancer cells. The functioning of cells is probabilistic, with probabilities drawn from the literature and experts in the ﬁeld. Additionally,
the deﬁnition of the functioning of a cancer cell is based on the hallmarks of cancer [5]. We also directly model
nutrient (oxygen) diﬀusion from vasculatures, and cancer angiogenesis through the diﬀusion of VEGF that initiates sprouts from blood vessels. Our methods are novel in comparison to previous angiogenesis models. We
are able to abstract the ﬂow of oxygen without losing the details of nutrient availability, VEGF diﬀusion, or its
resulting stimulation of new capillary growth.
Our tumor cells grow in the spheroid shape that is generally expected in cancer growth, whether or not angiogenesis is activated. With angiognesis tumors are able to grow signiﬁcantly bigger than without angiogenesis.
Our model shows a similar rate of growth of both cells and vasculatures as in the ﬁrst ﬁve phases modeled in [15],
despite our discretization of the angiogenesis process. However, our timeline is elongated in comparison. This

1024

Megan M. Olsen and Hava T. Siegelmann / Procedia Computer Science 18 (2013) 1016 – 1025

(a) Tumor Cells

(b) Hypoxic Cells

(c) Neovascular Cells

(d) Normal Tumor Cells

Fig. 6. Change over time of cell counts with (blue) and without (red) angiogenesis: (a) Number of tumor cells, (b) Number of hypoxic (low
nutrient) cells, (c) Number of neovascular (new vessel) cells, and (d) Number of non-hypoxic tumor cells. More tumor cells are able to grow
with angiogenesis, and eventually there is also more rapid creation of hypoxic cells with angiogenesis. These results resemble the ﬁrst ﬁve
phases in [15].

diﬀerence may be due to our larger system scale, or may indicate that diﬀerent parameters may be necessary to
the angiogenesis model to change the growth speed.
Our model represents a new variation on multiscale angiogenesis models. As our new discretization and
abstraction of the angiogenesis process gives similar results to previous models, we propose that this model and
its modeling approach be considered in future tumor growth model development. Being able to discretize nutrient
ﬂow and capillary growth will decrease simulation time without sacriﬁcing accuracy. More eﬃcient modeling will
allow the study of more complex and larger tumors, in addition to the including the surrounding tissue cells that
are currently ignored by most models.
Acknowledgements
The authors would like to thank Joe Jerry, Nava Sieglemann-Danieli, and John Nambu for their guidance on
various biological aspects of this work, as well as the conference reviewers for their feedback. The ﬁrst author
would also like to thank Yariv Levy for his feedback.
References
[1] K. M. Yamada, E. Cukierman, Modeling tissue morphogenesis and cancer in 3d, Cell 130.
[2] O. Wolkenhauer, C. Auﬀray, S. Baltrusch, N. Blthgen, H. Byrne, M. Cascante, A. Ciliberto, T. Dale, D. Drasdo, D. Fell, J. E. Ferrell,
D. Gallahan, R. Gatenby, U. Gnther, B. D. Harms, H. Herzel, C. Junghanss, M. Kunz, I. van Leeuwen, P. Lenormand, F. Levi, M. Linnebacher, J. Lowengrub, P. K. Maini, A. Malik, K. Rateitschak, O. Sansom, R. Schfer, K. Schrrle, C. Sers, S. Schnell, D. Shibata,

Megan M. Olsen and Hava T. Siegelmann / Procedia Computer Science 18 (2013) 1016 – 1025

[3]

[4]
[5]
[6]
[7]
[8]
[9]
[10]

[11]
[12]
[13]
[14]

[15]
[16]

[17]

[18]
[19]

[20]
[21]

[22]

[23]

[24]

[25]
[26]

J. Tyson, J. Vera, M. White, B. Zhivotovsky, R. Jaster, Systems biologists seek fuller integration of systems biology approaches in new
cancer research programs, Cancer Research 70 (1) (2010) 12–13. doi:10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-09-2676.
H.
Kitano,
Systems
biology:
A
brief
overview,
Science
295
(5560)
(2002)
1662–1664.
arXiv:http://www.sciencemag.org/content/295/5560/1662.full.pdf, doi:10.1126/science.1069492.
URL http://www.sciencemag.org/content/295/5560/1662.abstract
I. Zechmeister, B. Freiesleben de Blasio, G. Garnett, Hpv-vaccination for the prevention of cervical cancer in austria: a model based
long-term prognosis of cancer epidemiology, Journal of Public Health 18 (2010) 3–13.
D. Hanahan, R. A. Weinberg, The hallmarks of cancer, Cell 100 (2000) 57–70.
J. Plotkin, M. A. Nowak, Diﬀerent eﬀects of apoptosis and dna repair on tumorigenesis, Journal of Theoretical Biology 214 (2002)
453–467. doi:10.1006/jtbi.2001.2471.
T. Lindahl, R. D. Wood, Quality control by dna repair, Science 286 (3).
R. Abbott, Cancersim: A computer-based simulation of hanahan and weinberg’s hallmarks of cancer, Master’s thesis, University of New
Mexico (2002).
L. Zhang, C. Athale, T. S. Deisboeck, Development of a three-dimensional multiscale agent-based tumor model: Simulating gene-protein
interaction proﬁles, cell phenotypes and multicellular patterns in brain cancer, Journal of Theoretical Biology.
S. R. McDougall, A. R. A. Anderson, M. A. J. Chaplain, Mathematical modelling of dynamic adaptive tumour-induced angiogenesis: Clinical implications and therapeutic targeting strategies, Journal of Theoretical Biology 241 (3) (2006) 564–589. doi:doi:
10.1016/j.jtbi.2005.12.022.
URL http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/B6WMD-4J91NR8-1/2/8644ffbbaab6cd3ca5e099b22576b975
M. A. J. Chaplain, Mathematical modelling of angiogenesis, Journal of Neuro-Oncology 50 (2000) 37–51, 10.1023/A:1006446020377.
URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1023/A:1006446020377
M. R. Owen, T. Alarcon, P. K. Maini, H. M. Byrne, Angiogenesis and vascular remodelling in normal and cancerous tissues, Journal of
Mathematical Biology 58 (4-5) (2009) 689–721.
E. B. Shim, Y.-G. Kwon, H. J. Ko, Computational analysis of tumor angiogenesis patterns using a two-dimensional model, Yonsei
Medical Journal 46 (2) (2005) 275–283.
A. L. Bauer, T. L. Jackson, Y. Jiang, A cell-based model exhibiting branching and anastomosis during tumor-induced angiogenesis,
Biophysical Journal 92 (9) (2007) 3105–3121. doi:doi: 10.1529/biophysj.106.101501.
URL http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/B94RW-4TR4KB1-P/2/47e6d417197d70233ff79f9bd473089d
A. Shirinifard, J. S. Gens, Zaitlen, 3d multi-cell simulation of tumor growth and angiogenesis, PLoS ONE 4 (10) (2009) e7190.
doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0007190.
M. Markus, D. B¨ohm, M. Schmick, Simulation of vessel morphogenesis using cellular automata, Mathematical Biosciences 156 (1-2)
(1999) 191–206. doi:doi: 10.1016/s0025-5564(98)10066-4.
URL http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/B6VHX-3W374Y2-9/2/d03620d18d402fe799635911fa3dab5c
P. Topa, Dynamically reorganising vascular networks modelled using cellular automata approach, in: Proceedings of the 8th international conference on Cellular Automata for Reseach and Industry, ACRI ’08, Springer-Verlag, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2008, pp. 494–499.
doi:10.1007/978-3-540-79992-4 64.
S. M. Peirce, E. J. Van Gieson, T. C. Skalak, Multicellular simulation predicts microvascular patterning and in silico tissue assembly,
The FASEB Journal 18 (6) (2004) 731–733. doi:10.1096/fj.03-0933fje.
D. Dr´eau, D. Stanimirov, T. Carmichael, M. Hadzikadic, An agent-based model of solid tumor progression, in: Proceedings of the 1st
International Conference on Bioinformatics and Computational Biology, BICoB ’09, Springer-Verlag, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2009, pp.
187–198.
M. M. Olsen, N. Siegelmann-Danieli, H. T. Siegelmann, Robust artiﬁcial life via artiﬁcial programmed death, Artiﬁcial Intelligence 172
(2008) 884–898.
R. C. Allsopp, H. Vaziri, C. Patterson, S. Goldstein, E. V. Younglai, A. B. Futcher, C. W. Greider, C. B. Harley, Telomere length predicts
replicative capacity of human ﬁbroblasts, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 89 (21)
(1992) 10114–10118.
H. D. Ryoo, T. Gorenc, H. Steller, Apoptotic cells can induce compensatory cell proliferation through the jnk and the wingless signaling
pathways, Developmental Cell 7 (4) (2004) 491 – 501. doi:DOI: 10.1016/j.devcel.2004.08.019.
URL http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/B6WW3-4DHN7DC-8/2/cef72f5e91f6552d24d5637062093238
N. Barkai, B.-Z. Shilo, Variability and robustness in biomolecular systems, Molecular Cell 28 (5) (2007) 755–760.
doi:10.1016/j.molcel.2007.11.013.
URL http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/B6WSR-4RBM5GD-9/2/95f047d342ea349536c09caf92ebd481
A. R. Anderson, A. M. Weaver, P. T. Cummings, V. Quaranta, Tumor morphology and phenotypic evolution driven by selective pressure
from the microenvironment, Cell 127 (5) (2006) 905 – 915. doi:DOI: 10.1016/j.cell.2006.09.042.
URL http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/B6WSN-4MG0YV3-C/2/a27cc76f4b8a02d9087f0607cc2c525f
M. M. Olsen, N. Siegelmann-Danieli, H. T. Siegelmann, Dynamic computational model suggests that cellular citizenship is fundamental
for selective tumor apoptosis, PLoS One 5 (5).
G. Pettet, C. Please, M. Tindall, D. McElwain, The migration of cells in multicell tumor spheroids, Bulletin of Math Bio 63 (2001)
231–257.

1025

