Software Support for High Performance
Problem-Solving on Computational Grids
Ken Kennedy
John Doerr Professor
Director, Center for High Performance Software
Computer Science MS132
3079 Duncan Hall
Rice University
Houston TX 77251-1892, USA
Phone: +1-(713)-348-5186
FAX: +1-(713)-348-5186
ken@rice.edu

Abstract
The 1999 report of the President’s Information Technology Advisory Committee (PITAC)-Information Technology Research: Investing in our Future-called
on the Federal government and the research community to shift their focus toward long-term, high-risk projects. This report has had a pronounced impact
both on the structure of funding programs and on how we think about the entire IT research endeavor. One outcome is that researchers now think about their
work in the context of some overarching eﬀort of which it is a part. As a result,
many more of us are thinking about long-term goals for IT research.
One extremely challenging problem for the coming decade is how to make
it easy to develop applications for collections of heterogeneous, geographicallydistributed computing platforms, sometimes called computational grids. In other
words, how can we make the Internet a suitable computing platform for ordinary users? This talk will discuss the Grid Application Development Software
(GrADS) Project, an eﬀort funded by the NSF Next Generation Software Program, which is seeking to develop software strategies to simplify the problem of
programming for a grid.
The GrADS eﬀort is focusing on two challenges. First, how can we support the
development of conﬁgurable object programs that can be retargeted to diﬀerent
collections of computing platforms and tailored for eﬃcient execution once the
target conﬁguration is known? Second, how can we provide abstract interfaces
to shield the average users from the complexities of programming for a network
environment? One way to address this second problem is to make it possible
for end users to develop programs in high-level domain-speciﬁc programming
systems. I will discuss a new compiler framework, called telescoping languages,
designed to make it easy to construct domain-speciﬁc scripting languages that
achieve high performance on a variety of platforms including grids.

V.N. Alexandrov et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2001, LNCS 2073, p. 8, 2001.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2001


