Procedia Computer
Science
Procedia
Science
00 (2010)
1–10
ProcediaComputer
Computer
Science
1 (2012)
885–894

www.elsevier.com/locate/procedia

International Conference on Computational Science, ICCS 2010

eResearch bootcamp: grooming next-gen researchers
Valerie Maxville
iVEC, 26 Dick Perry Ave, Kensington, 6151, Australia

Abstract
The next generation of researchers are not only attempting to grasp their discipline and research areas, but also
need to be well-versed in technology powered techniques for research and its dissemination - a shift referred to as
eResearch. The iVEC summer internship program provides an intense research training program to help undergraduate
students transition into postgraduate programs and innovative industry positions. Interns are supervised by leading
researchers in areas including radio astronomy, nanochemistry and molecular dynamics. More than a summer research
project, the program aims to give a comprehensive indoctrination into core and emerging techniques for research. This
paper describes the evolution of the internship program, the goals and methods used and a reﬂection on the results we
are observing.
c 2012 Published by Elsevier Ltd. Open access under CC BY-NC-ND license.
⃝

Keywords: Education, Internship, eResearch, High Performance Computing

1. Introduction
Bootcamp is a term describing the intense training at the start of military service. In this paper we draw the analogy between our summer research internships and a bootcamp as we aim to change the way the students think about
research. To do this we provide initial training in technology and project management, on-going instruction and workshops in presentation and disseminations of results and support the cohort to support each other. Core to the student
experience is their research project, enhanced with broader skills and a toolkit preparing them for the challenges they
may meet in the future. The students come to us with with discipline knowledge and their undergraduate academic
experience, by the end of the ‘bootcamp’ we aim to have them research-ready.
2. Wanted: Skilled Problem Solvers
How do you develop a computational scientist?
What does it mean to be an eResearcher?
How can we grow them?
Governments around the world are recognising the need for the eResearch stack for solving problems: High
Performance Computing (HPC), large scale data storage and management, scientiﬁc visualisation, fast networks and
collaborative environments. The problems facing science, industry, society and the planet need some or all of these
Email address: maxville@ivec.org (Valerie Maxville)

c 2012 Published by Elsevier Ltd. Open access under CC BY-NC-ND license.
1877-0509 ⃝
doi:10.1016/j.procs.2010.04.097

886

V. Maxville
/ Procedia Computer Science 1 (2012) 885–894
/ Procedia Computer Science 00 (2010) 1–10

2

together to increase understanding and to model and compare potential solutions. In 2009, the Australian Government
announced the Super Science Initiative1 , providing $901 million for research infrastructure based on the Strategic
Roadmap which justiﬁes the investments:
Collaborative infrastructure funding is needed to support research into an environmentally sustainable
Australia, biological discovery and health, frontier science and technology and safeguarding Australia;
Increased emphasis should be placed on eResearch infrastructure, as information and communication
technology underpins all areas of research and is an important enabler of collaboration between researchers within Australia and overseas [1].
Similar commitments have been made by governments and organisations including the US2 (Cyberinfrastructure),
Europe3 and the UK4 (e-Science). Moving away from localised access to resources by restricted groups, the trend is
to shared resources and open access. The Strategic Roadmap for Australian Research Infrastructure found that:
It is becoming clear that bringing researchers together, across institutional, disciplinary and geographical
boundaries - both national and international - generates new and particular opportunities for science and
social breakthroughs through access to a greater collective intellectual capital. [1, p.4]
Governments and research funding organisations have realised the importance of technology to innovation across
all disciplines and funding is ﬂowing into programs. Unfortunately, this comes at a time where the STEM5 enrolments
are low and the average age of faculty is increasing. In the US, from 1973 to 2003 the percentage of faculty over 55
increased from 15% to 30% [2]. At Harvard, faculty over 60 now outnumber those under 50. Rather than focus on
the direness of the situation or on the very necessary strategies required to attract more students, in this paper we
consider one approach for preparing the young scientists - that we have - for the research environment of their future.
The STEM cohort needs to be exposed to and nurtured in a cross-disciplinary approach to research and the tools
available to support it. It is also possible that the positive experiences of interns, carrying out leading edge research
in topical areas, may also help to attract more students to research careers. Studies indicate that a key motivator for
career selection is altruism - a contributor to the popularity of medicine and nursing [3][4]. This concern and need to
do things for the beneﬁt of others could perhaps be directed towards the solution of critical world problems through
computational techniques.
The studies citing the importance of computational science and other technology powered research also highlight
the need for training. The US report on International Assessment of Research and Development in Simulation-Based
Engineering and Science [5] found that
Finding 2: Inadequate education and training of the next generation of computational scientists threatens
global as well as U.S. growth of SBE&S. This is particularly urgent for the United States; unless we
prepare researchers to develop and use the next generation of algorithms and computer architectures, we
will not be able to exploit their game-changing capabilities. [5, p xv.]
Finding 3: There is a clear and urgent need for a new, modern approach to educating and training the
next generation of researchers in high performance computing speciﬁcally, and in modeling and simulation generally, for scientiﬁc discovery and engineering innovation.[5, p xviii.]
There are a range of approaches being taken to educate and train researchers. Curricula in computational science
are oﬀered at George Mason University [6] and the Australian National University6 . These courses will either need to
1 see http://www.innovation.gov.au/Section/science/Pages/superscienceinitiative.aspx - $80m allocated to iVEC for the Pawsey HPC Centre for
SKA Science
2 http://www.nsf.gov/dir/index.jsp?org=oci
3 http://cordis.europa.eu/esfri/
4 http://www.rcuk.ac.uk/research/resinfra/lfroadmap.htm
5 STEM: Science Technology Engineering and Mathematics - not intending to exclude other disciplines from eResearch, but rather highlighting
the disciplines driving eResearch and the results that the funding bodies are expecting.
6 http://bcomptlsci.anu.edu.au/

V. Maxville/ Procedia
/ Procedia
Computer Science 1 (2012) 885–894
Computer Science 00 (2010) 1–10

887
3

be marketed to a niche who prefer a computational science, or perhaps become the standard approach for traditional
sciences. In an environment of cancelled courses, it may be diﬃcult to build the numbers for universities to consider
these viable. Another suggestion is for the new research skills to be speciﬁcally included in the graduate attributes
across all disciplines [7], which would require widespread agreement and approvals.
In Australia, the Review of NCRIS highlighted the need for education and training along with the common need
for ICT development. Computational Science has grown separately to the computing faculties in most academic
institutions and has very basic coverage of software development. The scale of software needed across domains
requires a more systematic approach to software development by 1) specialists in software engineering and 2) funded,
organised projects to develop common platforms and code. Venues for exchanging this expertise include the Software
Engineering for Computational Science and Engineering (SECSE)7 and the Software Carpentry8 resource. Funding
organisations also need to recognise the need for resourcing the core software development for research to build
standardised environments and manage these signiﬁcant projects. An example of the successful use of software
engineers in a domain area is the AuScope Grid project9 , which has built up middleware for the geoscience community
in Australia.
A challenge of this educational need is that the rate of change in eResearch technologies and skills exceeds the
ability of universities to update and approve new courses. A piece of the solution may be in the eResearch bodies who
support the infrastructure for computational research and are intimately aware of technological change. An example is
VPAC10 who oﬀer a three-month intern program focussed on science and advanced computing. Students are based at
VPAC and have some training in parallelisation, coding and computational methods as part of the internship. Monash
University11 hosts nine-week internships where students work with the developers of Nimrod, a software tool that
enables users to harness multiple computers for large-scale simulations. Training for these interns is in the use and
extension of Nimrod to suit their application. In the United States the LLNL12 lists internships along with other available employment at the Laboratory. Fields of research include organic/inorganic synthetic, analytical, computational,
nuclear, and environmental chemistry and are well paid, and provide the opportunity for interns to work alongside
scientists and engineers. LANL13 oﬀers research projects which are ﬂexible and self-contained, with an expectation
that the student publish a paper and present their work to the staﬀ group. Many existing programs have similarities
to the iVEC internships, but do not indicate they include ongoing training, collaboration and communication that we
have built into our program.
3. iVEC Education Program
iVEC is based in Perth, Australia, and provides eResearch infrastructure and support to Western Australian researchers and their collaborators. The Education Program is working to build local capacity in HPC, visualisation,
data management and eResearch. The Program is responsible for development and facilitation of advanced computing
courses, internships, assistance to researchers, outreach to schools and organisation of events to raise awareness and
understanding of eResearch and advanced computing. We draw on expertise across iVEC and its Facilities to provide relevant and targeted initiatives to build capacity in the use of high-end technology throughout the WA research
community.
In 2008 we launched the iVEC eResearch Forum to bring researchers, developers, government and industry together and communicate the signiﬁcant impact the three iVEC Facilities are having on the local research community.
The exchange of ideas, software, standards and techniques between these groups is crucial for accelerating research
and innovation [1, p.4].
The Education Program is tasked with preparing researchers and support staﬀ for each new wave of technology.
This currently includes training in parallel programming, software development, managing research data, project
7 http://www.cs.ua.edu/˜SECSE10
8 http://software-carpentry.org/

9 https://twiki.auscope.org/twiki/bin/view/Grid/WebHome

10 The

Victorian Partnership for Advanced Computing - http://www.vpac.org/training/internships
University - http://www.monash.edu.au/news/newsline/story/1290
12 Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory - https://jobs.llnl.gov/index.html
13 Los Alamos National Laboratory - http://www.lanl.gov/education/undergrad/
11 Monash

888

V. Maxville
/ Procedia Computer Science 1 (2012) 885–894
/ Procedia Computer Science 00 (2010) 1–10

4

management and the visualisation of datasets. The Program faces new challenges as iVEC and our researchers move
towards peta-scale computing. We are collaborating with educators around the world to be at the forefront of training
these new skills in readiness for the Pawsey HPC Centre for SKA Science.
4. Internships
The internship program was the earliest iVEC education initiative, and has awarded 46 internships from 20052009. The majority of scholarships are fully funded by iVEC with some targeted places co-funded by research
groups14 . The beneﬁts of the internships are many. For the student, there is the chance to use iVEC’s advanced
computing resources and to learn new skills as they undertake a non-trivial research project. The supervisor gains
through the exploration of new areas of research, and a low-risk ﬁrst contact with iVEC - opening many future
opportunities. For iVEC, building eResearch capacity is a core goal, we also raise awareness of iVEC through the
call for participation, the intern presentations at the annual iVEC eResearch Forum and the dissemination of online
materials (paper and podcasts).
Most of our interns are involved via summer research internships. Open to undergraduates, these last for ten
weeks and have a generous tax-free stipend. We have a competitive selection process for a limited number of places,
with the assessment based on the student’s academic results, resume and motivation. In 2009, we accepted 41% of
applications, with 61% of applicants being worthy of placement.
Many supervisors have had more than one internship project with iVEC, which we welcome. For some researchers
the internships are a pilot project to work with iVEC, which is the ﬁrst step in long-term use of our facilities. External
funding for places has been allowed in the most recent year, 2009, and has nearly doubled the number of places made
available 15 . This can be seen as evidence of the value the supervisors see in the iVEC program and the support system
we provide.
We consider a range of outcomes as indications of success for the internship program:
• Subsequent enrolment in programs related to their intern project or advanced computing
• Subsequent industry employment where their iVEC experience is exercised
• Publication of papers at conferences and in journals

• Subsequent work on the project by other students and researchers
A recent review of the internships to date showed that the interns averaged one conference or journal publication
each, with a third of students going on to undertake Higher Degrees by Research (HDR). Although iVEC is primarily
focussed on University and CSIRO research, we also aim to build local capacity for industry in advanced computing.
The students who did not take on HDR have transitioned into industry roles blending their domain knowledge and
new technical skills.
5. Bootcamp
As the iVEC internship program has run for a number of years, we have been reviewing and reﬁning it continually.
The program is available to undergraduate students of third year and above and is particularly suited to students about
to start a PhD. There is no restriction on the discipline for students, projects or researchers; just a requirement for
the project to make use of our Facilities or have a strong eResearch component. Internships are for ten weeks, with
the students usually on site with their supervisors at the iVEC member institutions. The ﬁrst week brings the interns
together for an induction, and the group meets up every fortnight throughout the program. Expectations on the students
are that they will submit a paper and a podcast, and will make a ﬁnal presentation at the iVEC eResearch Forum.
14 Including: CSIRO Minerals DownUnder Flagship (previously through the CSIRO predictive mineral discovery Co-operative Research Centre
(pmd*CRC) ), the International Centre for Radio Astronomy Research (ICRAR) and SGI
15 42% of budget via external funding in 2009

889
5

V. Maxville/ Procedia
/ Procedia
Computer Science 1 (2012) 885–894
Computer Science 00 (2010) 1–10

Afternoon 1-4pm

Morning 9am –
12pm

Monday 30th Nov
WASP

Tuesday 1st Dec
ARRC

Wednesday 2nd Dec
ARRC

Thursday 3rd Dec
ARRC

Friday 4th Dec
ARRC

9am: Welcome
Intro to using iVEC
Intro to iVEC
Programs
Facilities
eResearch
Internship Requirements

Meetings





Cognac
XT3
XE

Parallel Programming
Concepts

Project Management
Software Engineering
Licencing and Open Source
Managing Research Data
Internship Reporting

1pm: WASP Facility tour

Grid Computing
Meetings

2pm: Scientific
Visualisation




Concepts
Generic Grid Client

Advanced Parallel
Programming

 Collab. workspace
 Report dates and
requirements
Team-building with
ARRC staff

Figure 1: Induction program schedule
Prior to 2007, the internships were mainly a scholarship allowing students to work with researchers and then do a
presentation at the end. We have also funded top-up scholarships for PhD students. The current summer (DecemberFebruary) research intern program adds to that our eﬀort to develop the research skills of the students, and to broaden
their awareness of eResearch and cross-disciplinary synergies. The eResearch attributes we aim to develop to enhance
their domain knowledge include:
• Awareness of and openness to cross-disciplinary opportunities and applications
• Communication and collaboration skills
• Understanding of data management

• eResearch skills and knowledge: visualisation, collaboration, data management and HPC
• Awareness of standards and the value of interoperability

• Ability to abstract a problem to recognise similarities in solutions across disciplines
On a more personal note, we want to ensure the interns do not feel isolated as they work on projects during a
period when their friends, and most of the faculty, are on leave. For iVEC we look to promote our resources and
progress our goal of increasing local capacity in eResearch.
5.1. Induction
During the induction week the students have four solid days of instruction and their ﬁrst chance to meet each
other. The induction program moves between the three iVEC Facilities and the group is given a tour of each so they
actually see the resources they will be using and meet the staﬀ they may need to contact. We make the requirements
for the project deliverables very clear during the induction and reinforce our expectations of the students in each of
the subsequent project meetings.
Major challenges for setting up the schedule come from the diverse backgrounds of the students and the wide
range of projects they undertake. As an illustration, the student projects in 2009 include:
• Evaluation of Open Source Physics Engines Parallelization

• Deep Freeze: computer simulation of cryogenic preservation at the molecular level
• Calculating atomic collisions

• Numerical simulation and visualisation of active ﬂow control of a boundary layer
• Exploiting GPU processors to accelerate linear-scaling density functional theory
• The GPU autocorrelator for the LBA

• Simulations of the Molecular Hydrogen Content of Galaxies

890

V. Maxville
/ Procedia Computer Science 1 (2012) 885–894
/ Procedia Computer Science 00 (2010) 1–10

(a) MediaWiki 2007

(b) Sakai 2008

6

(c) Conﬂuence 2009

Figure 2: Collaborative environments for iVEC interns
• The Expanding Supernova 1987A
• Meteor Monitoring Project

In the early intakes, interns came from computational physics and chemistry and were involved in developing or
extending parallel code using FORTRAN or C and Message Passing Interface (MPI). In recent years we have seen
a trend towards data and visualisation projects and a strong contingent of GPU-based projects (Graphics Processor
Unit). In response, we have brought in more visualisation and added data management, software engineering and
project management to the curriculum (see Figure 1). We have broadened the MPI courses to explore the concepts
of parallel computing, while retaining MPI as our tool of choice for technical examples. We see parallelism as
fundamental in the end to end workﬂow of most projects and aim to provide at least a general understanding to all
students, even if that is not the part of the workﬂow they will focus on.
The students are expected to have a clear project plan, including their data management strategy, by the end of the
induction week. One day out of the week is set aside for meetings with supervisors and support staﬀ to assist with
planning and scope what can be accomplished in ten weeks.
Although plenty of useful content is covered in the induction week, we accept that some of it will not be applicable
to every intern’s project. Although we could try to tailor the induction to the projects, our goal is to give a broader
awareness to the students, so what they learn from iVEC is ready for them to apply when they need it later in their
career.
The immediate value of the induction is the students meeting each other and our staﬀ. They end the week with an
understanding of iVEC and eResearch and what it can oﬀer their current and future projects. They know where to get
help and they know they’re not alone.
5.2. Collaboration
One of the recent changes in research is the use of social networking, wikis and repositories for collaboration and
dissemination of results. In 2007 we introduced MediaWiki16 for the students to record their project progress which
could then be viewed and commented on by the other interns, supervisors and iVEC staﬀ. Added beneﬁts were the
visibility of each others’ work and having them begin to put the project into words at an earlier stage. In most cases,
the wiki page was the living draft of their ﬁnal report (as had been suggested in the induction).
In 2008 we moved to Sakai, supplied by the Australian Research Collaboration Service (ARCS)17 . Where the wiki
users were equal, Sakai allowed for two roles: maintain (teacher) and access (student). The split of the roles was a
positive, but we found the Learning Management System (LMS) aspect of Sakai imposed the teacher/student relation
and privileges which were not so helpful. The restriction to ‘maintain’ users posting material to the group resources
area meant that what had appeared to be a very useful collaborative facility could only be used for the facilitators to
16 http://www.mediawiki.org/
17 https://sakai.arcs.org.au/

V. Maxville/ Procedia
/ Procedia
Computer Science 1 (2012) 885–894
Computer Science 00 (2010) 1–10

891
7

disseminate material. Students were restricted to using a private drop box for resources which were only visible to
the facilitators. We found the students explored and then ignored most of the functionality of Sakai and lived inside
the wiki. Even then, the facility for entering maths equations did not work for us, and the steps involved in uploading
and sharing images became a stumbling block for most of the interns. One student did use the drop box extensively,
mainly as a check-in for the various versions of his software.
Sakai did oﬀer some social networking functions which the students found useful, including an indication of who
was currently online, a chat facility and proﬁles and personalisation of accounts. With MediaWiki in 2007 we had
a training session on the use of the wiki. In the 2008 induction, by the time the facilitators had all the Sakai logins
working, the entire group was immersed in creating proﬁles and ‘moving in’ to Sakai. The detailed hands-ons tutorial
was reduced to a list of tasks for them to set up their area and know where their resources would be. The indication
is that the improved usability of Sakai over MediaWiki, and/or a cohort with more familiarity in LMS and social
networking has removed the need for instruction in how to use collaborative workspaces. Even though they may not
need to ‘learn’ to use the workspace, it is important to give the students time to explore and get comfortable with the
tool and the way they will be expected to use it.
During the internship the Sakai chat facility was used, mostly for opportunistic questions when an active login
was visible. Two of the students who were working on similar projects at diﬀerent universities were chatting regularly
about the queue times on the supercomputers at iVECs three facilities:
Student 1: Your simulations seem to get stuck in the queue for quite a long time.
Student 2: Yeah, I dunno why, I tried to increase the time allocation for in08... so maybe it’s my memory
usage? R urs running straight away?
Student 1: Yep..and I think its coz you’re using 8 CPU’s....I’ve ran like jobs that goes on for over 24hrs!!!
4 CPUs each...and its already completed...
For 2009 we searched for a collaborative tool with the utility of MediaWiki and the usability of Sakai. We selected
Conﬂuence wiki18 . The students were directed to set up their area on the wiki and use the news (blog) facility to submit
their weekly reports. The home page for the intern space included recent updates, blog excerpts, a label heatmap and
a statistics table showing each user’s count of edits, comments and labels. As in previous years, supervisors and iVEC
staﬀ had access to be able to view and comment on content.
The activity varied between students providing minimal input to about half of the interns making lively comments
on each other’s pages. The heatmap and statistics table were added after week four to encourage participation. From
a coordination perspective the statistics are very useful for diagnosing where there may be a problem with a project
and to intervene early. It is also possible the intern and supervisor have a diﬀerent communication tool they prefer,
or that the intern is having diﬃculty working with the wiki, so we need to be able to follow up and work out what is
going on.
This 2009 intake had almost double previous numbers, going from 8-9 to 14. This impacted on our methods
of communication and the practicality of going through individual updates at the fortnightly progress meetings. We
found that the collaborative environment helped considerably, and provided the students an opportunity to reﬂect
regularly on their work in their weekly blogs. Subgroups also formed within the group, with students following each
other’s work.
Changing collaborative tool each year has made it diﬃcult to make comparisons of the way the students are using
the systems but the statistics can give some insight into the students’ behaviour. Figure 3 shows selected events in
Sakai from 2008-2009. Students were given the environment and found the facilities within it that suited their project
and their communication preference. The most used feature was the wiki, accounting for over half of the activity.
Students tended to make one very long page (‘wiki new’ in the ﬁgure), which they edited throughout the project
(‘wiki review’). After the wiki, the students used ‘content new/review’ which was mainly uploading ﬁles into the
resources and drop-box area. For example, Student 6 carried out most tasks through the drop box facility - private
from the other students. In most cases, the total activity is a good indicator of the level of eﬀort made by the student.
An exception was Student 8 who was very industrious but required math equations in all project documents. In this
case the workﬂow was to use LaTeX oﬄine and send copies of the paper in progress through the drop box and via
18 http://www.atlassian.com/software/conﬂuence/

892

V. Maxville
/ Procedia Computer Science 1 (2012) 885–894
/ Procedia Computer Science 00 (2010) 1–10

8

Figure 3: Sakai usage 2008-2009
email. A similar amount of activity by Student 2 tells a diﬀerent story - in the case the student had done little work
throughout and so put a late eﬀort into the project and deliverables oﬄine, but had little Sakai activity.
Figure 4 is the Conﬂuence wiki use by the 2009-2010 intake. It includes edits, creates and views by all with access
to the spaces. The two week break is visible as a lull about three weeks into the internships with the following weeks
showing an increase in the proportion of edits versus views as the students focussed on their projects. As with Sakai,
the interns adopted a variety of usage patterns. Some worked oﬀ a wiki home area for all the projects, editing to
update on project progress. The advised approach was to post weekly updates to the news/blog facility, linking to the
complete explanations. Around half of the students used news as their main activity. Edits can be a misleading statistic
as some will do many small edits and others one long edit, perhaps using the preview tab, and quickly the diﬀerence
between students can be a multiple of ﬁve, ten or more. For example, the peak at the 23/2 is almost completely the
work of one student, completing his ﬁnal report online. All of the other students wrote their ﬁnal reports oﬄine using
supplied Word and LaTeX templates.
The variation in workﬂows we have observed allows us to consider two main options in the future. The ﬁrst is to
continue to provide a tool with a range of features so interns can select those they prefer. Alternatively, we could move
to standardise their workﬂow, either through a restricted set of features, or through requirements on how they work.
The second approach would make it easier to monitor the students. However, for iVEC purposes we prefer to oﬀer
many options, provided they are accessible through one tool, and allow for collaboration between interns, supervisors
and iVEC staﬀ.
5.3. Meetings and Workshops
We bring the students together regularly to reinforce the bond between the interns and to provide face to face
checkpoints on progress. The previous approach of project by project updates is not appropriate as with a larger
group there would be 13 people waiting (and listening) for their turn. The blogs have helped to serve this purpose and
allowed us to focus on other activities in our meetings. With the 2009 intake we decided to expand on grooming them
for their ﬁnal (and future) presentations. We have recorded each of them giving a ﬁve minute impromptu overview of

V. Maxville/ Procedia
/ Procedia
Computer Science 1 (2012) 885–894
Computer Science 00 (2010) 1–10

893
9

Figure 4: Conﬂuence Wiki usage 2009-2010
their project in week 6 (30 minutes notice given). They had a slide to reference which held the four questions 19 they
were expected to address:
•
•
•
•

What is it?
What need does it address?
How is it diﬀerent?
So what?

This took place in the 115 seat auditorium where they give their ﬁnal presentations. The students were able to
view their own presentations in a presentation workshop that was held two weeks later. The cohort was split into three
and rotated between stations, with one group viewing and receiving feedback on their talks, another group doing a
similar impromptu talk and the third able to discuss any project issues with a computational science specialist. The
smaller groups, along with the shared discomfort, seemed to bring out an openness to feedback from iVEC staﬀ and
the other students. Researchers need to conquer the fear of public speaking, so we concentrate on enhancing the skills
across the group.
5.4. Deliverables
Over the years the required outputs have undergone subtle changes. Early interns wrote a webpage as a report and
presented on their results to a small group. We now require a report in the manner of short conference paper, a podcast
and a presentation as part of a public symposium. Each of these deliverables has a diﬀerent audience to help exercise
the students’ communication abilities and to reduce repetition across media.
The paper is targeted at a discipline-speciﬁc audience, with rigour expected in presentation and analysis of results.
This also creates a document which is very close to publication standard, and future publication is greatly encouraged.
19 Thanks

to Kat Black for these project pitch questions - http://vjzoo.com/ab.htm

894

V. Maxville
/ Procedia Computer Science 1 (2012) 885–894
/ Procedia Computer Science 00 (2010) 1–10

10

As in the recorded exercise, the audience for ﬁnal presentations is researchers, academics and technical experts of
various backgrounds. Thus the students need to provide some introductory material for their domain. Some projects
are so focussed and complex that they struggle to impart any level of understanding. We suggest these students work
with our visualisation experts to ﬁnd a way to represent their work and its theoretical basis.
In 2007 we introduced the podcast as a deliverable after observing the increase in use of video as a quick means
to communicate research ideas and results. The students are introduced to podcasting concepts in a group workshop
using GarageBand and Audacity software. Previously they have targeted a general audience with the podcasts, but this
cohort (2009) are developing podcasts aimed at high school students. This presents quite a challenge for the interns
to get across not only the science, but also their enthusiasm and the importance of the projects they are doing. The
value is in the communication challenge, and we continue to look at how to add value through the deliverables for the
intern program.
6. Conclusion and Future
As we see Computational Science and eResearch projects attracting government attention and funding, we need
to address a shortage of researchers skilled in advanced computing. The iVEC summer internship program takes
undergraduate students from all disciplines on a journey into eResearch - the technology, the solutions and the new
forms of research dissemination that can transform them into eResearchers. We observe the students adapting to these
approaches, and applying their social use of technology to their research. The exposure to staﬀ and researchers around
iVEC helps open them to the possibilities of cross-disciplinary research, and we hope will be good preparation for
them to take on challenging research or industry careers.
Acknowledgements
Thankyou to all the interns who have dedicated their summer break to undertaking challenging projects and building their research skills. Thanks also to the supervisors and iVEC staﬀ for their support of the students. We appreciate
the feedback from students, supervisors and staﬀ on the internship program and the opportunity to experiment and
improve on how we facilitate the training of these precious padawans.
About iVEC
As the hub of advanced computing in Western Australia, iVEC is encouraging and energising research in and the
uptake of high performance computing and visualisation in Western Australia. This is achieved by making available
facilities and expertise to the research, education, industrial and government communities.
iVEC is a joint venture among CSIRO, Curtin University, Edith Cowan University, Murdoch University and The
University of Western Australia and is supported by the Western Australian Government.
References
[1] Strategic Roadmap for Australian Research Infrastructure, Australian Government: Department of Innovation, Industry, Science and Research, August 2008, URL: http://ncris.innovation.gov.au/Pages/SRARI.aspx
[2] Editorial: Ivory Tower Grays, Nature Chemical Biology 3, 69 (2007) doi:10.1038/nchembio0207-69
[3] L. Saad, Medical Careers Seen as Best Choice for Young Men, Women; No other ﬁeld recommended in substantial numbers, Gallup Poll
News Service, August 7 2009, http://www.allbusiness.com/population-demographics/demographic-groups/12682756-1.html
[4] M. Miers, C. Rickaby, K. Pollard, Career choices in health care: Is nursing a special case? A content analysis of survey data, International
Journal of Nursing Studies, Volume 44, Issue 7, Pages 1196-1209
[5] S.C. Glotzer (Chair) et.al., International Assessment of Research and Development in Simulation-Based Engineering and Science, World
Technology Evaluation Center, Inc. 2009
[6] Kirk D. Borne, John Wallin, Robert Weigel, The New Computational and Data Sciences Undergraduate Program at George Mason University.
Computational Science - ICCS 2009, 9th International Conference, Baton Rouge, LA, USA, May 25-27, 2009, Proceedings, Part II. Lecture
Notes in Computer Science 5545 Springer, 74-83
[7] J. Warburton, ”eResearch Training for Higher Degree Students”, in eResearch Australasia Conference, Sydney, 9-13 Nov, 2009,
http://espace.library.uq.edu.au/view/UQ:188398

