Available online at www.sciencedirect.com

Procedia Computer Science 18 (2013) 1006 – 1015

International Conference on Computational Science, ICCS 2013

A multiscale approach for the coupled simulation of blood ﬂow
and thrombus formation in intracranial aneurysms
Simon Zimnya,∗, Bastien Chopardb , Orestis Malaspinasb , Eric Lorenzc , Kartik Jaina ,
Sabine Rollera , J¨org Bernsdorfa
a German

Research School for Simulation Sciences and RWTH Aachen University, Schinkelstr. 2a, Aachen, Germany
Science Department, University of Geneva, 7 route de Drize,1227 Carouge, Switzerland
c Computational Science, Faculty of Science, University of Amsterdam, Netherlands

b Computer

Abstract
This paper considers a multiscale description of thrombus formation and its simpliﬁed numerical implementation in the case of
cerebral aneurysms. In particular, we extend previously introduced generic 2D models towards 3D patient speciﬁc aneurysm
geometries. The multiscale ampliﬁcation method contributes to considerably reducing simulation time. This allows us to
achieve a mesh resolution high enough to resolve details of the stent geometry which is triggering ﬂow conditions to induce
clotting. Simulation results presented in this paper are qualitatively in a good agreement with clinical observations.
Keywords: Lattice Boltzmann Method; Scale Separation Map; Thrombus; Intracranial Aneurysms; Multiscale Simulation

1. Introduction and Motivation
In recent years the treatment of intracranial aneurysms (IA) has been studied at length and methods of treatment have improved signiﬁcantly. Besides surgical clipping and endovascular coiling, the use of stents as ﬂow
diverters is becoming more and more popular. The idea behind this non-invasive treatment technique is to change
the blood ﬂow properties in order to trigger thrombosis in aneurysm cavities and, thus, its complete occlusion,
eventually preventing the risk of rupture.
For the clinician it is a great challenge to decide the appropriate treatment strategy, once an IA has been
detected. Ideally, the choice of a suitable stent is supported by a prediction of the occlusion probability of an IA,
which requires an accurate estimation of the post-treatment ﬂow properties. Currently, the clinician’s intuition and
experience is the only guideline in this process. A secondary concern is the optimization of stent geometries, which
requires a detailed insight into the complex interaction of ﬂow and biological processes for various combinations
of stent and aneurysm topologies.
In the recent years several projects simulated the blood ﬂow in human brains, especially in IAs. The HemeLB
project1 focussed on the prediction of the blood ﬂow and on near vascular malformations while the @neurIST
∗ Corresponding

author. Tel.: +49-(0)241-80-99769; fax: +49-(0)241-80-6-99769.
E-mail address: s.zimny@grs-sim.de.
1 http://www.2020science.net/software/hemelb

1877-0509 © 2013 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. Open access under CC BY-NC-ND license.
Selection and peer review under responsibility of the organizers of the 2013 International Conference on Computational Science
doi:10.1016/j.procs.2013.05.266

Simon Zimny et al. / Procedia Computer Science 18 (2013) 1006 – 1015

1007

project2 focus was on the rupture risk assessment of cerebral aneurysm. In addition a simple thrombosis model
using only the wall shear stress (WSS) as clotting criteria has been developed [1].
The aim of the present paper is to develop a concept for numerical simulation of the highly complex process
of thrombus formation in patient speciﬁc intracranial aneurysms. This requires the concurrent simulation of both,
blood ﬂow in complex geometries, and biological processes such as blood coagulation under the inﬂuence of local
ﬂow properties. These results shall help the clinicians to choose the optimal stent design to trigger the complete
occlusion of the patient speciﬁc aneurysm. A particular challenge arises from the fact that these processes occur
over a large spectrum of time- and length scales, which prevent the application of classical simulation techniques
due to the expected enormous demand of memory and simulation time.
Here we base our approach on an extension of the model proposed by Ouared et al. [2, 3] and Bernsdorf and
Harrison et al. [4, 5, 6] by formalizing the multiscale part of the problem.
The remainder of this publication is structured as follows: First the bio-medical agents that are involved in the
formation of a thrombus are explained in detail. Based on this a possible scale separation map (SSM) including
various time (μs to weeks) and length scales (Å to dm) is deﬁned. After deﬁnition of the SSM and its associated
coupling patterns, a simpliﬁcation strategy for a possible implementation is described.
In a ﬁrst step towards simulation, a numerical model was derived from the macroscopic part of the SSM and
implemented into a ﬂow solver software package to simulate the thrombus formation in a patient speciﬁc aneurysm
geometry. This model is depending on two ﬂow properties, namely the wall shear stress (WSS) and the residence
time of the blood in certain areas of the aneurysm. Due to the high complexity of the aneurysm geometry the
blood ﬂow is simulated using the lattice Boltzmann method, which is proved to be optimal for large numerical
simulations. [7].
2. Multiscale Modeling
2.1. The biological process of thrombus formation
The formation of thrombus is a highly complex process depending on a large number of biochemical agents
reacting with each other, rheological properties of blood plasma, vessel wall (endothelium, extracellular matrix)
and blood cells like platelets or red blood cells (RBC). The biochemical agents can support (procoagulants) or
hinder (anticoagulants) the thrombus formation. Currently, there is no full understanding of the detailed processes
that lead to thrombosis in aneurysm cavities. The THROMBUS European project 3 addresses this question by
combining new biological experiments and new clinical observations into a multiscale numerical simulation.
In this paper we review the processes that are known to play a major role in clot formation, in general. The
key ingredients are
• platelets including its activation, aggregation and adhesion (see Fig. 1, red dotted circle)
• the coagulation cascade leading to ﬁbrin production including the incorporation of particles (e.g. RBCs)
(see Fig. 1, blue dotted circle)
• the endothelium as a modulator of procoagulants [8].
Although all parts can initiate the formation of a blood clot on their own, the interaction between them is more
likely to occur since platelets as well as coagulation factors and the endothelium are always present in human
blood vessels.
Platelets in their inactive form have a discoid shape, a smooth rippled surface [9] and an average diameter of 1.5
- 2 μm [10]. Their surface hosts various numbers of receptors that can be stimulated by pro- and anticoagulants. In
addition the platelets organelles include diﬀerent kinds of granules. The α-granules contain several procoagulants
(e.g. factor V, von Willebrand factor (vWF) [11, 12]).
The activation of platelets can be triggered by
• exposure to high shear stresses (∼ 5Pa [13, 14])
2 http://cilab2.upf.edu/aneurist1/index.php
3 http://www.thrombus-vph.eu

1008

Simon Zimny et al. / Procedia Computer Science 18 (2013) 1006 – 1015

extrinsic materials
(e.g. stent, coil)

cells (e.g. RBC,
monocytes)

platelets

endothelium

platelet
activation

coagulation
cascade

platelet
aggregation

clot
formation
changes in the
clot structure
clot lysis

Fig. 1. The biological processes leading to thrombus formation.

• extrinsic materials (e.g. stent, coil) [10]
• coagulation factors [10, 15] (e.g. collagen XII release from injured endothelium [16, 17])
• other activated platelets
Activated platelets change their shape from discoid to spherical [10] and start to expose proteins and growth
factors from their granules. Receptors on their surface support the ability to aggregate to the subendothelial
matrix of the vessel wall [10], exogenous surfaces and to each other. Note also that platelets can adhere without
prior activation [18]. Hemoglobin that is known to hinder the natural platelet inhibition process [12] is emitted
from damaged erythrocytes (red blood cells) at extremely high shear stresses (∼ 150Pa, [19]), which triggers the
activation of platelets.
Under healthy conditions the pro- and anticoagulants are balanced. Due to external inﬂuences (e.g. trauma,
inﬂammation) this balance is disturbed leading to thrombus formation. The inﬂuence of imbalanced coagulants
can be described by the coagulation cascade. The coagulation cascade leads to the production of ﬁbrin from its
inactive form ﬁbrinogen, which aggregates to ﬁbrin strands forming a cross-linked mesh. In this mesh blood cells,
e.g. RBCs, are caught and incorporated. Uchida et al. [20] characterizes the diﬀerent types of thrombi by its color
and by the level of platelets (white) and RBCs (red, brown) incorporated. White thrombi tend to be ﬁbrin-rich
while brown and red thrombi tend to be ﬁbrin-poor [20].
The coagulation cascade consists of two major pathways (extrinsic and intrinsic), which lead to a common
pathway in the end [21]. The intrinsic pathway (also known as contact activation pathway) is initiated by inﬂammations or the contact of blood to an extrinsic surface (e.g. stents). . The more important pathway to consider for
the formation of a stent-induced thrombus is the extrinsic pathway (also known as Tissue Factor Pathway). This
pathway is initiated by a dysfunctioning, or a damage to the vessel wall (e.g. inadequate ﬂow properties, cut or
stitch while stent deployment).
Among a various number of proteins (Protein C and S) and agents (vWF) the twelve coagulation factors I-XIII
(factor VI is not deﬁned) are major contributors to the ﬁbrin production. Besides ﬁbrin thrombin and its inactivated
form prothrombin is the central link of the two pathways and activates ﬁbrinogen to ﬁbrin [13].
Koskinas et al. [8] pointed out that in areas of low WSS proinﬂammatory genes are upregulated. These
areas appear in the bulge of stented aneurysms and often coincide with recirculation zones, in which the blood is
trapped. Due to the higher residence time, the procoagulant factors in the blood increase and initiate the formation
of a blood clot.
The process of clot lysis is almost simultaneously initiated [12] and helps to curtail the clot growth. This
process is dependent on the anticoagulants like the tissue-factor-pathway-inhibitor (TFPI) , antithrombin, proteins,
plasmin and prostacyclin. Also physical quantities like high shear stresses may lead to partial or complete abortion
or dilution of the thrombus.

Simon Zimny et al. / Procedia Computer Science 18 (2013) 1006 – 1015

1009

Experiments by Kamocka et al. [16] lead to the conclusion that the thrombus itself goes through several stages.
At ﬁrst the thrombus grows rapidly. After this growth phase the volume decreases due to the contraction of the
incorporated platelets. Kamocka et al. also suggests the hypothesis that the surface composition changes from
platelet- to ﬁbrin-rich forming a ﬁbrin cap.
2.2. The complete scale separation map
The processes that lead to the formation of a thrombus are acting on a wide range of temporal (ms to weeks)
and spatial scales (Å to several cm). Due to this wide spectrum the concept of a scale separation map (SSM)
proposed by Hoekstra et al. [22] is used to describe the formation of a thrombus in intracranial aneurysms. A
SSM is deﬁned as a two dimensional map with the temporal scales on the x- and the spatial scales on the yaxis. The diﬀerent
ﬀ
processes are drawn as boxes within their speciﬁc temporal- and spatial range. The mutual
interaction of the diﬀerent
ﬀ
processes is described by directed edges between the boxes.
For the case of thrombus formation in IA at ﬁrst a complete scale separation map (see Fig. 2) has been generated directly from the biological processes described in section 2.1. The complete system was split up in several
subsystems describing pure physical processes like the rheology (light green) and particles (yellow), biochemical
processes like the formation (orange) and structure and lysis of a thrombus (light blue).

Fig. 2. The complete scale separation map.

The rheology contains of the bulk ﬂow (BF) describing the blood ﬂow itself and the boundary layer (BL)
describing the inﬂuence of the moving vessel wall on the ﬂow. The spatial bounds are based on the diameter of the
basilar artery (∼ 4.3mm [23]) and the maximal size of a single strut of a stent (∼ 0.1mm [24]) while the temporal
bounds are determined by the cardiac cycle (∼ 1.0s [25]) and turbulence eﬀects
ﬀ
(∼ 1.0ms). The boundary layer
(BL) acts in spatial scales of approximately an order of magnitude less than the bulk ﬂow (∼ 0.1mm, max. strut
size to ∼ 10m, min. strut size, [24]). A range of ∼ 10ms to ∼ 1min was chosen to deﬁne the temporal scales.
The last pure physical process shown in this version of the SSM is the particle transport (PT) referring to
the transport of cells such as red blood cells (RBCs) and platelets (passive and activated) in the bulk ﬂow. This
subsystem is spatially bound by the size of platelets, the smallest cell of interest in the blood stream with a diameter
of ∼ 1.5 to 3μm and clusters of RBCs (diameter ∼ 7.5μm) and platelets. For the temporal bounds a range of ∼ 1s
to ∼ 1min was chosen.
The biochemical processes describing the thrombus formation are namely the coagulation cascade (CC),
platelet aggregation/
n adhesion (PlA), particle processes (PP) incl. platelet activation and dynamics of the thrombus
(CSL) like change in structure, size and its lysis. The corresponding spatial and temporal scales are listed below:

1010

Simon Zimny et al. / Procedia Computer Science 18 (2013) 1006 – 1015

• Coagulation Cascade: CC
spatial: 0.1μm (α-granules size, 200-500 nm [11])
temporal: ∼ 1ms up to ∼ several min
• Platelet Aggregation: PlA
spatial: several μm (aggregated platelets) up to several cm (clot size)
temporal: <min (platelet-platelet aggregation) up to weeks/months (development of a full clot)
• Particle Processes: PP
spatial: ∼ 1μm to ∼ 10μ
0 m (particle size)
temporal: ∼ 0.1s (activation by coagulation factors, [15]) to ∼ several min (shear induced activation, [26])
• Clot Structure/
e Lysis: CSL
spatial: ∼ 1μm (one platelet) up to ∼ 0.1mm (several particles)
temporal: ∼ 10ms (lysis of small aggregates) to ∼ several days (macroscopic changes in the clot structure)
The arrows in Fig. 2 describe the kind of information exchanged between the diﬀerent
ﬀ
subsystems. The red
arrows are based on physical properties like shear stress and particle densities, while the black arrows represent
the biomedical inﬂuenced properties like rates of activated coagulation factors.
2.3. From the complete to the reduced scale separation map
Due to the sheer complexity of the complete SSM (see Fig. 2) a full implementation in a numerical multiscale
model is beyond reach at the moment. In particular, the complexity caused by overlap of scales introduces complications. In attempt to group processes according to common functional entities (molecules, cells, ﬂow structures
/ tissue structure) we arrived at an SSM that contains only a few but well separated subprocesses (see Fig. 3).
The arrows represent again the type of interaction. In the following subsections 2.3.1 to 2.3.6 all underlying
subsystems and their spatial and temporal scales are presented.

Fig. 3. The reduced scale separation map.

2.3.1. Macroscopic ﬂow and advection-diﬀ
iﬀusion
This process is referring to the macroscopic blood ﬂow where the blood is treated as a continuum. Additionally the advection-diﬀusion
ﬀ
processes of several substances, which are crucial for the thrombus formation, like
coagulation factors, cofactors, proteins and nucleotides or lysis, like anticoagulants, of a thrombus are considered.

Simon Zimny et al. / Procedia Computer Science 18 (2013) 1006 – 1015

1011

The spatial scales are chosen based on the diameter of the basilar artery (∼ 4.3mm, [23]) up to the diameter of
giant intracranial aneurysms (< 2.5cm, [27]). The temporal scales describe the range of turbulence inﬂuences
(∼ 1ms) up to a cardiac cycle (∼ 1s, [25]).
2.3.2. Clotting dynamics and clot formation
The formation of a thrombus can generally be characterized by two phases [16]. At ﬁrst the volume of the
thrombus increases rapidly forming a rather soft structure. This is followed by a volume reduction as a result of
platelet contraction and leads to a stable structure. A key part of the stability is the development of a cross-linked
ﬁbrin mesh, which is a product of the coagulation cascade [12]. The lysis of a clot can be due to anticoagulants
(e.g. tissue factor pathway inhibitor (TFPI) or physical impact from the ﬂow, like high shear stresses [12]. The
spatial scales are based on the full occlusion of a giant intracranial aneurysm (< 2.5cm, [27]) and geometrical
change with an eﬀect on the macroscopic ﬂow (∼ 0.1mm). The temporal scales are described by the time required
for such a change (∼ several s) up to the fully developed clot (∼ several days).
2.3.3. Microscopic ﬂow, particle transport and adhesion/aggregation
Platelets are often seen as the main ingredient for the initiation and the formation of a thrombus. Both, the
aggregation of platelets and the adhesion to the vessel wall, act together in this formation process. The aggregation
of platelets can be induced by a great number of agents (like ADP, epinephrine, collagen and thrombin) [10].
Platelets adhere to a variety of extracellular matrix connective tissue components (e.g. ﬁbrin, laminin and collagen
[10]) using several receptors. Collagen can be exposed by endothelial damage or when the endothelium is subject
to both high [17] or low shear rates [28]. High shear rates are also related to receptor unlocking, to the break up
of platelet aggregants [12] and the damage of red blood cells which lead to the exposure of hemoglobin, hindering
the natural platelet activation inhibition [19].
2.3.4. Molecular receptors
The major reactions in the cascade take place on the surface of cells . The platelet receptor glycoprotein IIb/IIIa
(GP IIb/IIIa) plays an important role in the aggregation of platelets [29], using ﬁbrinogen as the connecting agent.
There is also a large number of other receptors for procoagulants (e.g. GPIb/IX/V for vWF, GP VI, GP Ia/IIa
collagen [30]), promoting the aggregation and adhesion of platelets.
2.3.5. Coagulation Cascade
The coagulation cascade is a subcellular process, which leads to the production of cross-linked ﬁbrin meshes,
a key part of a stable thrombus formation. As described previous in section 2.1 the coagulation cascade is based
on a large number of procoagulants in an inactive and active form as well as on anticoagulants acting against the
production of ﬁbrin strands. In addition to these nucleotides, proteins and cofactors take part in the coagulation
cascade.
2.3.6. Platelet activation
The second key part of thrombus formation are activated platelets. Platelets in their inactive form have a
discoid shape with a smooth rippled surface [10] and an average diameter of 1.5 to 2 m [9]. The activation can be
triggered by physical impact (e.g. high shear stresses [13, 14]), extrinsic materials [12], other activated platelets,
certain proteins or coagulation factors [10]. After the activation the platelets change their shape from discoid to
spherical [9] and start to expose proteins and growth factors (e.g. tissue factor, vWF).
2.4. The interaction scheme
In a numerical multi-scale simulation the diﬀerent subsystems working on independent spatial- and temporal
scales have to communicate with each other to exchange necessary data like ﬂow properties, geometry updates
or particle distributions. The mutual coupling between the diﬀerent parts of the reduced SSM is described using
a graphical representation (see Fig. 3) to achieve a better overview. The subsystems are shown as boxes linked
to each other by directed edges describing what has to be communicated (see Fig. 4). This representation helps
ﬁnding a possible communication structure for a numerical multi-scale simulation. Furthermore, it is a good way
of ﬁnding suitable simpliﬁcations of the simulation framework such that it can be executed in reasonable time on
available HPC systems.

Simon Zimny et al. / Procedia Computer Science 18 (2013) 1006 – 1015

act

da

bu
tri
dis
on
ati
es)
reg
tur
gg
rup
/a
m
cle
fro
rti
pa
ets
tel
pla
w

(ne

ted

co

up

>s
p ec
ies
<a
con
dhe
cen
sion
tra
/a
tion
ggr
ega
tion

platelet activation

< changes in species
concentration
> concentration of
coagulants as act.
criteria

coagulation cascade
sp
eci
es
co

nc
en
t
d a ratio
no
nti
-co
fp
ag
roula
nts

particle
distributions

ure criteria
> shear rates as rupt
< geometry update

<>

tion
tra
s
cen
tion
con
tra
ies
cen
p ec
con
he
>s
in t
ges

micro particle transport
adhesion / aggregation
micro ﬂow
platelet contraction

she
ar
ivat rate a
s
ion
crit
eria

nc

> platelet ac
tiv
< platelet dis ated
tribution

systole ﬂow
macro advectiondiﬀusion

d

han
<c

velo

ﬁel
city

en
tra

tio

n

molecular receptors

an

1012

tio
n
clotting dynamics
(including clot lysis
clot formation)

Fig. 4. The interaction scheme of processes contributing to the thrombus formation.

3. From multiscale model to numerical simulation
In a full simulation all subsystems described in the reduced SSM (see Fig. 3) should be modeled. In a ﬁrst step
towards this complete multiscale simulation only the tissue levels are considered here, namely the “systole-ﬂow/
macro advection-diﬀusion” and “clotting dynamics/ clot formation”.
3.1. The systole-ﬂow/macro advection-diﬀusion subsystem
The systole-ﬂow as well as the transport of blood particle in the ﬂow is simulated using the lattice Boltzmann
method (LBM). We refer the unfamiliar reader to the abundant literature on LBM. See for instance [31].
Due to its easy mesh generation, the independence of run-time from the complexity of the ﬂow geometry and
very good parallel performance the LBM is well suitable to simulate ﬂuid ﬂows in highly complex geometries
using several hundred-thousand cores on modern supercomputers [7, 32]. Several powerful implementations of
the LBM exists, in particular the Palabos software4 that is intensively used in the THROMBUS project to simulate
thrombus formation in cerebral aneurysms.
3.2. The clotting dynamics/clot formation subsystem
To abstract the sub tissue level processes in the reduced SSM presented in Fig. 3, namely the yellow and
orange boxes, macroscopic rheological properties are used. The wall shear stress (WSS) plays a critical role in the
formation of a blood clot as stated by Chopard et al. [2, 3] and Harrison et al. [5, 6]. Using the WSS as an upper
threshold for the formation of a thrombus is underlayed by common theories describing embolism [8].
The second key parameter for the formation of a blood clot is the time blood resides in certain regions. The socalled residence time model [4, 5] was derived in analogy to experiments of the clotting process of enzymatically
activated milk. The main idea is that usually enough procoagulants and activated platelets are present in the blood,
and coagulation occurs when they have suﬃcient time to aggregate. The residence time (equivalent to ’age of the
ﬂuid’) is computed by means of a passive scalar whose value is increased at every iteration to estimate the time
from the local concentration. At the inlet the concentration of this tracer is initialized with 0, slowly increasing
while the ﬂuid travels downstream towards the outlet.
4 www.palabos.org

Simon Zimny et al. / Procedia Computer Science 18 (2013) 1006 – 1015

1013

To prevent clots from developing in non-physical areas like near the outlet and inside the ﬂow itself we are
using the proximity [2, 3, 5] condition. This condition allows elements to solidify only in near wall regions,
preventing non-physical insulated clot formation in the bulk of the ﬂow.
In case age threshold and near-wall conditions are fulﬁlled for a computational ﬂuid element, it will turn into
a solid (optional with a given probability p) depending on the level of the WSS.
The above rules are with slight modiﬁcations a combination of those proposed in [2, 3] for the case of thrombus
formation in simple 2D and in [5, 6] for 3D geometries.
4. Numerical simulation
4.1. Ampliﬁcation for numerical simulation
To resolve the aneurysm with suﬃcient accuracy the mesh size and such the time step has to be very small.
With a time step in the order of 10−5 s, more than 8 billion iterations have to be performed for simulating a single
day in real time. As can be seen from the reduced SSM (Fig. 3) the upper temporal bound for the clot formation is
in the order of weeks. This leads to the conclusion that simulating the whole process would be far too expensive
even on the largest supercomputers.
To overcome these problems the technique of ampliﬁcation [33] can be used. The main idea is to amplify
the eﬀect of the long-term process of thrombus formation and only simulate one or two cardiac cycles for the
short-term process of blood ﬂow, as proposed in [3].
In the macroscopic model based on the reduced SSM proposed beforehand, the short-term process identiﬁes
with the “systole-ﬂow/macro advection-diﬀusion” subsystem, while the long-term process with the “clotting dynamics/clot formation” subsystem. Due to this temporal separation of the two systems, the “clotting dynamics/clot
formation” subsystem can be ampliﬁed e.g. by increasing the probability p of an element to solidify or the growth
rate.
4.2. Simulation setup
Based on the Model presented in subsection 3.2 a blood clotting simulation in a patient speciﬁc stented
aneurysm (see Fig. 5) has been performed. The grid size was chosen to be δx = 6.5 · 10−5 m resulting in approx. 45 million ﬂuid elements, the time step to be δt = 2.89 · 10−5 s the inlet velocity to be uin = 9.435 · 10−2 m/s.
Using the inlet diameter as the characteristic length and the mean velocity umean = uin /2 as the characteristic
velocity resulting in a Reynolds number of 50. The density of blood was set to ρblood = 1025kg/m3 and the
kinematic viscosity to be νblood = 3.8 · 10−6 m2 /s.
The simulations have been performed on the superMUC at the LRZ-Munich using the APES framework [32].
Due to its eﬃcient representation of the ﬂuid elements and their neighbor relations it is highly suitable to solve
large scale systems on hundred-thousand cores. The geometry has been provided by the THROMBUS project in
STL format. At ﬁrst the geometry has been read and meshed by the SEEDER. On the resulting grid the simulation
has been performed using the MUSUBI solver and postprocessed by the HARVESTER.

Fig. 5. (a) Complete aneurysm; (b) Stent deployed in aneurysm (provided by THROMBUS project).

As mentioned in subsection 3.2 the simulation had to be ampliﬁed to reduce the number of iterations. Therefore
the probability for an element was chosen to be constant p = 1 and the growth rate was ampliﬁed by letting only
whole elements solidify. After the convergence of the ﬂow and the passive scalar tracer the clotting model was
switched on with a wall shear stress threshold of 1.037 · 10−1 Pa and a residence time threshold of 14.5s.

1014

Simon Zimny et al. / Procedia Computer Science 18 (2013) 1006 – 1015

4.3. Simulation results

Fig. 6. Temporal evolution of the thrombus formation in the aneurysm bulge for diﬀerent time steps (105 , 3 · 105 , 4 · 105 , 1.3 · 106 iterations).

Fig. 6 shows the thrombus formation in the aneurysm bulge at diﬀerent time steps in terms of solidiﬁed ﬂuid
elements (marked in red). The thrombus mainly starts developing from the right face of the aneurysm bulge.
Additionally, very few clots appear on the left face. Clots continue to grow in layers, eventually resulting in
complete occlusion after 1.3 · 106 iterations. A comparison between these simulation results and those from the
non-stented aneurysm with the same parameters lead to the conclusion, that the insertion of the stent increases the
thrombus formation in the aneurysm bulge drastically.
5. Conclusion and Outlook
The model presented in this paper is a ﬁrst step towards multi-scale simulation of thrombus formation in
intracranial aneurysms based on the ampliﬁcation approach. They extend the work of Ouared et al. [2, 3] and
Bernsdorf and Harrison et al. [4, 5, 6] towards realistic 3D patient speciﬁc stented aneurysm geometries. The
results obtained from the numerical simulations qualitatively match the expected process of thrombus growth.
Using the ampliﬁcation method we were able to reduce the number of iterations from expected billions to
millions for simulating the whole process. Without considering a multi-scale approach, such a simulation would
be impossible even on largest super-computers.
The simulations performed for this paper were done with steady ﬂow conditions at a Reynolds number of
Re=50. An extension towards physiological ﬂow conditions employing pulsatile ﬂow at higher Reynolds numbers
will be the next step. Further extensions of the model will be adapting the growth rate of the thrombus and the
probability of solidiﬁcation in the macroscopic model. In addition, the local concentration of platelets in an active
and inactive form can be modeled as passive scalars. The platelet activation process might be induced by ﬂow
properties, mainly WSS, and procoagulants.
In the microscopic part of the simulation (see Fig. 3, yellow and orange boxes) cells in the blood, like RBCs
and platelets, can be simulated using a suspension code where the transport and shape of the particles are fully
resolved. This highly complex approach [34] is currently considered in the THROMBUS project.
The most important coagulation factors like ﬁbrin and thrombin concentrations as well as their interaction, the
endothelial and blood cells can be simulated explicitly. This will eventually lead to a fully coupled multiscale simulation of thrombus formation in intracranial aneurysms. A full clotting model, including all the above ingredients
is under development in collaboration with biologists, clinicians and computer scientists within the THROMBUS
project. Due to the large number of subsystems (Fig. 3) involving spatial and temporal scales spanning over several orders of magnitude, advanced multiscale techniques have to be employed. The use of a distributed coupling
framework (e.g. MAPPER 5 ) might be extremely helpful to achieve the ambitious task of a realistic quantitative
simulation of thrombus formation.
Acknowledgements
The research work presented in this paper was funded by the European Commission in the Seventh Framework
Programme in the area of Virtual Physiological Human (ICT-2009.5.3, project reference 269966).
5 http://www.mapper-project.eu

Simon Zimny et al. / Procedia Computer Science 18 (2013) 1006 – 1015

1015

References
[1] Y. Ventikos, E. Holland, T. Bowker, P. Watton, N. Kakalis, M. Megahed, F. Zhu, P. Summers, J. Byrne, Computational modelling for
cerebral aneurysms: risk evaluation and interventional planning, British Journal of Radiology 82 (Special Issue 1) (2009) 62–71.
[2] R. Ouared, B. Chopard, Lattice Boltzmann simulations of blood ﬂow: non-Newtonian rheology and clotting processes, Journal of
Statistical Physics 121 (1) (2005) 209–221.
[3] R. Ouared, B. Chopard, B. Stahl, D. A. R¨ufenacht, H. Yilmaz, G. Courbebaisse, Thrombosis modeling in intracranial aneurysms: a
lattice Boltzmann numerical algorithm, Computer Physics Communications 179 (1) (2008) 128–131.
[4] J. Bernsdorf, S. E. Harrison, S. M. Smith, P. V. Lawford, D. R. Hose, Concurrent numerical simulation of ﬂow and blood clotting
using the lattice boltzmann technique, in: J. Ma, L. Yang (Eds.), Proceedings of the 2005 11th International Conference on Parallel and
Distributed Systems (ICPADS’05), Vol. II, IEEE, 2005, pp. 336–340.
[5] S. E. Harrison, S. S. M, J. Bernsdorf, D. R. Hose, P. V. Lawford, Application and validation of the lattice Boltzmann method for modelling
ﬂow-related clotting, Journal of biomechanics 40 (13) (2007) 3023–3028.
[6] S. Harrison, J. Bernsdorf, D. Hose, P. Lawford, A lattice Boltzmann framework for simulation of thrombogenesis, Progress in Computational Fluid Dynamics 8 (1-4) (2008) 121–128.
[7] J. Zudrop, H. Klimach, M. Hasert, K. Masilamani, S. Roller, A fully distributed CFD framework for massively parallel systems, Proceedings of the Cray User Group CUG 2012, April 29 - May 3, 2012, Stuttgart, Germany.
[8] K. C. Giannoglou, Y. S. Chatzizisis, A. P. Antoniadis, K. C. Koskinas, Role of Endothelial Shear Stress in Stent Restenosis and Thrombosis, Journal of the American college of Cardiology 59 (15) (2012) 1337–1349.
[9] W. Siess, Molecular mechanisms of platelet activation, Physiological Reviews 69 (1) (1989) 58–178.
[10] S. Kamath, A. Blann, G. Lip, Platelet activation: assessment and quantiﬁcation, European Heart Journal 22 (17) (2001) 1561–1571.
[11] P. Harrison, E. M. Cramer, Platelet α-granules, Blood reviews 7 (1993) 52–62.
[12] M. Anand, K. Rajagopal, K. R. Rajagopal, A model incorporating some of the mechanical and biochemical factors underlying clot
formation and dissolution in ﬂowing blood, Journal of Theoretical Medicine 5 (3-4) (2003) 183–218.
[13] M. Anand, K. Rajagopal, K. R. Rajagopal, A model for the formation, growth, and lysis of clots in quiescent plasma. A comparison
between the eﬀects of antithrombin III deﬁciency and protein C deﬁciency, Journal of Theoretical Biology 253 (4) (2008) 725–738.
[14] J. M. Ramstack, L. Zuckermann, L. F. Mockros, Shear-induced activation of platelets, J Biomechanics 12 (1979) 113–125.
[15] G. Born, P. D. Richardson, Activation time of blood platelets, Journal of Membrane Biology 57 (1980) 87–90.
[16] M. M. Kamocka, J. Mu, X. Liu, N. Chen, A. Zollman, B. Sturonas-Brown, K. Dunn, Z. Xu, D. Z. Chen, M. S. Alber, E. D. Rosen,
Two-photon intravital imaging of thrombus development, Journal of Biomedical Optics 15 (2010) 1–7.
[17] O. Traub, B. C. Berk, Laminar shear stress: mechanisms by which endothelial cells transduce an atheroprotective force, Arteriosclerosis,
Thrombosis, and Vascular Biology 18 (1998) 677–685.
[18] J. Yip, Y. Shen, R. K. Andrews, Primary platelet adhesion receptors, Australian Biochemist 35 (2004) 4.
[19] L. B. Leverett, J. Hellums, C. P. Alfrey, E. C. Lynch, Red blood cell damage by shear stress, Biophysical journal 12 (3) (1972) 257–273.
[20] Y. Uchida, Y. Uchida, T. Sakurai, M. Kanai, S. Shirai, T. Morita, Characterization of Coronary Fibrin Thrombus in Patients With Acute
Coronary Syndrome Using Dye-Staining Angioscopy, Arteriosclerosis, Thrombosis, and Vascular Biology 31 (6) (2011) 1452–1460.
[21] S. Lee, A. M. Pham, S. G. Pryor, T. Tollefson, J. M. Sykes, Eﬃcacy of Crosseal ﬁbrin sealant (human) in rhytidectomy, Archives of
Facial Plastic Surgery 11 (1) (2009) 29–33.
[22] A. Hoekstra, E. Lorenz, J. Falcone, B. Chopard, Towards a complex automata framework for multi-scale modeling: Formalism and the
scale separation map, Computational Science–ICCS 2007 (2007) 922–930.
[23] W. Busch, Beitrag zur Morphologie und Pathologie der Arteria basialis (Untersuchungsergebnisse bei 1000 Gehirnen), European
Archives of Psychiatry and Clinical Neurosciences.
[24] C. Lally, P. J. Prendergast, D. Kelly, Stents, in: M. Akay (Ed.), Wiley Encyclopaedia of Biomedical Engineering, John Wiley & Sons,
pp. 3345–3355.
[25] P. Jehenson, D. Duboc, T. Lavergne, L. Guize, F. Guerin, M. Degeorges, A. Syrota, Change in human cardiac rhythm induced by a 2-T
static magnetic ﬁeld., Radiology 166 (1) (1988) 227–230.
[26] L. Badimon, J. Badim´on, A. Galvez, J. H. Chesebro, V. Fuster, Inﬂuence of arterial damage and wall shear rate on platelet deposition.
Ex vivo study in a swine model, Arteriosclerosis, Thrombosis, and Vascular Biology 6 (3) (1986) 312–320.
[27] T. Higa, H. Ujiie, K. Kato, H. Kamiyama, T. Hori, Basilar artery trunk saccular aneurysms: morphological characteristics and management, Neurosurgical Review 32 (2) (2008) 181–191.
[28] P. Davis, Flow-medicated endothelial mechanotransduction, Physio. Rev. (1995) 519–560.
[29] D. Varga-Szabo, I. Pleines, B. Nieswandt, Cell Adhesion Mechanisms in Platelets, Arteriosclerosis, Thrombosis, and Vascular Biology
28 (3) (2008) 403–412.
[30] K. Broos, H. B. Feys, S. F. De Meyer, K. Vanhoorelbeke, H. Deckmyn, Platelets at work in primary hemostasis, YBLRE 25 (4) (2011)
155–167.
[31] S. Succi, The Lattice Boltzmann Equation, For Fluid Dynamics and Beyond, Oxford University Press, 2001.
[32] S. Roller, J. Bernsdorf, H. Klimach, M. Hasert, D. Harlacher, M. Cakircali, S. Zimny, K. Masilamani, L. Didinger, J. Zudrop, An
adaptable simulation framework based on a linearized octree (2012) 93–105.
[33] A. G. Hoekstra, A. Caiazzo, E. Lorenz, J.-L. Falcone, B. Chopard, Complex automata: Multi-scale modeling with couples cellular
automata, in: A. G. Hoekstra, J. Kroc, P. M. A. Sloot (Eds.), Simulating Complex Systems by Cellular Automata, Understanding
Complex Systems, Springer, 2010, Ch. 3, pp. 29–57.
[34] L. Mountrakis, E. Lorenz, A. Hoekstra, Where do the platelets go? A simulation study of fully resolved blood ﬂow through aneurysmal
vessels, accepted for publication in Interface Focus Royal Society.

