Procedia Computer Science
Volume 80, 2016, Pages 1834–1845
ICCS 2016. The International Conference on Computational
Science

Probabilistic Semantics
Salvatore F. Pileggi
INRIA & UPMC-LIP6, Paris, France
flavio.pileggi@lip6.fr

Abstract
This paper proposes a concise overview of Probabilistic Semantics according to a technologyoriented perspective. Indeed, while the progressive consolidation of Semantic Technology in
a wide context and on a large scale is going to be a fact, the non-deterministic character of
many problems and environments suggests the rise of additional researches around semantics
to integrate the mainstream. Probabilistic extensions and their implications to the current
semantic ecosystems are discussed in this paper with an implicit focus on the Web and its
evolution. The critical literature review undertaken shows valuable theoretical works, eﬀective
applications, evidences of an increasing research interest as the response to real problems, as
well as largely unexplored research areas.
Keywords: Semantic Technology, Probabilistic Computing, Knowledge Representation

1

Introduction

During the past years Semantic Technology has been object of an intense research activity
that has pushed the materialization of theoretical models in concrete standard technologies to
address the enhanced semantic support aimed in the third version of the Web [1]. That support
should help machines to ”understand” the information on the Web so that they can provide
richer discovery, data integration, navigation, and automation of tasks. The need for semantics
is an evolving concept, as the Web itself is in a constant evolution in terms of scale and purpose.
The recent rise and aﬃrmation of Big Data [2] is a clear example.
On the other hand, the general relevance of uncertainties and the consequent importance
of probabilistic models to integrate deterministic approaches are well known, consolidated and
universally accepted concepts in Computer Science. The uncertainty can have a diﬀerent meaning depending on the context, such as unknown, partially known, probable. Semantics have a
general purpose. They are deﬁnitely not an exception as often they deal with problems with
uncertainties. Uncertainties can be implicit in the model itself (e.g. in predictive models [3]),
as well as inducted by processes and methods (e.g. in Information Retrieval [4]). Semantics
in Computer Science are a challenge themselves [5]. But it is a fact that uncertainties are
everywhere (or almost) in computation.
1834

Selection and peer-review under responsibility of the Scientiﬁc Programme Committee of ICCS 2016
c The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V.

doi:10.1016/j.procs.2016.05.472

Probabilistic Semantics

S.F.Pileggi

According to a ﬁrst naive analysis, semantic and uncertain knowledge seem to be somehow mutually exclusive: the former aims at formal speciﬁcations to avoid ambiguities in the
knowledge representation and processing; and the latter reﬂects the non-determinism. This
contradiction is evidently only apparent as the non-determinism, if formally modelled, is part
of the knowledge. Therefore, a particular line of work focusing on the combination of probabilistic models with description logic (e.g.[6]), known as Probabilistic Semantic, has progressively
gained importance. That convergence is indeed suggested by practical needs which are also
well supported by philosophical considerations: the awareness of the unknown is part of the
knowledge.
Several interesting works on probabilistic semantics are currently well known. However,
there is also a fundamental lack of integrated discussion on the topic, as well as there are
largely unexplored research areas. It seems that, even though recognizing the importance
of uncertainties in semantic computing, most researchers are working on the main branch,
focusing on the capability of the models and on their computation more than in extensions.
This is absolutely understandable considering the current technological trends aimed at the
consolidation of the technology. On the other hand, probabilistic extensions would probably
extend the scope of Semantic Technology and its reliability on a large scale also in presence of
non-determinism.
This paper proposes a concise overview of relevant works in the area of probabilistic semantics with a conceptual focus on web-technology. An ideal, exhaustive and rigorous approach
would include an overview of the theoretical background and its materialization in concrete
technologies. Furthermore, uncertainty is a very complex concept which can assume diﬀerent
meanings depending on the context. Just as an example we can distinguish among probabilistic/possibilistic uncertainty, qualitative/quantitative non-determinism, ambiguity, vagueness,
lack, entropy, similarity, approximation and application-speciﬁc concepts that can be modelled
as an uncertainty in a given context (e.g. trusting). This paper has a more reduced scope
and focuses on the ”front-end” technology and its relation with the theoretical background in a
context of applied semantics, providing a snapshot of the current status of the art. Semantics’
key concepts are brieﬂy explained as part of an unique model which assumes semantics on a
large-scale in a Web context (Web Semantics). This model emphases above all on the semantic
representation and processing of the information and doesn’t deal explicitly with other applications of semantics (e.g. Semantic Web Services [7] or agents [8]). The probabilistic meaning
of semantics is discussed both with an overview of the major works in literature and examples
where needed and possible.

2

From Semantics to Probabilistic Semantics

Semantic technologies are progressively emerging as a response to new evolving requirements
from the Information Society [9]. The consolidation of the key concepts, as well as their progressive application in real systems, has produced a new generation of semantic ecosystems
where the information is modeled and processed according to standardized semantic models.
A simpliﬁed Semantic Ecosystem is represented by the concept map in ﬁg. 1. In this model,
the raw, atomic and unorganized piece of information is the data; heterogeneous data can be
composed to represent a most consistent information which is, therefore, a simple aggregation
or composition of atomic data; the processing of data and/or information produces knowledge,
which diﬀers from information as it cannot be obtained by obvious operations or transformations
(such as merging or aggregation) but only through a proper computing or inference in a given
context. The border between information and knowledge often result a bit fuzzy in practice,
1835

Probabilistic Semantics

S.F.Pileggi

where it could be just theoretical or, more properly, context-speciﬁc. All these three progressive concepts are represented according to a formal semantic model (Semantic Representation
[10]), even though the representation of the knowledge cannot be always formalized due to its
intrinsic complexity (for instance when the understanding of results requires a domain speciﬁc
interpretation or contextual meaning). The very ﬁrst goal of the semantic representation is the
support of enhanced models for interoperability to support machine-to-machine interaction.
Indeed, Semantic Interoperability [11] is the ability of computer systems to exchange data with
unambiguous, shared meaning. It wants to overcome common interoperability models, based
on simple syntactic equivalences (Basic Interoperability) as simple exchange of messages between systems or on extensions that provide a common structural deﬁnition for message ﬁelds
(Functional Interoperability). Functional Interoperability evidently extends the basic model.
Semantics enforce further extensions enabling links among formalized data structures.
The semantic representation commonly refers to the process of annotating resources with
semantic metadata (Semantic Annotation and Indexing [12]) and to the use of rich data models
called Ontology (e.g.[13]), understood as the formal speciﬁcation of a conceptualization. In
practice, an Ontology represents, according to a standard language, the concepts of a given
domain, as well as the relations among those concepts. The last generation model for Ontology
[14] is based on the capability of deﬁning concepts and properties explicitly and on the inference
of further concepts (like additional layers of knowledge) from the explicit information. Query
on semantic rich data models requires additional languages (e.g.[15]) that make the knowledge
accessible according to a smart and direct philosophy. Semantics are so important to assure the
eﬀectiveness and the scalability of the next generation information systems that the evolution
of the whole web model is currently driven by semantic technologies. They should lead from the
current consolidated understanding of the Web (Web 2.0 or Social Web [16]) to a real semanticoriented model (Web 3.0 or Semantic Web [1]), along multiple understandings of intermediate
models (Web 2.x [17]) such as Internet of Services or Semantic Social Web, as well as domain
speciﬁc semantic webs (e.g. Web of Data [18] and Semantic Sensor Web [19]).
Semantic Computing aims at the achievement of some knowledge by processing or analysing
semantic data or information. The most relevant model for computing semantic data is the
Semantic Reasoning, which provides capabilities to infer logical consequences from a set of
asserted facts or axioms with a clear similitude with human reasoning (e.g. in [20]). Further
paradigms may be deﬁned and are progressively emerging (e.g. Semantic Learning) as the
consequence of the increasing popularity of the Semantic Technology.
Once a simpliﬁed view of a semantic ecosystem has been proposed, the key question is: can
it be a probabilistic ecosystem? The answer is positive and, as explained in the next sessions,
it can be potentially a very consistent probabilistic ecosystem.

3

Probabilistic Semantics

As evident is ﬁg.1, the real central concept in a semantic ecosystem is the semantic representation, which is the simplest concept in the ecosystem but also the most ambiguous. The
centrality of a given concept has a context-speciﬁc understanding. In this case, the expressiveness and the features of the semantic representation determine, directly or indirectly, the
capabilities of the whole ecosystem.
Assuming this key concept in its probabilistic meaning (Probabilistic Semantic Representation) redeﬁnes completely the scope of a semantic ecosystem as a Probabilistic Semantic
Ecosystem, which is able to model and represent uncertainties as part of the knowledge according to a probabilistic approach to the non-determinism. Following this approach, the probability
1836

Probabilistic Semantics

S.F.Pileggi

Figure 1: A simpliﬁed concept map representing a Semantic Ecosystem.

is considered as an additional dimension for semantics. Therefore, probabilistic semantics are
implicitly understood as an extension of common semantics to integrate further capabilities in
terms of representation and computing.
Ad-hoc solutions are very interesting but they are often hard to apply as a generic solution.
As well as approaches diﬀerent from the extension/integration that do not guarantee compliance
with the existing technology seem somehow hard to be proposed at this stage of the web
evolution. Indeed the mainstream philosophy is pushing towards the standardization to convert
local semantics into Web Semantics, making hard the aﬃrmation of completely new approaches.
However, the last generation of Semantic Technology is extremely ﬂexible and intrinsically
allows variants and evolutions, providing an interesting research contest. As one of many
possible examples, OWL 2 EL [21] is used by large-scale ontologies from practical applications
to improve the reasoning performance in common problems such as classiﬁcation and instance
checking.

3.1

Probabilistic Semantic Representation:
ground

the theoretical back-

The models for probabilistic semantic representation are, somehow, the theoretical background
around technologies as they deﬁne the logic to represent the knowledge according to a probabilistic approach. Knowledge representation languages invariably reﬂect a trade-oﬀ between
expressiveness and tractability. The model of uncertainty adds a further complexity.
There are diﬀerent approaches from diﬀerent areas, such as probabilistic description logics
[22, 23] and statistical relational languages [24]. While the former have mainly contributed at
a theoretical level, statistical relational languages have been applied in a number of practical
applications, such as data integration through ontology matching [25]. Fuzzy logic [26] has also
been extensively explored [27] producing a number of signiﬁcant results in the ﬁeld of semantic
technologies (e.g. [28, 29, 30]). However, the probability theory seems more suitable to make
1837

Probabilistic Semantics

S.F.Pileggi

prediction about events from a state of partial knowledge.
Evidences suggest that the compromise between expressivity and tractability chosen by
description logics is a particularly successful one. But, as a variant of ﬁrst-order logic, description logics have severe limitations to express uncertainties. The integration of original
models with probabilistic extensions seems to be the most eﬀective approach. It is the case of
P-CLASSIC [22] which extends the original model by establishing Bayesian networks [31] to
represent uncertainty. The resulting inference procedure (probabilistic subsumption [22]) is the
natural consequence of combining representation logic with Bayesian networks: it computes the
probability that a random individual in a class A is also a member of class B. The extension of
classical description logic for the management of vague/imprecise knowledge is deeply discussed
in [23]. Some of the logics currently adopted in key semantic languages have been extended to
address probabilistic knowledge: for example SHOQ(D) is extended by P-SHOQ(D) [32].

3.2

Probabilistic Semantic Annotation

Semantic annotation and indexing are processes based on the capability to extend common
content with semantic meta-data to relate pieces of knowledge each other. As a case study,
this section considers the probabilistic extensions of the well know RDF [33]. The Resource
Description Framework (RDF) is a paradigm for knowledge representation that has rapidly
emerged as a data model for representing information about World Wide Web resources. Despite
its enormous popularity, RDF is not able to express probabilistic knowledge.
There are diﬀerent theoretical approaches, such as [34] where the author brieﬂy discusses a
method for representing probabilistic relations in RDF by using Bayesian networks. Common
query mechanisms can be adapted to work eﬃciently on probabilistic RDF data graphs [35].
A more comprehensive contribution is represented by pRDF [36]. A pRDF instance (ﬁg. 3)
extends common RDF triples (ﬁg. 2) with a further dimension which allows the unconditioned
probability distributions over a set of possible values of an RDF triple. As an example of the
strong limitations of RDF and of the usefulness of probabilistic extensions, we can consider a
common phrase: the complications of the ﬂu are, among others, acute bronchitis (70%) and
pneumonia (15%). The human understanding of this aﬃrmation easily detects an uncertain
knowledge related to the implicitly deﬁned concept of other. This uncertainty integrates the
explicit probabilistic knowledge expressed by the statement. There is, indeed, an intuitive conclusion deduced by the fact that the sum of the probabilities is lower than 100%. The concept
of other is hard to model in the context of semantic environments due to its intrinsic ambiguity. Furthermore, its potentially extensive use would introduce signiﬁcant uncertainties at an
application level. Standard RDF only allows an incomplete and, therefore, wrong knowledge
representation (ﬁg. 2) which is limited to the deterministic knowledge. Indeed, the RDF triple
(Flu, hasComplication, AcuteBronchitis,Pneumonia) is commonly understood like Flu has two
complications, acute bronchitis and pneumonia, that is far away from the original semantic.
The quadruple (Flu, hasComplication, AcuteBronchitis,Pneumonia,.7, .15) can be intuitively
read as: whenever the Flu condition has complications, there is a 70% probability that the complication is AcuteBronchitis and a 15% probability that the complication is Pneumonia (ﬁg. 3).
That is still somehow vague due to an implicit lack of knowledge that can generate ambiguities
in the interpretation. But it is much closer to the original semantic.
A more detailed analysis of pRDF suggests also the deﬁnition of a simpliﬁed model. Indeed,
the previous pRDF statement is really composed of two diﬀerent atomic probabilistic statements, (Flu, hasComplication, AcuteBronchitis, .7) and (Flu, hasComplication, Pneumonia,
.15), merged in an unique piece of knowledge or assertion. A simpliﬁed approach associates an
1838

Probabilistic Semantics

S.F.Pileggi

Figure 2: RDF.

Figure 3: pRDF.

Figure 4: Simpliﬁed pRDF.

unique probability to the whole assertion (ﬁg. 4). From this brief analysis two diﬀerent models
for probabilistic extension of RDF-like annotation can be deﬁned as follows:
Def. A fully-probabilistic semantic annotation assumes that all the concepts of the n-tuple
representing the assertion are related each others with a given probability (e.g. pRDF).
Def. A simpliﬁed probabilistic semantic annotation associates an unique probability to the
whole assertion, even composed of multiple tuples (e.g. the simpliﬁed pRDF model previously
described).
The two models are equivalent only if assertions are atomic statements. In general, the
former is more expressive than the latter. Diﬀerent approaches to model and compute the
knowledge could privilege the full or the simpliﬁed model.

3.3

Probabilistic Ontology

Ontology Web Language (OWL) [37] consists of three increasingly-expressive variants known as
OWL Lite (from SHIF(D) logic [38]), OWL DL (from SHOIN(D) logic [39]), and OWL Full.
The ﬁrst only allows simple statements, the second implements a consistent inference model
and the last is a free mixing of OWL with RDF that does not guarantee completeness and
decidability [40]. OWL 2 polishes OWL and is backward compatible with it. Without altering
expressiveness, semantics and complexity, OWL 2 makes some patterns easier to write allowing
1839

Probabilistic Semantics

S.F.Pileggi

more eﬃcient processing in reasoners.
Assuming the most expressive decidable version of OWL (OWL DL basically), an Ontology
is composed of a set C of concepts (or classes), a set P of properties and a set I of individuals.
Inside an Ontology whichever statement is an assertion. Assertions establish hierarchies among
concepts, deﬁne individuals, associate individuals with classes, as well as they set the properties
of individuals, establishing relations among concepts. Furthermore, a set R of inference rules
allows the inference of the knowledge; therefore, individuals may be associated through those
rules to concepts without explicit assertion. According to an individual-centric perspective [4],
at a theoretical level, two diﬀerent kind of probabilistic models for OWL Ontologies may be
observed. They are deﬁned as follows:
Def. An Ontology has a non-deterministic population if assertions are non-deterministic,
meaning they are associated with a given probability (ﬁg. 5).
Def. An Ontology has a non-deterministic schema if each inference rule is associated with
a given probability (ﬁg. 6).
The two models are not equivalent and, a priori, the ﬁrst is more expressive than the
second. As discussed before for RDF, diﬀerent models of computation may privilege one model
or another. Also a fully-probabilistic Ontology can be deﬁned as the combination of the two
models. The co-existence of a non-deterministic schema and a non-deterministic population
deﬁnes a sophisticated inference model that combines both kinds of uncertainty.

Figure 5: Probabilistic population.

3.3.1

Figure 6: Probabilistic schema.

Probabilistic extensions for OWL

As a de facto standard, OWL is deﬁnitely the most used language for Ontology development.
Several probabilistic extensions for OWL have been proposed during the last years to support
uncertain ontology representation, reasoning and mapping. The most common approaches
provide inference models based on the Bayesian paradigm (generic conditional dependency
between cause/assertion and eﬀect/inferred) or on a joint (independent) probability model. All
them propose a convergence between the original logic inference model and statistical inference.
The work proposed in [41] incorporates Bayesian networks to model uncertain knowledge.
Bayesian networks are also used in [42] to provide enhanced probabilistic ontology mapping. In
1840

Probabilistic Semantics

S.F.Pileggi

[43] the authors proposes PR-OWL as the response to the ubiquity of uncertainty: a Bayesian
framework for probabilistic ontologies and plausible reasoning services determine a deterministic
view of a probabilistic world, overcoming in fact one of the major weakness of the current Semantic Technology [43]. While PR-OWL provides OWL constructs for representing Multi-Entity
Bayesian Network (MEBN) [44] theories, it presents several limitations extensively discussed
in [45], including the lack of a proper integration of the MEBN formalism with the logical basis
of OWL on the meta level. A formal mapping between random variables deﬁned in PR-OWL
and concepts deﬁned in OWL is addressed by PR-OWL 2 [46].
3.3.2

Prolog-like technology

Prolog-like technology [47] is based on Horn clauses and has signiﬁcantly contributed to education and research for a long time. In a second moment, it has been discharged by industry
and, consequently, by many education programs. But it has never been dropped by researchers
which follow using declarative programming and Prolog-like solutions in many domains and
applications (e.g. Artiﬁcial Intelligence).
Even though there are examples that seem to prove the contrary (e.g. [48]), prolog-like technology is not considered a priori a Semantic Technology. It has already extensively contributed
to the development of the last generation of semantic technologies (e.g. SWRL [49]), as well as
it will probably lead also some further evolution.
Languages such as SWRL [49] combines OWL and subsets of Datalog [50]. Datalog is
syntactically a subset of Prolog often used as a query language for deductive databases. Datalog
has recently found new applications in data integration, information extraction, networking,
program analysis, security, and cloud computing. SWRL is built on OWL DL and shares its
formal semantics. It is more expressive than OWL DL alone but this additional expressivity
comes at the expense of decidability. Common reasoners (e.g. Pellet [51]) support SWRL
built-ins, enabling the use of SWRL in fact.
Probabilistic extensions of Datalog (pDatalog) have been proposed several years ago [52, 53].
They can intuitively contribute to the model of probabilistic semantics, implicitly or explicitly.
For example, a simple program in pDatalog (0.5male(x) ← person(x)) may express that a
person is with probability of 50% male, or that Tom is a person with probability of 80%
(0.8person(T om)). The work reported in [54] adds probabilities and rules to OWL Lite by
using Probabilistic Datalog, as well as probabilistic extension of SWRL have been recently
proposed [55, 28, 29].

3.4

Probabilistic Semantic Interoperability

The ontological representation (according to the OWL model) can currently be considered the
highest layer of suﬃcient maturity in the theoretical hierarchical structure of the Semantic
Web. Once the Ontology layer and the back-end architecture is extended to accommodate the
representation of uncertain knowledge, high-level concepts based on the semantic infrastructure, such as Semantic Interoperability and Computation, change consequently. As far as the
author knows, Probabilistic Semantic Interoperability, an intuitive consequence of the semantic
representation, is not explicitly addressed in literature.
The commonly accepted concept of Semantic Interoperability (SI) is based on the indirect
relation established by semantically linking contents to formally deﬁned concepts as part of
shared vocabularies (ﬁg. 7). A probabilistic understanding of SI (ﬁg. 8), even though maintaining the same philosophy and structure of the original model, adopts probabilistic semantic
links. Therefore, also the resulting relation of interoperability among contents is probabilistic.
1841

Probabilistic Semantics

Figure 7: Semantic Interoperability (SI).

4

S.F.Pileggi

Figure 8: Probabilistic SI.

An intuitive comparison

An intuitive analysis is proposed in table 1. The diﬀerent classes of probabilistic extensions
for semantic technologies are informally compared according to simple qualitative metrics and
without using formal methods.
Representation logic has provided a solid theoretical background which has not yet been
converted into technology, proposing a huge still unexplored potential in terms of application.
Statistical relational languages propose the opposite situation as they have been used in practice
without providing a real semantic support. They are deﬁning, in fact, a kind of gap between
the semantic representation and its probabilistic meaning. Future eﬀorts could be aimed at
covering that gap. Finally, solutions based on fuzzy logic are deﬁnitely promising but need
experimentation in practice to archive some maturity at a technological level.
Focusing on applied semantics, the extensions of the current semantic technology seem the
most serious candidate to approach the real world. Due to its simplicity, the technology based
on RDF looks the easiest to use; on the other hand, the potential in terms of further evolution
seems reduced. The most promising solutions extend OWL. Those models propose enhanced
expressiveness with respect to RDF. Their use is not always intuitive but the potential in terms
of evolution seems really consistent. The considerations about OWL can be easily extended to
the Prolog-like technology, which proposes higher expressiveness at the price of decidability.

5

Conclusions

The fundamental question addressed in the paper (can semantic ecosystems model and process
also probabilistic knowledge? ) has a clearly positive answer. Indeed, the critical literature review
undertaken shows valuable theoretical works, eﬀective applications, as well as the evidences of
an increasing research interest as the response to real problems.
The critical analysis of the state of the art has also put in evidence largely unexplored research areas, as well as a theoretical gray zone that should provide a kind of integration path
to the main Semantic Technology for extensions and variants.
1842

Probabilistic Semantics

S.F.Pileggi

Probabilistic Semantic Representation
Theory
Description Logic
High
Statistical Relational Lang. Low
Fuzzy Logic
Medium
Probabilistic Semantic Technology
Probabilistic RDF
Simpliﬁed Prob. RDF
OWL-like extensions
Probabilistic Population
Probabilistic Schema
Prolog-like extensions
†

Expressiveness
Medium\Low
Low
High\Medium
High\Medium
Medium
High

Decidable
yes
yes
yes†
yes†
yes†
no

Application
Low
High
Low
Usability
High
High
Medium
Medium
Medium
Medium

Evolution
Low
Low
High
High
High
High

Assuming OWL-DL
Table 1: Qualitative comparison.

Acknowledgments
This research is supported in part by European FP7 project 609551 SyncFree (2013–2016).

References
[1] Tim Berners-Lee, James Hendler, Ora Lassila, et al. The semantic web. Scientiﬁc american,
284(5):28–37, 2001.
[2] Andrew McAfee, Erik Brynjolfsson, Thomas H Davenport, DJ Patil, and Dominic Barton. Big
data. The management revolution. Harvard Bus Rev, 90(10):61–67, 2012.
[3] C Soize. A comprehensive overview of a non-parametric probabilistic approach of model uncertainties for predictive models in structural dynamics. Journal of sound and vibration, 288(3):623–652,
2005.
[4] Salvatore F Pileggi. An individual-centric probabilistic extension for owl: Modelling the uncertainness. Procedia Computer Science, 51:1742–1751, 2015.
[5] Nigel Shadbolt, Wendy Hall, and Tim Berners-Lee. The semantic web revisited. Intelligent
Systems, IEEE, 21(3):96–101, 2006.
[6] Ian Horrocks et al. Daml+oil: A description logic for the semantic web. IEEE Data Eng. Bull.,
25(1):4–9, 2002.
[7] Sheila A McIlraith, Tran Cao Son, and Honglei Zeng. Semantic web services. IEEE intelligent
systems, 16(2):46–53, 2001.
[8] James Hendler. Agents and the semantic web. IEEE Intelligent systems, (2):30–37, 2001.
[9] Manuel Castells. The rise of the network society: The information age: Economy, society, and
culture, volume 1. John Wiley & Sons, 2011.
[10] Thomas L Griﬃths, Mark Steyvers, and Joshua B Tenenbaum. Topics in semantic representation.
Psychological review, 114(2):211, 2007.

1843

Probabilistic Semantics

S.F.Pileggi

[11] Aris M Ouksel and Amit Sheth. Semantic interoperability in global information systems. ACM
Sigmod Record, 28(1):5–12, 1999.
[12] Atanas Kiryakov, Borislav Popov, Ivan Terziev, Dimitar Manov, and Damyan Ognyanoﬀ. Semantic
annotation, indexing, and retrieval. Web Semantics: Science, Services and Agents on the World
Wide Web, 2(1):49–79, 2004.
[13] Xiao Hang Wang and et al. Ontology based context modeling and reasoning using owl. In Pervasive
Computing and Communications Workshops, 2004.
[14] Deborah L McGuinness, Frank Van Harmelen, et al. Owl web ontology language overview. W3C
recommendation, 10(10):2004, 2004.
[15] Jorge P´erez, Marcelo Arenas, and Claudio Gutierrez. Semantics and complexity of sparql. In
International semantic web conference, volume 4273, pages 30–43. Springer, 2006.
[16] Tim O’reilly. What is web 2.0: Design patterns and business models for the next generation of
software. Communications & strategies, (1):17, 2007.
[17] Salvatore F. Pileggi, Carlos Fernandez-Llatas, and Vicente Traver. When the social meets the
semantic: Social semantic web or web 2.5. Future Internet, 4(3):852–864, 2012.
[18] Christian Bizer. The emerging web of linked data. Intelligent Systems, IEEE, 24(5):87–92, 2009.
[19] Salvatore F Pileggi, Carlos E Palau, and Manuel Esteve. Building semantic sensor web: Knowledge
and interoperability. In SSW, pages 15–22, 2010.
[20] Nicola Henze, Peter Dolog, and Wolfgang Nejdl. Reasoning and ontologies for personalized elearning in the semantic web. Journal of Educational Technology & Society, 7(4):82–97, 2004.
[21] F. Baader, S. Brandt, and C. Lutz. Pushing the envelope. In 19th International Joint Conference
on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (IJCAI 2005), Morgan-Kaufmann Publishers, Edinburgh, UK.
[22] Daphne Koller, Alon Levy, and Avi Pfeﬀer. P-classic: a tractable probablistic description logic.
AAAI/IAAI, 1997:390–397, 1997.
[23] Thomas Lukasiewicz and Umberto Straccia. Managing uncertainty and vagueness in description
logics for the semantic web. Web Semantics: Science, Services and Agents on the World Wide
Web, 6(4):291–308, 2008.
[24] Lise Getoor and Lilyana Mihalkova. Learning statistical models from relational data. In 2011
ACM SIGMOD International Conference on Management of data.
[25] Mathias Niepert, Christian Meilicke, and Heiner Stuckenschmidt. A probabilistic-logical framework for ontology matching. In AAAI, 2010.
[26] George Klir and Bo Yuan. Fuzzy sets and fuzzy logic, volume 4. Prentice Hall New Jersey, 1995.
[27] Thomas Lukasiewicz and Umberto Straccia. Description logic programs under probabilistic uncertainty and fuzzy vagueness. International Journal of Approximate Reasoning, 50(6):837–853,
2009.
[28] Jeﬀ Z Pan, Giorgos Stoilos, Giorgos Stamou, Vassilis Tzouvaras, and Ian Horrocks. f-swrl: A fuzzy
extension of swrl. In Journal on Data Semantics VI, pages 28–46. Springer, 2006.
[29] Xing Wang, Zongmin M Ma, Li Yan, and Xiangfu Meng. Vague-swrl: a fuzzy extension of swrl.
In Web Reasoning and Rule Systems, pages 232–233. Springer, 2008.
[30] Mauro Mazzieri, Aldo Franco Dragoni, and UPD Marche. A fuzzy semantics for semantic web
languages. In ISWC-URSW, pages 12–22, 2005.
[31] David Heckerman, Dan Geiger, and David M Chickering. Learning bayesian networks: The combination of knowledge and statistical data. Machine learning, 20(3):197–243, 1995.
[32] Rosalba Giugno and Thomas Lukasiewicz. P-shoq (d): A probabilistic extension of shoq (d) for
probabilistic ontologies in the semantic web. In JELIA, volume 2, pages 86–97. Springer, 2002.
[33] Frank Manola, Eric Miller, Brian McBride, et al. Rdf primer. W3C recommendation, 10(1-107):6,
2004.
[34] Yoshio Fukushige. Representing probabilistic relations in rdf. In ISWC-URSW, pages 106–107.

1844

Probabilistic Semantics

S.F.Pileggi

Citeseer, 2005.
[35] Xiang Lian and Lei Chen. Eﬃcient query answering in probabilistic rdf graphs. In 2011 ACM
SIGMOD International Conference on Management of data.
[36] Octavian Udrea, VS Subrahmanian, and Zoran Majki. Probabilistic rdf. In 2006 IEEE International Conference on Information Reuse and Integration.
[37] Deborah L McGuinness, Frank Van Harmelen, et al. Owl web ontology language overview. W3C
recommendation, 10(10):2004, 2004.
[38] Ian Horrocks and Peter F Patel-Schneider. Reducing owl entailment to description logic satisﬁability. In The Semantic Web-ISWC 2003, pages 17–29. Springer, 2003.
[39] Ian Horrocks and Ulrike Sattler. A tableau decision procedure for\ mathcal {SHOIQ}. Journal of
Automated Reasoning, 39(3):249–276, 2007.
[40] Riccardo Rosati. On the decidability and complexity of integrating ontologies and rules. Web
Semantics: Science, Services and Agents on the World Wide Web, 3(1):61–73, 2005.
[41] Zhongli Ding and Yun Peng. A probabilistic extension to ontology language owl. In 37th Annual
Hawaii international conference on System Sciences, 2004.
[42] Prasenjit Mitra, Natasha F Noy, and Anuj Rattan Jaiswal. Omen: A probabilistic ontology
mapping tool. In The Semantic Web–ISWC 2005, pages 537–547. Springer, 2005.
[43] Paulo Cesar G da Costa, Kathryn B Laskey, and Kenneth J Laskey. Pr-owl: A bayesian ontology
language for the semantic web. In ISWC-URSW, pages 23–33, 2005.
[44] Kathryn Blackmond Laskey. Mebn: A language for ﬁrst-order bayesian knowledge bases. Artiﬁcial
intelligence, 172(2):140–178, 2008.
[45] Livia Predoiu and Heiner Stuckenschmidt. Probabilistic extensions of semantic web languages-a
survey. The Semantic Web for Knowledge and Data Management: Technologies and Practices.
Idea Group Inc, 2008.
[46] Rommel N Carvalho, Kathryn B Laskey, and Paulo CG Costa. Pr-owl 2.0–bridging the gap to
owl semantics. In Uncertainty Reasoning for the Semantic Web II, pages 1–18. Springer, 2013.
[47] William Clocksin and Christopher S Mellish. Programming in PROLOG. Springer Science &
Business Media, 2003.
[48] Francesco M Donini, Maurizio Lenzerini, Daniele Nardi, and Andrea Schaerf. Al-log: Integrating
datalog and description logics. Journal of Intelligent Information Systems, 10(3):227–252, 1998.
[49] Ian Horrocks, Peter F Patel-Schneider, Harold Boley, Said Tabet, Benjamin Grosof, Mike Dean,
et al. Swrl: A semantic web rule language combining owl and ruleml. W3C Member submission,
21:79, 2004.
[50] Stefano Ceri, Georg Gottlob, and Letizia Tanca. What you always wanted to know about datalog
(and never dared to ask). Knowledge and Data Engineering, IEEE Transactions on, 1(1):146–166,
1989.
[51] Evren Sirin, Bijan Parsia, Bernardo Cuenca Grau, Aditya Kalyanpur, and Yarden Katz. Pellet: A
practical owl-dl reasoner. Web Semantics: science, services and agents on the World Wide Web,
5(2):51–53, 2007.
[52] Norbert Fuhr. Probabilistic dataloga logic for powerful retrieval methods. In Proceedings of the
18th annual international ACM SIGIR conference on Research and development in information
retrieval, pages 282–290. ACM, 1995.
[53] Norbert Fuhr. Probabilistic datalog: Implementing logical information retrieval for advanced
applications. Journal of the American Society for Information Science, 51(2):95–110, 2000.
[54] Henrik Nottelmann and Norbert Fuhr. Adding probabilities and rules to owl lite subsets based
on probabilistic datalog. International Journal of Uncertainty, Fuzziness and Knowledge-Based
Systems, 14(01):17–41, 2006.
[55] Yu Liu, Shihong Chen, Shuoming Li, and Yunhua Wang. Bayes-swrl: A probabilistic extension of
swrl. In International Conference on Computational Intelligence and Security (CIS), 2013.

1845

