Procedia Computer Science
Volume 51, 2015, Pages 2435–2444
ICCS 2015 International Conference On Computational Science

Quantifying complementarity among strategies for
inﬂuencers’ detection on Twitter∗
Alan Neves, Ramon Vieira, Fernando Mour˜ao, and Leonardo Rocha
Universidade Federal de S˜
ao Jo˜
ao del Rei, S˜
ao Jo˜
ao del Rei, Minas Gerais, Brasil
{aneves,ramonv,fhmourao,lcrocha}@ufsj.edu.br

Abstract
The so-called inﬂuencer, a person with the ability to persuade people, have important role on
the information diﬀusion in social media environments. Indeed, inﬂuencers might dictate wordof-mouth and peer recommendation, impacting tasks such as recommendation, advertising,
brand evaluation, among others. Thus, a growing number of works aim to identify inﬂuencers
by exploiting distinct information. Deciding about the best strategy for each domain, however,
is a complex task due to the lack of consensus among these works. This paper presents a quantitative study of analysis among some of the main strategies for identifying inﬂuencers, aiming to
help researchers on this decision. Besides determining semantic classes of strategies, based on
the characteristics they exploit, we obtained through PCA an eﬀective meta-learning process to
combine linearly distinct strategies. As main implications, we highlight a better understanding
about the selected strategies and a novel manner to alleviate the diﬃculty on deciding which
strategy researchers would adopt.
Keywords: Social Media Environments, Information Diﬀusion, Inﬂuencer Detection

1

Introduction

The widespread use of social media applications, such as blogs, microbloggings and social networks, has allowed an increasing among of people to diﬀuse on the Web thoughts, opinions,
discussions and reviews about distinct topics [4]. Hence, researchers on information diﬀusion
possess nowadays a rich and huge amount of data to understand better this diﬀusion process.
Indeed, understanding the diﬀusion of information has implications for several tasks, such as
recommendation, advertising, opinion pools, brand evaluation, among others [1, 23]. Eﬀorts
on this direction, frequently, point out the so-called inﬂuencers as a main character on this
diﬀusion process. An inﬂuencer is a person with the ability to persuade people, aﬀecting their
actions and behavior [17]. Besides their sociological role, determining which information will
be spread, as well as the diﬀusion speed and reach, inﬂuencers have an important economic
∗ This

work was partially supported by CNPq, CAPES, Fapemig, and INWEB.

Selection and peer-review under responsibility of the Scientiﬁc Programme Committee of ICCS 2015
c The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V.

doi:10.1016/j.procs.2015.05.428

2435

A study on strategies for inﬂuencers’ detection on Twitter.

Neves, Vieira, Mourao and Rocha

role. Recent studies have demonstrated that word-of-mouth and peer recommendation, which
might be dictated by inﬂuencers, are eﬀective forms of advertising [1]. Thus, a growing number
of studies have focused on identifying inﬂuencers on distinct social media environments.
Despite the identiﬁcation of inﬂuencers has been an active research area, it has proven to
be a challenging task [4]. We highlight three main diﬃculties related to this task. First, it
is not clear which characteristics are relevant to determine a person as being an inﬂuencer.
While some studies exploit social structure of networks, other focus on patterns of propagation
in the network or basic statistics of each person, such as number of posts spread over his/her
contacts, total of answered messages, among others. The second diﬃculty is how to determine
which characteristics must be considered in order to determine an inﬂuencer, according to a
speciﬁc goal (i.e. economic, social, etc.) and the available information (connection between
users, information route, etc.). Third, a major diﬃculty is how to assess the eﬀectiveness of
the proposed methods in identifying all inﬂuencers of each domain. Since there is no ground
truth about the actual inﬂuencers in many real domains, quality assessment became unclear and
controversial in the literature [1, 4]. Distinct proposals have emerged over time but no consensus
on how to address this task was reached. Further, to the best of our knowledge, there is no work
in the literature that analyzes and compares the main strategies for identifying inﬂuencers.
This work performs a quantitative study of analysis and comparison among some of the
main strategies for identifying inﬂuencers in the literature. We intend to help researchers on
information diﬀusion to understand better the eﬀect of distinct strategies in each domain and
make a better decision about which of these strategies to use. In this sense, ﬁrst, we surveyed several eﬀorts on the literature and proposed a new taxonomy for these eﬀorts, based
on common premises and characteristics they exploit. Speciﬁcally, we evaluated six highly
referenced strategies: PageRank, PCC, ProﬁleRank, Eﬀective Readers, and two basic statistical summaries. Thus, we identiﬁed three relevant classes. The ﬁrst class comprises strategies
exploiting network structures, which is represented by PageRank TM algorithm [15] and PCC
[9]. PageRank calculates a score of inﬂuence for each vertex in a directed graph using only
relationships and propagation on the network. PCC proposes a centrality-based metric to determine inﬂuential neighborhoods in a network. Our second class refers to strategies focused on
content and ﬂow, which is represented by the strategies ProﬁleRank [18] and Eﬀective Readers
[11]. While ProﬁleRank models information diﬀusion just considering the temporal order in
which the messages are propagate on a social network, Eﬀective Readers evaluates information
diﬀusion as a cascade eﬀect that topics have among users. The third class consists of strategies
that exploit statistical summary of user actions and attributes. The strategies belonging to this
class are Number of social ties [23] and Number of propagated posts [1].
In order to evaluate the proposed taxonomy, we measure the level of agreement among the
selected strategies. We conducted all analyses on data samples from Twitter, given its relevance
for information diﬀusion on the Web. We applied each strategy Sa on these data sample and
derived a descending ordered list of Top-50 inﬂuencers, according to the scores deﬁned by Sa .
Then, we used the generalized version Kendall’s Tau metric [6] as measurement of agreement
between pair of lists. Our analyses conﬁrmed that lists derived from strategies belonging to
the same class present the highest level of agreement. Since these analyses demonstrated high
variance on the scores derived by each strategy, we also used Principal Component Analysis
(PCA) for extracting useful and orthogonal information modeled by them [16]. Through PCA,
ﬁrst, we analyzed the complementarity of information modeled by strategies belonging to the
same class. We found that strategies belonging to the same class are strongly correlated, once
again, corroborating the proposed taxonomy. Then, we evaluated the complementarity among
strategies belonging to distinct classes. Our interest was to determine how redundant strategies
2436

A study on strategies for inﬂuencers’ detection on Twitter.

Neves, Vieira, Mourao and Rocha

derived from distinct ﬁelds and theories are. In this case, ﬁrst we observe the resulting lists
of inﬂuencers, generated by each strategy, are very diﬀerent from each other. Furthermore, we
may interpret the use of PCA as a meta-learning strategy that combines linearly distinct strategies in order to compose a single one carrying the useful information to identify inﬂuencers.
Moreover, the use of PCA alleviates the diﬃculty on deciding which strategy researchers would
adopt to get a proper list of inﬂuencers. As main contributions, we highlight:
1. Survey and organization of eﬀorts in the literature into semantic class (i.e., a new
taxonomy), based on assumptions and characteristics exploited;
2. Analysis of intra-class complementarity using PCA, which showed high level of agreement among strategies of the same class;
3. Analysis of inter-class complementarity, which showed that PCA can be used as a
meta-learning process combining linearly the strategies that consider diﬀerent characteristics.

2

Related Work

There are in the literature several works that aim to identify inﬂuencers in social media environments [1, 23]. It is noteworthy the diversity of domains and ﬁelds related to these works,
ranging from sociological to biological researches [17]. Considering the domain of study, we
grouped most of the eﬀorts into three main groups.
First, we found many works focused on sociological theories. In [19], the authors proposed
a method based on the notion of social capital, which measures the ability of bonding (i.e.,
similar) and bridging (i.g., diverse) people to cooperate and communicate in a network. In
turn, [9] proposed a centrality measure, named Principal Component Centrality (PCC), to
determine inﬂuential neighborhoods in a network. In [10], the authors showed that the most
eﬃcient inﬂuencers are those located within the core of the network, identiﬁed by a k-core decomposition analysis. Also, [21] reviewed 10 techniques used to identify inﬂuencers, presenting
advantages/disadvantages on each technique.
The second group is related to mathematical/computational modeling of the problem. Studies on this group range from simple statistical analysis of activity logs to graph-based strategies
[1, 23, 9]. Usually, there is a high intersection between the type of information exploited by
strategies from the ﬁrst group and those exploited in the second one. However, strategies from
the second group tend to combine simple information of sociological structures with additional
information, such as content and time. Indeed, some works argue that the user’s actual inﬂuence
is related to his/her relationships and the temporal order of the published content [11, 18]. In
this sense, [18] takes into account the temporal order of message diﬀusion, without considering
the relationships for deriving a user’s inﬂuence score. In turn, [15] adapted the PageRank algorithm to derive an inﬂuence score for each user, modeled as a node in a directed graph. Other
works model the problem of ﬁnding inﬂuencers as an inﬂuence maximization problem, where
the goal is to ﬁnd the top-k nodes such that the average infection spread is maximized [12].
Finally, we point out as the third relevant group works based on economic theories [20, 7, 13].
Theories in this group are, usually, focused on viral marketing and brand adoption. The goal
is to understand the mechanisms that lead to large-scale chain-reaction of inﬂuence, with a
very small marketing cost. Using a threshold model, [20] studied the opinion leadership on the
diﬀusion of innovations. In [22], the aim was to clarify insights on new product diﬀusion in a
population of inﬂuencers, through mathematical formalism. Further, [13] used a neural artiﬁcial network to ﬁnd inﬂuential reviewers for word-of-mouth marketing. Also, [7] proposed the
Law of the Few to explain the role of inﬂuencers in social groups, which states that a majority
of individuals get most of their information from a very small subset of users, the inﬂuencers.
2437

A study on strategies for inﬂuencers’ detection on Twitter.

Neves, Vieira, Mourao and Rocha

Since our case studies are data samples from Twitter, we also reviewed some main eﬀorts
for identifying inﬂuencers on it. Indeed, Twitter has been the focus of several researches on
information diﬀusion [11]. Many of the aforementioned works use this microblogging system
as case study, such as [4, 23, 1]. Also, Twitter’s singularities motivated the proposal of novel
strategies speciﬁcally for it. [3] adapted the k-shell decomposition algorithm to exploit followers
relationship. [1] conducted an empirical analysis on the attributes and roles of inﬂuencers.
A main drawback related to the numerous works existing in the literature, however, is that
there is no consensus among them [23]. Determining which strategy might provide a proper solution in each domain is not trivial, since quality evaluation is complex and unclear [4].Further,
to the best of our knowledge, there is no work focused on quantifying the similarity among
distinct strategies. Thus, this work aims to analyze and compare quantitatively some of the
main strategies in the literature, instead of proposing new ones. Moreover, by applying PCA
to determine not correlated information, we have a simple way to combine these strategies.

3

A new taxonomy for inﬂuencer detection strategies

In this section, we present a new taxonomy for eﬀorts on identifying inﬂuencers, based on the
distinct assumptions and characteristics exploited in the literature. Thus, we aim to determine
semantic classes of strategies that exploit the same type of characteristics. Such classes would
help us in our goal of analyzing and comparing distinct strategies.
In order to deﬁne these classes, we propose a simple and non-automatic methodology of
classiﬁcation. First, we surveyed the main related works published or referenced in the past
few years. Second, we extracted from these works the main characteristics they exploit in order to determine inﬂuencers. Third, we grouped these characteristics according to the type of
information modeled. Finally, we classiﬁed the works according to the groups deﬁned in the
last step. Note that, this methodology can be applied to any set of strategy existing in the
literature. Further, the resulting groups would depend on the set of evaluated strategies. Also,
we highlight that we do not intend to provide a closed set of classes in this work. Instead, we
propose a way to extend the taxonomy as new strategies appear.

3.1

Evaluated Strategies

In this section, we describe in detail the six highly referenced strategies we selected.
• PCC: Principal Component Centrality (PCC) [9] is a strategy of inﬂuencer detection based
on centrality, a measurement of relevance for users in a network that takes into account the
neighborhood of each user. PCC extends the EingenValue Centrality (EVC) metric [2], by
exploiting the k dominant characteristics in a graph. These characteristics are determined
through a Singular Value Decomposition (SVD) of the adjacent matrix representing the social
network [8]. Based on this decomposition and on the Hadamard operator ( ) [5], the PCC’s
value is derived according to Equation 1. In this formula, k is the number of characteristics
(i.e., eigenvectors) to be exploited and U and S are two matrices obtained through SVD.
By applying PCC on an adjacent matrix, we derive a centrality measure for each user. The
higher this centrality, the higher the user’s inﬂuence.
Cp =
2438

(Un×k

Un×k )(Sk×1

Sk×1 )

(1)

A study on strategies for inﬂuencers’ detection on Twitter.

Neves, Vieira, Mourao and Rocha

• PageRank: PageRank is a well-know algorithm proposed in [15] and commercially exploited
by GoogleTM to determine global ranks for Webpages. Basically, it calculates the propagation
of inﬂuence among nodes on a directed graph. In order to identify inﬂuencers, nodes on this
graph represent users and edges their social relationships. Thus, the PageRank value (P R)
of each user ui is given by Equation 2, where Mi is the set of users connected to user ui ; L(j)
is the size of uj ’s neighborhood; α is the damping factor (with default value 0.85); and N is
the number of users in the graph. The PageRank value represents the probability of reaching
each user in the network. The higher this probability, the higher the user’s inﬂuence.
P R(ui ) = α
j∈Mi

P R(uj ) 1 − α
+
L(j)
N

(2)

• Eﬀective Readers: This strategy considers relationship among users and the temporal order in which information reach each user. The authors observed that information spread
faster at the initial moments of its diﬀusion process. Based on this observation, the authors
proposed the Eﬀective Readers score, which is the number of distinct users who received
an information for the very ﬁrst time from a speciﬁc user. Assuming that users read their
messages chronological as the latter arrive, given a message m published by a user ui , the
Eﬀective Readers ER0 (m, ui ) is deﬁned by Equation 3, where F is a binary ﬂag of status for
each user uj . F is initialized to zero and it is set to 1 at the ﬁrst moment uj gets m from
his/her neighborhood. The inﬂuence score IF0 assigned to ui is deﬁned as the sum of ER0
values derived for the set T (ui ) of all messages published by ui , such as show by Equation 4.
ER0 (m, ui ) =

F (uj , m)

(3)

uj ∈f ollower(ui )

IF0 (ui ) =

ER0 (m, ui )

(4)

m∈T (ui )

• ProﬁleRank: This strategy exploits a cyclic deﬁnition of relevance and inﬂuence [18]. Inﬂuential users spread relevant content and relevant content are disseminated by inﬂuential
users. ProﬁleRank sort both users and content according to scores of inﬂuence and relevance.
It models information diﬀusion through the relationship among users and content over time
by using two matrices M and L. M is a matrix with dimensions |U | × |C| that represents
the content set C created by the user set U . ProﬁleRank initializes each position Mi,j as q1i ,
where qi is the number of pieces of contents ui has created or propagated. In turn, matrix
L has dimensions |C| × |U |, where Li,j = 1 if the user uj created the piece of content ci and
Li,j = 0 otherwise. Based on these matrices, scores of content relevance (r) and user inﬂuence
(p) are deﬁned according to Equations 5 and 6, respectively. Again, d stands for the damping
factor and, in this case, it is used to prevent strongly connected subgraphs. I is the identity
matrix and V is a uniform vector.
r = (1 − d)V (I − dLM )−1

(5)

p = (1 − d)V (I − dM L)−1

(6)

• Number of Followers: one of the simplest and most frequently used strategies designed
speciﬁcally for Twitter [4]. A follower is a user that want to get updated about actions from
the user he/she is following. Basically, some works count the number of followers each user
has in the system. The higher this number, the higher the user inﬂuence on the network.
• Number of Retweets: another simple and very referenced strategy designed for Twitter
[23]. It summarizes the number of tweets published by a user that were forwarded by other
users (i.e., retweets). The higher the number of retweets related to a given user, the higher
this user’s inﬂuence on the network.
2439

A study on strategies for inﬂuencers’ detection on Twitter.

3.1.1

Neves, Vieira, Mourao and Rocha

Resulting Taxonomy

Following the methodology presented, the third step corresponds to group the characteristics
according to the type of information modeled, and, as fourth step, the strategies are classiﬁed according to the groups previous deﬁned. Based on the subset of evaluated strategies, we
identiﬁed three main classes, as follows.
The ﬁrst class comprises strategies that take into account Network Structures (NS) only.
We found in this group the PageRank TM algorithm [15], which calculates a score of inﬂuence
for each vertex in a directed graph using only relationships and propagation on the network.
PCC [9] is the second strategy in this class. Again, it proposes a centrality-based metric to
determine inﬂuential neighborhoods in a network.
Strategies belonging to the second class exploit Content and Flow (C&F) to determine inﬂuencers. We observe in this class ProﬁleRank [18] and Eﬀective Readers [11]. While ProﬁleRank
models information diﬀusion just considering the temporal order in which the messages are
propagate on a social network, Eﬀective Readers evaluates information diﬀusion as a cascade
eﬀect that topics have among users.
Finally, the third class corresponds to strategies focused on Statistical Summary (SS) of
activity logs of users. Basically, they are strategies that aim to determine the inﬂuential level
of users by just summarizing some attributes of users, such as the Number of Followers (#F)
and Number of Retweets (#R).

3.2

Taxonomy Evaluation

In order to evaluate the proposed taxonomy, we conducted an experiment on which we measure
the level of agreement among the selected strategies. We conducted all analyses on data samples from Twitter, given its relevance for information diﬀusion on the Web. In the following
subsections, we describe in detail these data samples, the experiments and the results achieved.
3.2.1

Data Samples

We collected two distinct samples from Twitter. The ﬁrst one (Dataset1) refers to tweets coming that the Brazilian city Belo Horizonte and spans the period from 10/30/2014 to 11/06/2014.
During this period the two biggest soccer team from Belo Horizonte were playing the ﬁnals of
the two biggest Brazilian soccer championship (i.e., Copa do Brasil and Campeonato Brasileiro).
The second data sample (Dataset2) comprises tweets coming from the biggest Brazilian city,
S˜ao Paulo, published from 12/24/2014 to 01/05/2015 that corresponds to the period of Christmas and New Years Eve celebrations. In both collections, we collected tweets related to the
top 10 topics most discussed (i.e., the TopTrends) in the previous 10 minutes of gathering. We
also collected public information about all users related to a tweet, such as the tweet’s writer,
his/her followers and friends. We used the APIStreaming 1 to gather the tweets and the API
REST to gather all user’s public information2 . Table 1 details both data samples.
Table 1: Summary of the data samples used in all experiments.
Collection # users # tweets
Dataset 1
1,253
3,248
Dataset 2
3,800
1,302

1 https://dev.twitter.com/docs/streaming-apis
2 https://dev.twitter.com/docs/api

2440

A study on strategies for inﬂuencers’ detection on Twitter.

3.2.2

Neves, Vieira, Mourao and Rocha

Experimental evaluation

To determine the level of agreement among distinct strategies, we conducted a pairwise comparison among results generated by each strategy. In this sense, we applied each strategy Sa on
our data samples and derived a descending ordered list of Top-50 inﬂuencers, according to the
scores deﬁned by Sa . Then, we used the generalized version of Kendall’s Tau metric [6] with
penalty parameter p = 0 as measurement of agreement between pair of lists. The higher the
Kendall’s Tau between two lists, the more they agree. To ease comparisons, we normalized the
results obtained, such as suggested by [14]. Table 2 shows the results of this analysis.
Table 2: Pairwise comparison of lists of Top-50 inﬂuencers generated by strategy of inﬂuencer
identiﬁcation, using Kendall’s Tau metric.
PCC
PageR
ER
PR
#R
#S

PCC
1.00
0.78
0.23
0.09
0.32
0.29

PageR
0.77
1.00
0.28
0.09
0.34
0.32

ER
0.24
0.29
1.00
0.36
0.41
0.68

PR
0.09
0.09
0.35
1.00
0.05
0.08

A - Dataset 1

#R
0.32
0.34
0.40
0.05
1.00
0.62

#S
0.29
0.32
0.68
0.08
0.62
1.00

PCC
PageR
ER
PR
#R
#S

PCC
1.00
0.68
0.36
0.15
0.02
0.21

PageR
0.72
1.00
0.32
0.11
0.23
0.32

ER
0.36
0.31
1.00
0.73
0.01
0.13

PR
0.15
0.10
0.72
1.00
0.00
0.02

#R
0.02
0.23
0.01
0.00
1.00
0.43

#S
0.22
0.34
0.13
0.02
0.43
1.00

B - Dataset 2

As highlighted in the tables, our analysis conﬁrmed that lists derived from strategies belonging to the same class present the highest level of agreement on both datasets, which correspond
to our ﬁrst contribution on this paper. An exception refers to the Eﬀective Readers (from class
C&F) on Dataset1, which exhibited higher levels of agreement with the strategy Number of
Followers (from class SS). This behavior is related to the collection size and limitations inherent to these strategies. Since Dataset1 spans a short period of time, there are few users in this
collection with high number of relationships (e.g., higher than 15). In this kind of scenario, the
Eﬀective Readers behaves similarly to the Number of followers because there are not enough
connections in the network to model the information propagation.
Based on the these results, a relevant question arises: is it possible to derive a single metric
from each class that combines useful and distinct information captured by each strategy of the
same class? Next, we present the experiments performed in order to answer this question.

4

Analysis of intra-class complementarity

In this section, we analyze the complementarity of information modeled by strategies belonging
to the same class. The experiments conducted in Section 3.2.2 demonstrated high variances on
the scores derived by each strategy. This observation motivated us to use Principal Component
Analysis (PCA)[16] for extracting useful and orthogonal information modeled by them. Thus,
instead of deciding among strategies from the same class, researchers may use the combination
of these strategies performed by PCA.
PCA is a multivariate statistical technique that exploits the variability structure of the data
[16]. Its main idea consists of reducing the dimensionality of a dataset that exhibit a large
number of correlated variables, while capturing as much as possible the original data variability. PCA performs this reduction by transforming the variables into a new set of orthonormal
variables, named Principal Components. These components are decreasingly ordered by the
amount of the variability each one models. In our analyses, we run PCA using an input matrix
P . P has dimensions |U | × |S| , where U is the user set and S is the set of evaluated strategies.
Each position P (ui , sj ) refers to the inﬂuence score that strategy sj assigned to user ui . Since
one of our goals is to derive a single metric that captures all non-redundant information modeled
by each class, we evaluated only the ﬁrst principal component of PCA. The ﬁrst component
2441

A study on strategies for inﬂuencers’ detection on Twitter.

Neves, Vieira, Mourao and Rocha

might be interpreted as a liner combination of the strategies. Thus, we derived a new inﬂuence
score for each user ui that is a linear combination of all scores given to ui by distinct strategies
of each class. As our taxonomy has three class, we created three distinct input matrices P ,
each one containing only the strategies of each class (i.e., |S| = 2).
Again, for each class, we derived a descending ordered list of Top-K inﬂuencers, according
to the new scores deﬁned by PCA and compared this list with the ones related to each strategy
belong to the same class, using the Kendall’s Tau metric. The goal is to measure the agreement
between the new list generated by PCA with the others strategies of the same class. Figure 1
presents the results of this analysis when varying the Top-K inﬂuencers from 5 to 50.
Figure 1: Analysis of complementarity of information modeled by distinct strategies belonging
to the same class using PCA.
(b) Content and Flow

(c) Statistical Summary

DataSet 2

DataSet 1

(a) Network Structure

Observe that, in most of the cases, strategies belonging to the same class (i.e., green lines)
present levels of agreement higher than 40%. Additionally, when comparing the Top-K inﬂuencers derived from PCA with other strategies belonging to the same class the levels of
agreement are even higher in both collections. For all datasets and classes, we found at least
80% of agreement between PCA and one of the strategies. These observations have two main
implications. First, strategies belonging to the same class are strongly correlated, once again,
corroborating the proposed taxonomy. Second, the Top-K inﬂuencers identiﬁed by PCA were
able to synthesize properly the characteristics exploited by each class. The ﬁrst principal component was able to capture more than 66% of the data variability in all cases (i.e. the Variance
presented in graphics). Furthermore, we may interpret the use of PCA as a meta-learning
strategy that combines linearly distinct strategies of a well deﬁned class in order to compose
a single one carrying the useful information to identify inﬂuencers. Indeed, this is one of the
main contributions of this work.

5

Analysis of inter-class complementarity

An important question raised by the foregoing discussion refers to the complementarity among
strategies belonging to distinct classes and how PCA would be able to combine strategies that
exploit characteristics from distinct nature. In this section, we evaluate this question.
Such as performed in Section 3, we created an input matrix P of users per strategies for
each data sample. The position P (ui , sj ) represents the inﬂuence score assigned by strategy sj
2442

A study on strategies for inﬂuencers’ detection on Twitter.

Neves, Vieira, Mourao and Rocha

to user ui . We used all evaluated strategies to compose P (i.e., |S| = 6). Then, we applied PCA
on P deriving a single inﬂuence score per each distinct user, which represents a combination of
the scores originally deﬁned by each strategy. For each data sample, we derived a descending
ordered list of Top-50 inﬂuencers, according to the new score deﬁned by PCA. We contrasted
the list generated by PCA over all strategies against the lists resulting from PCA applied over
each class individually. Using the Kendall’s Tau metric for determining levels of agreement, we
varied the Top-K inﬂuencers from 5 to 50. The results of this analysis are presented in Figure 2.
Figure 2: Analysis of complementarity of information modeled by strategies belonging to different classes using PCA

(a) Dataset 1.

(b) Dataset 2.

We observe that lists derived by PCA on distinct classes have low agreement among them
(i.e., smaller than 40%). This result demonstrates that as strategies belonging to distinct classes
exploit diﬀerent information, the resulting Top-K inﬂuencers of each strategy diﬀer from each
other, depicting the diﬃculty in selecting the best strategy to use due to lack of consensus. On
the other side, the list generated by PCA applied to all strategies, in most of the cases, synthesized better the information modeled by the diﬀerent classes, presenting levels of agreement
higher than 50%. The variance captured by the ﬁrst principal component tends to be smaller
(around 40%) given the larger number of non-aligned strategies. Thus, PCA may be also used
as a meta-learning strategy to combine linearly strategies with distinct nature. We believe this
is the main contribution of this work, since PCA may alleviate he diﬃculty on deciding which
strategy researchers on information diﬀusion would adopt to get a proper list of inﬂuencers.

6

Conclusions and Future Works

In this paper, we presented a quantitative study of analysis and comparison among some of the
main strategies for identifying inﬂuencers on social media applications [9, 18, 11, 23, 1]. We
extracted from these works the main characteristics they exploit and grouped these characteristics according to the type of information modeled, deﬁning a new taxonomy. Then, all selected
works were classiﬁed according to the deﬁned groups. To evaluate these groups, we derived a
descending ordered list of Top-50 inﬂuencers, according to the scores deﬁned by each strategy.
Comparing these lists, we conﬁrmed that lists derived from strategies belonging to the same
class present the highest level of agreement. Moreover, using Principal Component Analysis
(PCA), we analyzed the complementarity of information modeled by strategies belonging to the
same class, demonstrating that strategies belonging to the same class are strongly correlated.
Further, we used PCA as a meta-learning process to combine linearly distinct strategies, alleviating the diﬃculty on deciding which strategy researchers would adopt. As future work, we
intend to extent the proposed taxonomy by inspecting other strategies existing in the literature.
The goal is to combine all of them using PCA, achieving a new metric more complete w.r.t the
characteristics exploited.
2443

A study on strategies for inﬂuencers’ detection on Twitter.

Neves, Vieira, Mourao and Rocha

References
[1] Eytan Bakshy, Jake M. Hofman, Winter A. Mason, and Duncan J. Watts. Everyone’s an inﬂuencer:
Quantifying inﬂuence on twitter. In Proc. 4th ACM WSDM, 2011.
[2] Phillip Bonacich and Paulette Lloyd. Eigenvector-like measures of centrality for asymmetric relations. Social Networks, 23(3):191–201, 2001.
[3] Phil E Brown and Junlan Feng. Measuring user inﬂuence on twitter using modiﬁed k-shell decomposition. In Fifth International AAAI Conference on Weblogs and Social Media, 2011.
[4] Meeyoung Cha, Hamed Haddadi, Fabricio Benevenuto, and P Krishna Gummadi. Measuring user
inﬂuence in twitter: The million follower fallacy. ICWSM, 2010.
[5] Chandler Davis. The norm of the schur product operation. Numerische Mathematik, 1962.
[6] Ronald Fagin, Ravi Kumar, and D. Sivakumar. Comparing top k lists. In Proc. 14th ACM-SIAM,
2003.
[7] Andrea Galeotti and Sanjeev Goyal. The law of the few. The American Economic Review, 2010.
[8] Gene H. Golub and Charles F. Van Loan. Matrix Computations. Johns Hopkins University Press,
1996.
[9] M. U. Ilyas and H. Radha. Identifying inﬂuential nodes in online social networks using principal
component centrality. In Communications (ICC), IEEE International Conference. IEEE, 2011.
[10] Maksim Kitsak, Lazaros K Gallos, Shlomo Havlin, Fredrik Liljeros, Lev Muchnik, H Eugene
Stanley, and Hern´
an A Makse. Identiﬁcation of inﬂuential spreaders in complex networks. Nature
Physics, 2010.
[11] Changhyun Lee, Haewoon Kwak, Hosung Park, and Sue Moon. Finding inﬂuentials based on
the temporal order of information adoption in twitter. In Proceedings of the 19th International
Conference on World Wide Web. ACM, 2010.
[12] Jure Leskovec, Andreas Krause, Carlos Guestrin, Christos Faloutsos, Jeanne VanBriesen, and
Natalie Glance. Cost-eﬀective outbreak detection in networks. In Proc. of the 13th ACM SIGKDD,
2007.
[13] Yung-Ming Li, Chia-Hao Lin, and Cheng-Yang Lai. Identifying inﬂuential reviewers for word-ofmouth marketing. Electron. Commer. Rec. Appl., 9(4):294–304, jul 2010.
[14] Frank McCown and Michael L. Nelson. Agreeing to disagree: Search engines and their public
interfaces. In Proc. 7th ACM/IEEE-CS JCDL. ACM, 2007.
[15] Lawrence Page, Sergey Brin, Rajeev Motwani, and Terry Winograd. The pagerank citation ranking: Bringing order to the web. Technical report, Stanford InfoLab, 1999.
[16] K. Pearson. On lines and planes of closest ﬁt to systems of points in space. Philosophical Magazine,
1901.
[17] Everett M Rogers. Diﬀusion of innovations. Simon and Schuster, 2010.
[18] Arlei Silva, Sara Guimar˜
aes, Wagner Meira, Jr., and Mohammed Zaki. Proﬁlerank: Finding
relevant content and inﬂuential users based on information diﬀusion. In Proc. of the 7th SNAKDD. ACM, 2013.
[19] Karthik Subbian, Dhruv Sharma, Zhen Wen, and Jaideep Srivastava. Finding inﬂuencers in
networks using social capital. In Proc. of IEEE/ACM ASONAM, 2013.
[20] Thomas W. Valente. Social network thresholds in the diﬀusion of innovations. Social Networks,
1996.
[21] Thomas W. Valente and Patchareeya Pumpuang. Identifying Opinion Leaders to Promote Behavior Change. Health Education & Behavior, 2007.
[22] Christophe Van den Bulte and Yogesh V. Joshi. New product diﬀusion with inﬂuentials and
imitators. Marketing Science, 2007.
[23] Shaomei Wu, Jake M Hofman, Winter A Mason, and Duncan J Watts. Who says what to whom
on twitter. In Proc. the 20th WWW, 2011.

2444

