Available online at www.sciencedirect.com

Procedia Computer Science 4 (2011) 967–973

International Conference on Computational Science, ICCS 2011

A discrete fracture model for two-phase ﬂow
with matrix-fracture interaction
J. Jaﬀr´ea,∗, M. Mnejjab , J. E. Robertsa,∗∗
a INRIA
b Ecole

Paris-Rocquencourt, B. P. 153, 78153 Le Chesnay, France
Polytechnique de Tunisie, B. P. 743, 2078 La Marsa, Tunisia

Abstract
This article introduces a model for incompressible, two-phase ﬂow in a porous medium with a fracture. The
model is an extension to the case of two-phase ﬂow of the model for single phase ﬂow described in [1]. The model
is a discrete fracture model in which the fractures are treated as interfaces of dimension n − 1 but in which there is
ﬂuid exchange between the fracture and the surrounding rock matrix. The matrix domain is eﬀected by the fracture
ﬂow through a Robin type boundary condition along both sides of the fracture, while the fracture takes into account
the ﬂow in the matrix by means of a source term representing the discontinuity across the fracture of the ﬂux. Twophase ﬂow is modeled using the global pressure formulation in which the unknowns are the global pressure and the
wetting phase saturation; see [2]. The case of diﬀerent rock types in the (n − 1)-dimensional fracture domain and in
the n-dimensional matrix rock domain is considered.
Keywords: discrete fracture model, two-phase ﬂow, two rock types, mixed ﬁnite elements

1. Introduction
The presence of fractures in a porous medium greatly complicates the modeling of ﬂow and transport in such a
domain. The fractures represent heterogeneities of several orders of magnitude in the coeﬃcients characterizing the
medium. Thus the fractures have a very strong inﬂuence on ﬂow and transport, either making ﬂow in certain directions
several orders of magnitude more rapid than in others or possibly blocking ﬂow in certain directions. However the
discrepancy between the scale of the width of the fractures and that of the other physical dimensions involved is again
of several orders of magnitude, and the inclusion of fractures in a model using a simple numerical method is diﬃcult
and costly. Thus some special method of dealing with this diﬃculty is required. The so called continuum models take
fractures into account through some sort of averaging or homogenizing process. Discrete fracture models include the
fractures individually in the model. Often in these models it is considered that the amount of ﬂow outside the fractures
is negligible and ﬂow in the domain is modeled as ﬂow in a network of fractures which don’t communicate with the
surrounding medium. More complex discrete fracture models take into account exchange between fractures and the
∗ Corresponding

author
corresponding author
Email addresses: jerome.jaffre@inria.fr (J. Jaﬀr´e), mnejja.mokhles@yahoo.fr (M. Mnejja), jean.roberts@inria.fr
(J. E. Roberts)
∗∗ Principal

1877–0509 © 2011 Published by Elsevier Ltd. Open access under CC BY-NC-ND license.
Selection and/or peer-review under responsibility of Prof. Mitsuhisa Sato and Prof. Satoshi Matsuoka
doi:10.1016/j.procs.2011.04.102

968

J. Jaffr´e et al. / Procedia Computer Science 4 (2011) 967–973

surrounding medium. This last type of model is the one that interests us here, and more precisely we are concerned
with models that treat fractures as (n − 1)−dimensional objects imbedded in an n−dimensional medium, n being either
2 or 3, and in which there is communication between the n−dimensional and (n−1)−dimensional mediums. A number
of articles have been written on numerical models of this type; see [3, 4, 5, 6, 7] and references therein. However,
we are interested in locally mass conserving methods and in particular mixed ﬁnite element methods or cell centered
ﬁnite volume methods. The object of this work is to extend to the case of two-phase ﬂow the model presented in [1].
After this introduction we present in Section 2 the formulation of incompressible two-phase ﬂow using the global
pressure. In Section 3 we introduce interface conditions between subdomains with diﬀerent rock types. This is applied
in Section 4 to the model of incompressible two-phase ﬂow in a domain divided by a fracture into two subdomains
for which the fracture is modeled as an interface between the two subdomains along the line of what was done for
one-phase ﬂow in [1]. Numerical methods are discussed in Section 5.
2. Global pressure formulation of incompressible two-phase ﬂow
We consider the model for incompressible two-phase ﬂow in a porous medium which uses the global pressure
formulation [8, 9, 2]. The index = w, nw is the index for the wetting phase and the nonwetting phase.
The saturation equation expresses volume conservation for the wetting phase ﬂuid (which is equivalent to mass
conservation since the ﬂow is assumed to be incompressible):
Φ

∂s
+ div uw = 0
∂t

(1)

where s = sw is the saturation of the wetting phase (0 ≤ s ≤ 1 ) and Φ is the porosity. The Darcy velocity of the
wetting phase uw is given by
(2)
uw = −K kw (s)(gradpw − ρw uG )
where K denotes the tensor of absolute permeabilities and pw , ρw and kw are the pressure, the density and the mobility,
respectively of the wetting phase ﬂuid. After some algebraic manipulation [2] this expression for uw can be rewritten
as
uw = r + f,
(3)
r = −K grad α(s), f = bT (s) uT + K bG (s) uG .
Here uT is the total Darcy velocity which is the sum of the Darcy velocities of the wetting and the nonwetting phase
and uG denotes the gravity ﬁeld:
uT = uw + unw , uG = g grad z.
with g the gravitational constant and z the depth.
The coeﬃcients a, bT and bG depend on the mobilities kw and knw and the capillary pressure pc which are all
functions of the saturation:
s

α(s) =

a(σ)dσ,
0

a(s) =

kw knw
d pc
),
(−
kw + knw
ds

bT =

kw
,
kw + knw

bG =

kw knw
(ρw − ρnw ).
kw + knw

The mobilities are positive monotone functions of the saturation s; kw is increasing and kw (0) = 0, while knw is
decreasing and knw (1) = 0. The capillary pressure pc = pnw − pw , where pnw and pw denote the pressures in the
nonwetting and wetting phase ﬂuids, is a positive decreasing function of s.
Plugging equation (3) into (1) the saturation equations become a nonlinear parabolic equation of diﬀusionadvection type. The vector r is the diﬀusion contribution to uw due to capillary eﬀects and f is the advection contribution to uw . The latter is itself the sum of gravity eﬀects and of the contribution of the total ﬂow rate uT which is given
by the pressure equation that we now describe.
The pressure equation expresses the conservation of the total volume of the two phases. As the ﬂow is assumed to
be incompressible this takes the form
div uT = 0.
(4)

969

J. Jaffr´e et al. / Procedia Computer Science 4 (2011) 967–973

Using the global pressure formulation [2] the total ﬂow rate is given by a Darcy type equation
uT = −K kT (s) (grad p − ρ(s) uG )

(5)

where the global pressure p is given by
1
(pw + pnw ) + β(s).
(6)
2
The global pressure is not a physical pressure and is only a mathematical tool. It is a smooth function deﬁned in the
whole domain, whether a phase vanishes or not, while this is not the case for the phase pressures. The global pressure
satisﬁes pw ≤ p ≤ pnw . The coeﬃcients β, kT and ρ are functions of the saturation s:
p=

s

β(s) =
1

d pc
1
),
(bT − )(−
2
ds

kT = kw + knw ,

ρ=

kw ρw + knw ρnw
.
kw + knw

Shapes of functions a, α, bT , bG , d, β, ρ are shown in Figs. 1 and 2.
α

a

s

bg

b

s

s

s

Figure 1: Shapes of functions a, α, bT , bG .

β

d

s

s

(case β(0) > 0)

ρ

s

Figure 2: Shapes of functions d, β, ρ.

The system (1), (3) is refered to as the saturation equation and the system (4), (5) as the pressure equation.
3. Two-phase ﬂow with two rock types
In some parts of the domain under consideration the relative permeability functions and the capillary pressure
function may diﬀer from those in another part of the domain; i. e. the domain may consist of more than one rock
type. We denote by σ the interface between two subdomains with diﬀerent rock types and we index the subdomains
by l (for left) and r (for right).
In order to ensure conservation of each of the ﬂuid phases across the interface σ between the two rock types, the
normal components of the Darcy phase velocities, and consequently of the total Darcy velocity, must be continuous
across σ:
uwl · n l + uwr · n r = 0, and uTl · n l + uTr · n r = 0 on σ,
(7)
where n l and n r denote respectively the normal to the interface σ exterior to the subdomain on the left and the normal
to the interface σ exterior to the subdomain on the right.
Concerning the pressure interface conditions we assume in this presentation that the two capillary pressure curves
have the same endpoint at s = 1; i.e. plc (1) = prc (1) = 0 as in Fig. 3. The case of Brooks-Corey capillary pressure
curves can also be handled as in [10]. In this case continuity across the interface σ of each of the phase pressures
implies the continuity of their diﬀerence or in other words continuity of the capillary pressure while the saturation

970

J. Jaffr´e et al. / Procedia Computer Science 4 (2011) 967–973

 

prc

 
✠
 

pcl
✂

✂

✂
✌✂
0

s

Figure 3: Capillary pressure curves with the same right endpoint.

is not in general continuous across the interface. Thus the phase pressure interface conditions yield the saturation
interface condition
(8)
plc (sl ) = prc (sr ), on σ
which implies that the saturation is usually discontinuous across σ. Also, together with equation (6), the continuity of
the phase pressures implies the continuity of their sum, so that
pl − β l (sl ) = pr − β r (sr )

on σ.

(9)

This implies that the global pressure is also in general discontinuous across the interface between two rock types.
The ﬁrst equation (7) and equation (8) are interface conditions for the saturation equation while the second equation (7) and equation (9) are interface conditions for the pressure equation.
4. Two-phase ﬂow in a domain with a fracture
Let Ω be a domain in Rn , n = 2 or 3 and suppose that the domain Ω is split into two disjoint subdomains Ω1
and Ω2 by a fracture Ω f . The fracture is supposed to be a porous medium itself and its thickness d is supposed to be
quite small with respect to the size of the domain Ω. The fracture is represented in the model by a surface γ ⊂ Ω of
dimension (n − 1); see Figure 4. Let Γ = ∂Ω denote the boundary of Ω and Γi = ∂Ωi ∩ Γ, i = 1, 2, the part of the
boundary of Ωi lying on Γ, and divide Γi into a Dirichlet part ΓisD and a Neumann part ΓisN for the saturation equation,
and similarly into a Dirichlet part ΓipD and a Neumann part ΓipN for the pressure equation. Let n1 respectively n2
denote the outward-pointing unit normal vector ﬁeld on ∂Ω1 respectively ∂Ω2 .

Ωf

γ

Figure 4: The domain Ω with the physical fracture Ω f (left) and with the fracture interface γ (right).

In the matrix domains Ωi , i = 1, 2, as well as in the fracture γ the ﬂow is assumed to be incompressible and to be
diphasic. Further the absolute permeability tensor in the fracture is assumed to be made up of a tangential part K f,τ
and a normal part K f,ν .
All physical constants and functions as well as unknown functions associated with one of the subdomains Ωi will
be indexed by i; i = 1, 2. Thus in the matrix domain Ωi the unknown functions, the wetting phase saturation, the Darcy
velocity of the wetting phase, the global pressure and the total Darcy velocity, will be denoted by si , uwi , pi and uT i
respectively. Then for i = 1, 2, the two-phase ﬂow equations for the matrix domain Ωi are

J. Jaffr´e et al. / Procedia Computer Science 4 (2011) 967–973

saturation equation in Ωi
∂si
+ div uwi = 0 in Ωi
Φ
∂t
uwi = ri + fi ,
ri = −Ki grad αi (si ),
si = s¯ on ΓisD ,
uwi · ni = uwd on ΓisN ,

971

(10)
fi = bT i (si ) uT i + Ki bGi (si ) uG ,

pressure equation in Ωi
div uT i = 0, in Ωi
uT i = −Ki kT i (si )(grad pi − ρi (si ) uG )
p = p¯ on ΓipD ,
uT · ni = uT d on ΓipN .

(11)

(12)
(13)

Transmission conditions on γ need to be given for both the saturation equation (11) and the pressure equation (13).
We will return to these after giving the equations for ﬂow along γ.
To obtain functions on γ the functions characterizing the fracture medium Ω f , i.e. the porosity, the absolute
permeability and the depth, are averaged over cross sections of Ω f normal to the direction of the fracture (or simply
assumed to be invariant in the normal direction) so the functions Φ f , K f τ , K f ν and zγ will be considered to be functions
on γ. Similarly the unknown functions sγ and pγ are considered to represent average values of the wetting phase
saturation and the global pressure across normal sections of Ω f . However the the two vector unknown functions, uT γ
and uwγ are respectively the width d times the average of the tangential component of the total Darcy velocity and of
the wetting phase Darcy velocity across normal cross sections of Ω f . For simplicity of presentation we also use the
following notation:
Φγ = dΦ f ,
Kγ = dK f τ .
Now integrating the two-phase ﬂow equations over normal cross section of Ω f , or more precisely integrating the
scalar equations (1) and (4) and the tangential components of the vector equations (3) and (5), we obtain the following
equations on the fracture interface γ:
saturation equation in γ
∂sγ
Φγ
+ divτ uwγ = uw1 · n1 + uw2 · n2 in γ,
∂t
uwγ = rγ + fγ , rγ = −Kγ gradτ α f (sγ ), fγ = bT f (sγ ) uT γ + Kγ bG f (sγ ) uGγ ,

(14)

pressure equation in γ
divτ uT γ = uT 1 · n1 + uT 2 · n2 in γ,
uT γ = −Kγ kT f (sγ ) (gradτ pγ − ρ f (sγ ) uGγ ),

(16)

(15)

(17)

where divτ denotes the tangential divergence along γ, gradτ denotes the tangential gradient and uGγ = g gradτ z. Note
that the source terms in the conservation equations (14) and (16) come from the lack of continuity in the ﬂow across
the interface fracture γ for the wetting phase and total Darcy velocities. These terms come from the integration across
the physical fracture Ω f of the the normal divergence and the use of the continuity of the normal component of the
ﬂux (both wetting phase and total) across the interface between the physical subdomains Ωi and Ω f .
To complete the model we return now to the transmission conditions along γ for (11) and (13). These should
be seen as transmission conditions between the subdomains Ωi , i = 1, 2 and the fracture γ. They are obtained for
the subdomain Ωi and γ by averaging across half of each normal section of Ω f the normal components of the vector
equations (2) and (5), i. e. the normal component of Darcy’s law for the wetting phase ﬂuid and then for the total

972

J. Jaffr´e et al. / Procedia Computer Science 4 (2011) 967–973

ﬂuid:
transmission condition for the saturation equation
pwi − pwγ
= 0 on γ, i = 1, 2,
− uwi · ni + K f ν kw f (sγ )
d/2

(18)

transmission condition for the pressure equation
pi − βi (si ) + β f (sγ ) − pγ
= 0 on γ, i = 1, 2,
− uT i · ni + K f ν kT f (sγ )
d/2

(19)

where we have neglected inside the fracture the component of the gravitational term in the direction normal to the
fracture. The integral of the normal component of the wetting phase Darcy velocity, respectively total Darcy velocity,
across half of the normal section of the fracture has been approximated by (uwi · ni )d/2, respectively by (uT i · ni )d/2.
The integral of the normal derivative of the wetting phase pressure, respectively of the sum of the two phase pressures,
is given by the diﬀerence of its value at the center of the physical fracture which is supposed equal to pwγ , respectively
pγ − β f (sγ ), and its value at the interface between the physical domains Ωi and Ω f equal to pwi , respectively pi − βi (si ).
Using the global pressure deﬁnition (6) and that of capillary pressure we can write pw and pnw in terms of the main
unknowns s and p as
1
1
pw = p − β(s) − pc , pnw = p − β(s) + pc .
(20)
2
2
Then the transmission condition (18) may be rewritten in terms of the main unknowns as follows:
−uwi · ni + K f ν kw f (sγ )

pi − β(si ) − 1/2pc (si ) − pγ − β f (sγ ) − 1/2pc f (sγ )
d/2

= 0 on γ, i = 1, 2.

Concerning the transmission condition (19) on γ for the pressure equation in the matrix domain Ωi , it is the Darcy
law for both phases in the direction normal to the fracture. It is also obtained by averaging across half the fracture as
in [1]. To understand equation (19) we can introduce pγi the global pressure on the interface γi between Ωi and the
physical fracture Ω f . Due to the change of rock type between the domain and the fracture the global pressure is not
continuous and only p − β is continuous (see equation (9)). Therefore on γi we have pγi − β f (sγ ) = pi − βi (si ) which
gives
pγi = pi − βi (si ) + β f (sγ ).
This expression of pγi is what appears in the ﬁnite diﬀerence expression for the global pressure in Darcy’s law (19).
5. Numerical methods
For time discretization we use an Euler ﬁrst order discretization in time of the IMPES type (IMplicit Pressure
Explicit Saturation). That is in the pressure equation saturation are left at the previous time level. Therefore the
pressure equation and the saturation equation are decoupled and solved one after the other. For the saturation equation
we split capillary diﬀusion and advection, so diﬀusion can be treated implicitly while advection is treated explicitly
and we use diﬀerent time steps for diﬀusion and advection. Since advection is calculated with an Euler explicit
method, the advection time step must be bounded by a CFL condition to preserve the stability of the scheme. On the
contrary the diﬀusion time step is not bounded by stability considerations but only by accuracy considerations. Since
very often advection is dominant the diﬀusion time step is usually larger than the advection time step.
Furthermore since the matrix domain and the fracture may have very diﬀerent physical properties one would like
to use diﬀerent time steps in the matrix domain and in the fracture, smaller time steps in the matrix domain when the
fracture is a barrier (it has smaller permeability) or the opposite if it is the matrix permeability which is smaller.
Concerning space discretization we use a locally conservative ﬁnite volume method for the conservation equations
(10), (12), (14), (16). The advective terms are approximated using a Godunov type method in order to calculate fi
in equation (11) and fγ in equation (15). For diﬀusion terms we use the mixed ﬁnite element method [11, 12] for
approximating ri in equation (11), uT in equation (13), rγ in equation (11) and uT γ in equation (17). The mixed
method can also be implemented through the mixed-hybrid ﬁnite element method [13, 2, 14] or through the CrouzeixRaviart nonconforming ﬁnite element method [15, 16].

J. Jaffr´e et al. / Procedia Computer Science 4 (2011) 967–973

973

6. Conclusion
In this presentation we have extended to the case of incompressible, two-phase ﬂow a discrete fracture model
for single phase ﬂow in a fractured porous medium. The model permits interaction between the fracture and the
surrounding matrix. It uses nonlocal interface conditions on the fracture modeled as an (n − 1)-dimensional domain.
The new model allows for the possibility of diﬀerent rock types in the fracture and the matrix. Numerical results are
forthcoming.
References
[1] V. Martin, J. Jaﬀr´e, J. E. Roberts, Modeling fractures and barriers as interfaces for ﬂow in porous media, SIAM J. Sci. Comput. 26 (5) (2005)
1667–1691.
[2] G. Chavent, J. Jaﬀr´e, Mathematical Models and Finite Elements for Reservoir Simulation, North Holland, 1986.
[3] M. Karimi-Fard, A. Firoozabadi, Numerical simulation of water injection in fractured media using the discrete fracture model and the galerkin
method, SPERE 6 (2003) 117–126.
[4] J. Kim, M. Deo, Finite element, discrete-fracture model for multiphase ﬂow in porous media, AlChE J.
[5] J. Mondteagudu, A. Firoozabadi, Control-volume method for numerical simulation of two-phase immiscible ﬂow in 2-d and 3-d discretefracture media, Water Resources Research 40.
[6] J. Mondteagudu, A. Firoozabadi, Control-volume model for simulation of water injection in fractured media: incorporating matrix heterogeneity and reservoir wettability eﬀects, SPE J. 12 (2007) 355–366.
[7] V. Reichenberger, H. Jakobs, P. Bastien, R. Helmig, A mixed-dimensional ﬁnite volume method for multiphase ﬂow in fractured porous
media, Adv. Water Resources 29 (7) (2006) 1020–1036.
[8] S. Antoncev, V. Monahov, Three-dimensional problems of time-dependent two-phase ﬁltration in nonhomogeneous anisotropic porous media,
Soviet Math. Dokl. 19 (1978) 1354–1358.
[9] G. Chavent, A new formulation of diphasic incompressible ﬂows in porous media, in: P. Germain, B. Nayroles (Eds.), Applications of
methods of functional analysis to problems in mechanics, Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1976, pp. 258–270.
[10] C. J. van Duijn, J. Molenaar, M. de Neef, The eﬀect of capillary forces on immiscible two-phase ﬂow in heteregeneous porous media,
Transport in Porous Media 21 (1995) 71–93.
[11] J. Roberts, J.-M. Thomas, Mixed and hybrid methods, in: P. Ciarlet, J. Lions (Eds.), Handbook of Numerical Analysis Vol.II, North Holland,
Amsterdam, 1991, pp. 523–639.
[12] F. Brezzi, M. Fortin, Mixed and Hybrid Finite Element Methods, Springer Verlag, Berlin, 1991.
[13] D. Arnold, F. Brezzi, Mixed and nonconforming ﬁnite element methods : implementation, postprocessing and error estimates, M2AN 19
(1985) 7–32.
[14] G. Chavent, J. E. Roberts, A uniﬁed physical presentation of mixed, mixed-hybrid ﬁnite element method and standard ﬁnite diﬀerence
approximations for the determination of velocities in waterﬂow problems, Advances in Water Resources 14 (1991) 329–348.
[15] D. Marini, An inexpensive method for the evaluation of the solution of the lowest order raviart-thomas mixed method, SIAM J. Numer. Anal.
22 (3) (1985) 493–496.
[16] C. Bahriawati, C. Carstensen, Three matlab implementations of the lowest-order raviart-thomas mfem with a posteriori error control, Computational Methods in Applied Mathematics 5 (4) (2005) 333–361.

