Procedia Computer Science
Volume 29, 2014, Pages 1959–1969
ICCS 2014. 14th International Conference on Computational Science

An Architecture for Integrating Genetic and Clinical Data
Giuseppe Tradigo1 , Claudia Veneziano2 , Sergio Greco1 , and Pierangelo Veltri3
1

Dept. of Computer Science, Models,
Electronics and Systems Engineering
University of Calabria
giuseppe.tradigo@dimes.unical.it;greco@dimes.unical.it
2
Tebaid Consortium for
Advanced Biomedical Technologies
University of Calabria
veneziano.claudia@gmail.com
3
Dept of Experimental and Clincal Science
University of Catanzaro
veltri@unicz.it

Abstract
Personalized medicine is the new horizon of the medical science. Its main goal is to improve
the quality of patient care, both in prevention and in therapeutic stage, and to improve the
precision of therapy through the integrated analysis of clinical, biological and molecular data.
Data integration represents a powerful instrument for clinicians to have an overall vision of
diseases. Even if clinical data integration has been treated in many recent papers, few results
have been presented with respect to integrating proteomics and genomics data.
We present the architecture for the integration of genetic and phenotype data extracted
from medical records. The focus is information extraction and data preﬁling for early detection
of chronic diseases. Focus is about cancer diseases where omics data, environmental, ontologies
and clinical data can be integrated to improve knowledge about the risk assessment and genetic
susceptibility.
Keywords:

1

Introduction

Patient records contain personal, hospitalization, diagnosis and therapy data, but do not contain genetic or genomic data. However, it is possible, after the extraction of raw data, to
obtain information, such as inference, about e.g. familial risk of recurrence, histopathological
or molecular classiﬁcation of tumors, mutations associated with cancer, phenotype molecular,
association between families and drug response (pharmacogenomics), identiﬁcation of biomarkers. Medical records contain unstructured, alphanumeric, diagnostic tests data and textual
Selection and peer-review under responsibility of the Scientiﬁc Programme Committee of ICCS 2014
c The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V.

doi:10.1016/j.procs.2014.05.180

1959

An Architecture for Integrating Genetic and Clinical Data

Tradigo et al.

information from annotations. Furthermore, the majority of clinical data sources are hosted
by proprietary commercial software. Data obtained from biological analysis and genomic or
genetic studies often present a well-structured formalism, even if often related to a particular
software platform. In addition, while basic biological research data sources are open, clinical
data sources are kept private with rigorous data access controls, due to the privacy health data
regulations. In this scenario data cannot be used for automatic information extraction from
the speciﬁc software.
We focus on integration between data contained in medical records related to patients with
cancer disease, patient’s family history and genetic data. Medical records sources may be found
in structured or semi-unstructured format, as well as text or PDF ﬁles or paper forms. Similarly,
genetic information may be found in structured as well as non structured format.
The target of the presented paper is to propose an architecture for data integration for
clinical and genetic data. The examples reported are related to genetic information obtained
from family tree analysis. Clinical data have to be extracted from heterogeneous sources, ﬁnalized to the creation of a local DB repository (semi) structured and displaying data of interest.
Data must be stored in a way that can be trusted and preserved, tracking its provenance, and
protecting the individual privacy and security. To complete the vision, the data model must
be supported by methods for querying, searching, and analyzing data. They must be related
to ontological knowledge capable of explaining both genetic and clinical phenomena. After the
elaboration of the pedigree containing familial genetic information, thanks to the use of prediction models for computation the genetic risk of carrier mutation, it is possible achieve the
knowledge about future cancer risk to improve care process.

2

Related Works

The importance of integration clinical and genetic/genomic data is documented in [1] where
various aspects are highlighted about the clinical-genomic studies and the advantages and disadvantages about application of three diﬀerent integration methods: early, intermediate and late.
Combination between these three methods and several classiﬁers, to analyse a set of 295 breast
cancer samples, for which gene expression data and an extensive set of clinical parameters are
available, is carried out in [2]. A scalable informatics framework to combine the use of existing
clinical and genomic data for individual patients with diseases having genetic origins is i2b2
(Informatics for Integrating Biology and the Bedside)[31]. i2b2 software shows a hive structure
based on a collection of interoperable cells that encapsulates business logic as well as access
to data objects behind standard Web interfaces. Analogous to i2b2, the BTRIS (Biomedical
Translational Research Information System) system, developed by the US National Institute of
Health, combines data from clinical care and clinical research to support several perspectives,
including speciﬁc, prospective research as well as retrospective re-use of data [42]. In [3] a system that reads, stores, analyses and consolidates sequencing results from multiple technologies,
and provides a knowledge base of tumor mutation frequency annotated with clinical signiﬁcance
and drug sensitivity to generate reports for clinicians. Several projects are also documented
such as IGV (Integrative Genomics Viewer) and KEGG [4, 5]. The former allows the visualization of heterogeneous data from array-based and next-generation sequencing data sources and
phenotypic and clinical context; the [5] is a database that integrates genomic, chemical and systemic functional information, in particular gene catalogs, from completely sequenced genomes,
are linked to higher-level systemic functions of the cell, the organism and the ecosystem.
Techniques for information extraction and data analysis has been developed in many applications in the form of unstructured and ﬂat text documents, documents and PDF ﬁles and
1960

An Architecture for Integrating Genetic and Clinical Data

Tradigo et al.

their transformation in a structured form. For instance, in [6], images obtained from medical
documents has been manipulated to extract character strings, converted into text data with an
OCR (Optical Character Recognition) engine, then stored into a database. Another approach
is represented by the use of NLP (Natural Language Processing) tools and ontologies to extract structured information from clinical text. In [7] the steps of a typical natural language
processing to analyse and extract knowledge from clinical text are shown. Ontologies deﬁne
fundamental concepts, their properties and relations among them within a particular domain.
In the medical domain they are the basic infrastructure to ensure semantic interoperability,
where information are integrated and mapped to a common medical vocabulary. An attempt
to develop a framework supporting translational research by integrating biomolecular information with patient’s clinical data is described in [8]. The framework consists of four levels: (i) a
data level, to store the data, (ii) a semantic level, to integrate and standardize the data by the
use of ontologies, (iii) an application level, to manage clinical databases, ontologies and data
integration process, (iv) a web interface level, to interaction with users.
Ontologies may be identiﬁed as supports in information integration. Many ontologies have
been developed, each relating to speciﬁc biomedical domains. On the NCBO BioPortal [9] there
are a number of searchable ontologies, each containing concepts and terms related to resources
available for the user to browse. The most mentioned medical ontologies are: UMLS (Uniﬁed
Medical Language System) [10], NCI Thesaurus [11], GALEN (Generalised Architecture for
Languages, Encyclopedia and Nomenclature in Medicine) [12], FMA (Foundational Model of
Anatomy) [13], SNOMED (Systematized Nomenclature of Medicine) [14], GO (Gene Ontology)
[15], OBO (Open Biomedical Ontology) [16] and Disease Ontology [17]. UMLS integrates key
terminology, classiﬁcation, coding standards and associated resources to promote the creation
of more eﬀective and interoperable biomedical information systems, including electronic health
records. UMLS Knowledge Sources are represented by: Meta-thesaurus, Semantic Network and
the Specialist Lexicon. The Meta-thesaurus is organized by concept, each having a unique and
permanent concept identiﬁer. The NCI provides deﬁnitions, synonyms, and other information
on nearly 10, 000 cancers and related diseases, 8, 000 single agents and combination therapies,
and a wide range of other topics related to cancer and biomedical research. GALEN is designed to be a re-usable application-independent and language-independent model of medical
concepts. FMA is a domain ontology concerning with the representation of classes or types and
relationships necessary for the symbolic representation of the phenotypic structure of the human
body in a form which is understandable to humans and also interpretable by machine-based
systems. SNOMED CT is a clinical healthcare terminology able to cross-map to other international standard, hence very important for the implementation of electronic health records,
containing more than 311, 000 concepts with unique meanings and formal hierarchical logicbased deﬁnitions. The Gene Ontology project provides a controlled vocabulary of terms for
the description of gene products’ characteristics and annotations. The ontology covers three
domains: (i) cellular components, (i) molecular functions, and (iii) biological processes. The
OBO Foundry is a collaborative experiment involving developers of science-based ontologies
working on a set of principles for ontology development with the goal of creating a suite of
orthogonal interoperable reference ontologies in the biomedical domain. The Disease Ontology
semantically integrates disease and medical vocabularies through extensive cross mapping of
DO terms to MeSH, ICD, NCI’s thesaurus, SNOMED and OMIM. Another diﬀusely adopted
medical vocabulary is MeSH (Medical Subject Headings) [21]. MeSH is the controlled vocabulary thesaurus used for articles indexing on PubMed. It is available online and it is used to
quickly locate descriptors of possible interest and to show the hierarchy in which descriptors
of interest appear. Therefore the identiﬁcation of a correspondence between domain concepts
1961

An Architecture for Integrating Genetic and Clinical Data

Tradigo et al.

from diﬀerent ontologies and relative concept codes from a system vocabulary appears a key
feature, as highlighted in [18]. The importance of medical vocabulary systems to obtain genomic knowledge comes from clinical data has also been described in [19]. A clinical-genomic
model in silico is proposed to cluster 635 distinct clinical traits against 12 gene-disease sets
obtained by OMIM. Recently, a tool called EMU, able to extract genetic information (e.g. the
identiﬁcation of mutations and associated genes) from biomedical literature has been developed
[20]. EMU is used to identify and retrieve mutations from the mutation disease-related corpus
with relationship to genes and disease phenotype. An attempt to combine PubMed knowledge
and EHR data, in order to develop a cancer risk calculator, is described in [22].
Integrating EHR with genetic data can give an idea of genotype-phenotype relationships.
Examples of integration frameworks between gene expression information and clinical data
are give in [23, 24], in which a statistical prediction tree model combining “metagenes” and
clinical risk factors, predicts individual breast recurrence. An approach identifying cancer risk
through genetic data is reported in [25], where by applying machine learning techniques on
SNPs data, authors were able to detect the best SNPs predictor. Machine learning techniques
allow diagnosis and prognosis improvement of cancer diseases, as reported in [26, 27, 28, 29].

3

Genomic-clinical system and databases

The idea underlying this paper is the necessity of integrating genomics information with familiar
and clinical information to allow targeted public programs of prevention and early disease
detection. This paper indeed is part of the results of a project [43] aiming to model and
create a unique platform for clinical and genomic data. The genomic approach involves the
identiﬁcation of all the variants associated to a certain phenotypic trait. This would help to
improve the clinical management of patients and counselling for family members. A complete
catalogue of genetic variants identiﬁed may lead to identify some involved with prognostic
aspects of the disease. In order to obtain this correlation, it is necessary to create comprehensive
data collections through the creation of a database. The aim is to catalog in one collection all
available information: a local DB Repository, based on the use of biomedical ontologies currently
available, organizes, optimizes and transforms clinical data to integrate those genomics. The
increase in information degree contained in clinical data requires an interaction with information
available in literature as well as those available in the local database. Interaction, mediated by
Gene Ontology, which can lead to the deﬁnition of an “automatic method of extracting” data
from the literature to trace the pathology associated with them. Among the major databases
containing the association genotype/phenotype we report:
• OMIM, the online mendelian inheritance in human database [34];
• Entrez Gene sequences and descriptive information about genetic loci [35];
• Gene Cards, a database of genes and their involvement in diseases [36];
• HGMD Human Gene Mutation Database, containing information about the disease
causative mutations in known genes [37];
• dbSNP, the NCBI database on gene variations (Single Nucleotide Polymorphism) [38].
Disease-speciﬁc databases in which molecular changes and associated clinical features are
catalogued, are particularly relevant for the correlation of molecular and clinical data. These
databases, which already exist for many diseases, are coordinated by Medical Societies and
1962

An Architecture for Integrating Genetic and Clinical Data

Tradigo et al.

International Scientiﬁc Projects and are usually integrated with the main genome browsers (i.e.
NCBI, Ensembl, UCSC). They have been built following recommendations and guidelines from
specialists in the ﬁeld.
One of the most relevant interest of associating genomic databases with diseases is the one
relating cancer and genomics. An example of cancer clinical genomic database, developed on the
case-study of brain tumours, is the Repository of Molecular Brain Neoplasia Data (Rembrandt)
[33]. It features a web-based data mining and analysis platform through which data can be
queried and displayed for both a selected gene and multiple genes. Similarly, the DAVID [39]
database allows the analysis of lists of genes, gene annotation and functional classiﬁcation, as
well as the association between diseases and genes. The GALAXY [40] tool allows the creation
of workﬂows through which the user can specify the path followed by raw input data to obtain
the desired output, going through intermediate data processing and cleaning tools.
Following the above reported available examples, the idea here is to develop an architecture for information integration regarding clinical and genomic data that uses also web based
information.

4

System Architecture

From the analysis of the state of the art and the problems connected with data extraction
from patient records and genomics, we propose an architecture for clinical and genomic data
integration and querying. The architecture is reported in Figure 1. We consider patient EPRs
with clinical and genomic data; also, an improvement of cancer risk assessment models is
also integrated based on genetic tree predictive algorithms. Knowledge about patient data is
organized in an ontology, which is the basis of information extraction, to deﬁne cancer risk
related to gene mutation. Such an information can be used for clinical strategies (such as
monitoring and check frequencies) and it is usually written in the patient record 2.
Data sources extended to the data collected during the annual screening program, to health
social network and forum.The development of techniques for the integration of multiple data
sources can lead to the interchange between the medical record and genetic/genomic sources
and also to include an integration with the Electronic Health Record. In addition, it is possible
to develop more accurate predictors based on machine learning techniques, such as artiﬁcial
neural network or Bayesian network.
The proposed architecture (see Figure 3) is characterized by three diﬀerent data sources:
clinical, laboratory, and those related to genomic databases and medical literature. The ﬁrst
aim is the creation of Meta Health Records (MHR) database (called MetaInfo), where, for a
macroscopic research, a few aggregate useful information will be gathered. Useful information
are: (i ) Personal (Surname, Name, BirthDate, Sex ) and (ii ) Clinical (Diagnosis, DiagnosisDate,
Stage, Therapy, Results, DeathDate).
The MHR will be generated from medical records of each source and share a common
identiﬁcation pattern. Data extraction will be mediated by the biomedical domain ontologies,
in order to overcome the problem of diversity in terminology between the sources and the
presence of negations in the text. It is possible the application of a system for extracting and
querying, where data are enriched with information coming from genetic and familiar oncogenetic counseling process. In addition, data obtained from genetic testing laboratory must be
addressed in the database. A second aim is the deﬁnition of an architectural component that
integrates clinical and genetic clusters, as described above, with a genomic cluster (i.e., genomic
databases fused with literature data), called ClinicalGenomic Database.
Architecture’s purposes are:
1963

An Architecture for Integrating Genetic and Clinical Data

Tradigo et al.

Figure 1: System Architecture for clinical and genomic data integration
• Increase information for “insiders” (e.g. the individual laboratory often works on subsets);
• Allow to be able to enter information in exchange for information;
• Have an information space wider (Open-Data).
In this context, the actors identiﬁed for the system are:
• Clinicians, pharmacologists, biologists, laboratory technicians, who will populate database;
• Patients and technical-administrative users, who can access the ClinicalGenomic Database
with diﬀerent views.
We also identiﬁed possible queries, that could beneﬁt from the use of a ClinicalGenomic
Database, including:
Q1 : For a speciﬁc tumor, which genes pattern shows a better survival rate?
Q2 : Stratiﬁcation of a patients group with the same disease, the same molecular proﬁle (mutations cause of the pathology), on the basis of their response to a certain drug treatment;
Q3 : Does a speciﬁc tumor develop in certain groups (age, ethnicity, geographical area of origin
and belonging)? - Example gastric cancer in the Japanese population.

5

Genetic counseling control in risk estimation: an application

A possible application of the integrated system presented above, based on ClinicalGenomic
Database, is represented by the control of genetic counseling and data collection. The purpose
of oncology genetic counseling is the overall management of suﬀering and at risk individuals,
1964

An Architecture for Integrating Genetic and Clinical Data

Tradigo et al.

Figure 2: Human pedigree analysis supporting the cancer risk assesment decision
from predisposed families to hereditary or family history of cancer. It provides information
about genetic transmission and risk of occurrence of the speciﬁc tumor, its natural history, the
possibility of early diagnosis and treatment of hereditary and family disease in order to accrue
the necessary choices in respect of quality of life. The protocol of genetic counseling consists of
three steps: pre-test, genetic test, post-test.
Pre-test includes:
• Data collection of family and personal history of the subject, ﬁlling of family tree with
age and health status of known relatives;
• Veriﬁcation of clinical data by retrieving medical records about all family cancer cases;
• Computation of risk assessment;
• Delivery of information material to patients and their families and, if indicated, draw a
blood sample for the implementation of genetic testing;
• Assessment of the psychological impact by the psychologist.
The genetic test phase regards molecular analysis of patient DNA, to verify the presence of a
mutation associated with a high risk of developing a malignancy. The molecular study provides
guidance on the possible presence of mutation in the gene of interest, the type of mutation
with reference to its presence in the genomic database (e.g. GeneBank) and its presence in
disease-speciﬁc databases (eg. Breast Cancer Information Core - BIC) [33].
The post-test consists of:
1965

An Architecture for Integrating Genetic and Clinical Data

Tradigo et al.

Figure 3: Architecture of the Integrated System

• Communication of the results by the medical geneticist;
• Discussion of possible treatment options, monitoring and prevention;
• Oﬀer counseling and testing to family members in order to include them in the monitoring
plans for high-risk individuals.
Thanks to genetic counseling it will be possible to enrich the ClinicalGenomic database,
with data from probands and their families. Genealogical data previously acquired and, if
available, genomic data obtained from molecular analysis that have been made, could serve a
more accurate reconstruction of a patient’s family history of cancer addressed to the counseling
process. The risk assessment carried out by using models already available, will beneﬁt from the
greater degree of information obtained by the use of ClinicalGenomic Database. In addition, an
improvement of risk assessment models, today widely used, is conceivable. The main advantage
of the control of counseling resides in the improvement of prevention protocols and screening
and, in an indirect manner, in guided choice of therapy.
1966

An Architecture for Integrating Genetic and Clinical Data

6

Tradigo et al.

Conclusions

This paper presents an architecture for clinical and genetica data integration based on ontology.
he data model is also able to consider epidemiological studies based on residential or familariaty.
We started to recruit data from counseling (anonymized) performed in a south of Italy region
to correlate clinical, genomic data to create an instance of a clinicalgenomic database.

7

Acknowledgments

This work has been partially supported by PRIN2020 grant from the Italian Ministry of University and Research (MIUR) and also by PON StayWell sh2.0. Claudia Veneziano gave hger
contribution during the HealthSOAF PON project at TEBAID and DIMES of Unical (July
2013-October 2013).

References
[1] S. Dey, R. Gupta, M. Steinbach, V. Kumar, Integration of Clinical and Genomic data: a Methodological Survey, Technical Report, Department of Computer Science and Engineering University
of Minnesota, 2013
[2] M. H. van Vliet, H. M. Horlings,M. J. van de Vijver, M. J. Reinders, L. F. Wessels, Integration of
Clinical and Gene Expression Data Has a Synergetic Eﬀect on Predicting Breast Cancer Outcome,
PLoS ONE, 7(7), 2012
[3] S. Watt, W. Jiao, A. M. Brown, T. Petrocelli, B. Tran, T. Zhang, J.D. McPherson, S. KamelReid, P.L. Bedard, N. Onetto, T.J. Hudson, J. Dancey, L.L. Siu, L. Stein, V. Ferretti, Clinical
genomics information management software linking cancer genome sequence and clinical decisions,
Genomics, 102(3), 140-147, 2013
[4] H. Thorvaldsd´
o ttir, J.T. Robinson, J.P. Mesirov, Integrative Genomics Viewer (IGV): highperformance genomics data visualization and exploration, Brieﬁngs in Bioinformatics 14(2), 178192, 2013
[5] M. Kanehisa, S. Goto, Y. Sato, M. Furumichi, M. Tanabe, KEGG for integration and interpretation
of large-scale molecular data sets, Nucleic Acids Research 40(D1), D109-D114, 2012
[6] H.Kawanaka, K.Yamamoto, H.Takase, S.Tsuruoka, Document Image Processing for Hospital Information Systems, Modern Information Systems, ISBN, 978-953, 2012
[7] P.B. Jensen, L.J. Jensen, S. Brunak, Mining electronic health records:towards better research applications and clinical care, Nature Reviews Genetics, 13 (6), 395-405, 2012
[8] N.S. Miyoshi, D.G. Pinheiro, W.A. Silva, J.C. Felipe, Computational framework to support integration of biomolecular and clinical data within a translational approach, BMC Bioinformatics,
14(1), 180, 2013
[9] NCBO BioPortal website, http://bioportal.bioontology.org/, 2014
[10] Uniﬁed Medical Language System website, http://www.nlm.nih.gov/research/umls/, 2014
[11] NCI Thesauruswebsite, http://ncit.nci.nih.gov/, 2014
[12] GALEN website, http://www.opengalen.org/, 2014
[13] FMA website, http://sig.biostr.washington.edu/projects/fm/AboutFM.html, 2014
[14] SNOMED website, http://www.ihtsdo.org/snomed-ct/, 2014
[15] GO website, http://www.geneontology.org/, 2014
[16] OBO website, http://www.obofoundry.org/, 2014
[17] Disease Ontology website, http://disease-ontology.org/, 2014

1967

An Architecture for Integrating Genetic and Clinical Data

Tradigo et al.

[18] P. Mirhaji, M. Zhu, M. Vagnoni, E.V. Bernstam, J. Zhang, J.W. Smith, Ontology driven integration
platform for clinical and translational research, BMC Bioinformatics 10(Suppl 2), S2, 2009
[19] Y.A. Lussier, I.N.Sarkar, M.Cantor, An Integrative Model for In-Silico Clinical-Genomics Discovery Science, AMIA Annual Symposium Proceedings, 2002
[20] E. Doughty, A.Kertesz-Farkas, O. Bodenreider, G.Thompson, A. Adadey, T. Peterson, M.G. Kann,
Toward an automatic method for extracting cancer and other disease-related point mutations from
the biomedical literature, Bioinformatics, 27(3), 408-15, 2011
[21] MeSH website, http://www.nlm.nih.gov/mesh/, 2014
[22] D. Zhao, C. Weng, Combining PubMed knowledge and EHR data to develop a weighted Bayesian
network for pancreatic cancer prediction, Journal of Biomedical Informatics 44, 859-868, 2011
[23] J.R. Nevins, E.S. Huang, H. Dressman, J. Pittman, A.T. Huang, M. West, Towards integrated
clinico-genomic models for personalized medicine: combining gene expression signatures and clinical factors in breast cancer outcomes prediction, Human Molecular Genetics, 12(2), R153-R157,
2003
[24] J. Pittman, E. Huang, H. Dressman, C.F.Horng, S.H. Cheng, M.H. Tsou, C.M.Chen, A. Bild, E.S.
Iversen, A.T. Huang, J. R. Nevins, M. West, Integrated modeling of clinical and gene expression
information for personalized prediction of disease outcomes, Proceedings of the National Academy
of Sciences of the United States of America, 101(22), 8431-8436, 2004
[25] J.Listgarten, S. Damaraju, B. Poulin, L.Cook, J. Dufour, A. Driga, J. Mackey, D. Wishart,
R.Greiner, B. Zanke, Predictive Models for Breast Cancer Susceptibility from Multiple Single Nucleotide Polymorphisms, Clinical Cancer Research, 10(8), 2725-2737, 2004
[26] J.A. Cruz, D.S. Wishart, Applications of Machine Learning in Cancer Prediction and Prognosis,
Cancer Informatics, 2, 59-78, 2006
[27] T. Ayer, O.Alagoz, J. Chhatwal, J.W. Shavlik, C.E. Kahn, E.S. Burnside, Breast Cancer Risk
Estimation With Artiﬁcial Neural Networks Revisited - Discrimination and Calibration, Cancer,
116(14), 3310-21, 2010
[28] J.M. Jerez-Aragones, J.A. Gomez-Ruiza, G.R.-Jimeneza, J.Munoz-Perez, E. Alba-Conejo, A combined neural network and decision trees model for prognosis of breast cancer relapse, Artiﬁcial
Intelligence in Medicine, 27(1), 45-63, 2003
[29] A.T. Eshlaghy, A. Poorebrahimi, M. Ebrahimi, A. R. Razavi, L.G. Ahmad, Using Three Machine Learning Techniques for Predicting Breast Cancer Recurrence, Journal of Health & Medical
Informatics, 4 (2), 2013
[30] M.H. Gail, L.A. Brinton, D.P. Byar, D.K. Corle, S.B. Green, C. Schairer, J.J. Mutvihill, Projecting Individualized Probabilities of Developing Breast Cancer for White Females Who Are Being
Examined Annually, Journal of the National Cancer Institute, 81(24), 1989
[31] Informatics for Integrating Biology and the Bedside website, https://www.i2b2.org/, 2014
[32] S.Madhavan, J.C. Zenklusen,Y. Kotliarov, H. Sahni, H. A. Fine, K. Buetow Rembrandt: helping
personalized medicine become a reality through integrative translational research, Mol. Cancer Res.,
7(2), 157-67, 2009
[33] Breast Cancer Information Core - BIC website, http://research.nhgri.nih.gov/bic/, 2014
[34] OMIM website, http://www.omim.org/, 2014
[35] ENTREZ GENE website, http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/gene, 2014
[36] GENE CARDS website, http://www.genecards.org/, 2014
[37] HGMD website, http://www.hgmd.org/, 2014
[38] dbSNP website, http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/SNP/, 2014
[39] DAVID website, http://david.abcc.ncifcrf.gov/, 2014
[40] GALAXY website, http://galaxyproject.org/, 2014
[41] M.Cannataro, D. Talia, G.Tradigo, P.Trunﬁo, P. Veltri, SIGMCC: A system for sharing meta

1968

An Architecture for Integrating Genetic and Clinical Data

Tradigo et al.

patient records in a Peer-to-Peer environment, Future Generation Computer Systems, 24(3), 22223, 2008
[42] J. J. Cimino, E. J. Ayres, L. Remennik, S. Rath, R. Freedman, A. Beri, Y. Chen, V. Huser, The
National Institutes of Health’s Biomedical Translational Research Information System (BTRIS):
Design, contents, functionality and experience to date, Journal of Biomedical Informatics, 2013
[43] Gendata2020: Data Driven Genomic Computing. PRIN 2010 Project funded by Italian University
Ministry http://gendata.weebly.com/

1969

