Available online at www.sciencedirect.com

Procedia Computer Science 4 (2011) 1448–1449

International Conference on Computational Science, ICCS 2011

First International Workshop on Advances in High-Performance
Computational Earth Sciences: Applications and Frameworks
(IHPCES)
Takashi Furumuraa, Kengo Nakajimab, Masaki Satohc
a
Earthquake Researech Institute, The University of Tokyo, 1-1-1 Yayoi, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-0032, Japan
Information Technology Center, The University of Tokyo, 2-11-16 Yayoi, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-8658, Japan
a
Atmosphere and Ocean Researech Institute, The University of Tokyo, 5-1-5 Kashiwanoha, Kashiwa-shi, Chiba 277-8654, Japan
a

1. Goal of this Workshop
The IHPCES workshop will provide a forum for presentation and discussion on the state-of-the-art research in
high-performance computational earth sciences. Emphasis will be on novel advanced high-performance
computational algorithms, formulations and simulations, as well as the related issues for computational
environments and infrastructure for development of high-performance computational earth sciences. Presentations
and audience from the broad geoscience communities are highly welcome. The workshop facilitates communication
among diverse scientific groups between geoscientists, applied mathematicians, computational and computer
scientists to exchange advanced knowledge, insights and science discoveries. These kinds of interactions are
particularly encouraged at the post-petascale and exascale where multidisciplinary collaborations for highperformance computational earth sciences are highly required. Contributions are solicited in (but not restricted to)
the following areas:
y
y
y
y
y
y
y

Large-scale simulations using modern high-end supercomputers in earth sciences, such as atmospheric
science, ocean science, solid earth science, and space & planetary science, as well as multi-physics
simulations.
Advanced modeling/large-scale simulations on natural disaster prevention/mitigation.
Advanced numerical methods for computational earth sciences, such as FEM, FDM, FVM, BEM/BIEM,
Mesh-Free method, Particle method, and etc.
Numerical algorithms and parallel programming models for computational earth sciences.
Optimization and reengineering of applications for both conventional multi- and many cores processors, or
specified accelerators such as GPU.
Strategy, implementation and applications of pre/post processing and handling of large-scale data sets for
computational earth sciences, such as parallel visualization, parallel mesh generation, I/O, data mining and
etc.
Frameworks and tools for development of codes for computational earth sciences on Peta/Post-Peta/Exa
Scale Systems.

1877–0509 © 2011 Published by Elsevier Ltd. Open access under CC BY-NC-ND license.
Selection and/or peer-review under responsibility of Prof. Mitsuhisa Sato and Prof. Satoshi Matsuoka
doi:10.1016/j.procs.2011.04.156

Takashi Furumura et al. / Procedia Computer Science 4 (2011) 1448–1449

2. Program Committee
T. Furumura (ERI/University of Tokyo, Japan), Co-Chair
K. Nakajima (ITC/University of Tokyo, Japan), Co-Chair
M. Satoh (AORI/University of Tokyo, Japan), Co-Chair
H. Aochi (BRGM, France)
S. Aoi (NIED, Japan)
T. Aoki (Tokyo Institute of Technology, Japan)
X. Cai (Simula/University of Oslo, Norway)
H.W. Chen (National Central University, Taiwan)
P. Chen (University of Wyoming, USA)
H.B. Cheong (Pukyong National University, Korea)
Y.F. Cui (San Diego Supercomputer Center, USA)
L.A. Drummond (Lawrence Berkeley Nat’l. Lab., USA)
O. Ghattas (University of Texas at Austin, USA)
L. Gross (University of Queensland, Australia)
H. Hasumi (AORI/University of Tokyo, Japan)
R. Hayashi (Kanazawa Institute of Technology, Japan)
T. Hori (JAMSTEC, Japan)

References
1. IHPCES 2011 Workshop: http://nkl.cc.u-tokyo.ac.jp/IHPCES2011/

T. Ichimura (ERI/University of Tokyo, Japan)
T. Iwashita (Kyoto University, Japan)
P. Joeckel (DLR, Germany)
A. Kageyama (Kobe University, Japan)
O.A. Marques (Lawrence Berkeley Nat’l. Lab., USA)
A. Mirin (Lawrence Livermore Nat’l. Lab., USA)
T. Narumi (Univ. Electro-Communications, Japan)
S. Ohshima (ITC/University of Tokyo, Japan)
H. Okuda (RACE/University of Tokyo, Japan)
H. Sakaguchi (JAMSTEC, Japan)
H. Takenaka (Kyushu University, Japan)
O. Tatebe (University of Tsukuba, Japan)
H. Tomita (JAMSTEC, Japan)
H. Tufo (University of Colorado/NCAR, USA)
L. Wang (University of Wyoming, USA)
H.L. Xing (University of Queensland, Australia)
D.A. Yuen (University of Minnesota, USA)

1449

