Available online at www.sciencedirect.com

Procedia Computer Science 4 (2011) 1953–1963

eScience: Building our Body of Knowledge
Valerie Maxville
iVEC
Perth, Australia
Email: maxville@ivec.org

Abstract
This paper describes the need for an eScience BoK, particularly as a resource for educators. eScience is a term
representing the computational technology and techniques utilised when undertaking research. As eScience matures,
stakeholders, and particularly educators, can beneﬁt from the clarity that a deﬁned Body of Knowledge (BOK) can
provide. The BOK would require domain-speciﬁc and technological aspects to be addressed. This paper describes a
framework for a prototype BOK for eScience and discusses how the BOK can be used as a tool to drive education,
outreach and infrastructure planning.
Keywords:

1. Introduction
In the synergy of technology and science, eScience1 has the potential to reveal new insights and entire research
ﬁelds in science. In [1], the authors provide a generic knowledge acquisition cycle (Figure 1). When the social
interconnections within science are included in this diagram, it becomes more like the scientiﬁc knowledge ecosystem
in Figure 2. This synergy and transfer of knowledge goes beyond the boundaries of each project or discipline. Already
the supercomputing infrastructure provided for energy research has transferred science, technology and engineering
capabilities to climate change, spread of pandemic disease and hurricane modelling [2].
A shift towards sharing research and government data is taking place around the world: “The speed at which any
given scientiﬁc discipline advances will depend on how well its researchers collaborate with one another, and with
technologists, in areas of eScience such as databases, workﬂow management, visualization, and cloud-computing
technologies” [3]. Publishers are also supporting the push for data sharing, with the editors of Elsevier discussing
openly accessible raw data, social networking and search and discovery trends in a recent update [4]. This may be
facilitated in part through publishing APIs for delivery of intelligent information [5].
This synergy also exposes the need to develop expertise across the continuum from the application domain to the
various technologies employed. In some projects, this may be very speciﬁc to the research and the researcher themselves may possess the required knowledge. In larger groups, a team with combinations of domain and technology
may be required. In an example of an eScience project team [6] identiﬁes four roles with distinct, complementary
skills: Principal Investigator, Co-Investigator, Computer Scientist and Computer Engineer. Extending this to eScience
support, the aim would be to have creative, ﬂexible staﬀ with a blend of technical and domain knowledge relevant
1 In

Australia the term used is eResearch, and hence eResearch BoK

1877–0509 © 2011 Published by Elsevier Ltd. Open access under CC BY-NC-ND license.
Selection and/or peer-review under responsibility of Prof. Mitsuhisa Sato and Prof. Satoshi Matsuoka
doi:10.1016/j.procs.2011.04.213

1954

Valerie Maxville. / Procedia Computer Science 4 (2011) 1953–1963

Figure 1: Scientiﬁc knowledge acquisition schema [1]

to a range of projects. The ICEAGE workshop report [7] indicates the types of students [graduates] required for
eInfrastructure development are: Computer Scientists, Application Developers and Users and Systems Engineers and
Managers.
Recognising the increasing demand for suitably trained R&D staﬀ for eScience has led to symposia in the UK, US,
and Australia. The Centre for Computational Thinking2 considers how this awareness can be developed from the K-12
level. “Computational thinking is a way of solving problems, designing systems, and understanding human behavior
that draws on concepts fundamental to computer science. To ﬂourish in today’s world, computational thinking has to
be a fundamental part of the way people think and understand the world.” Shodor3 and the SC Education Program4
are also working on aspects of this supply problem.
We now consider the challenges in eScience education and how the development of a shared knowledge base will
support educators and researchers in eScience.
2. Education for eScience
The demand for computational thinkers has been identiﬁed as early as 1982, when the Panel on Large Scale
Computing in Science and Engineering included “training of personnel in scientiﬁc and engineering computing” as
one of the four components of a proposed National Program [9]. Ten years later, the need was again stated: “Current
curricula at grade schools and colleges will not educate students to exploit the possibilities opened up by parallel
computers and the emergence of the computational methodology. [...] what we need most are computational scientists
- individuals trained to use computers” [8]. More recently, Anderson [10] quotes skills and knowledge shortages
for general ICT practitioners across Europe, USA, Australia and Thailand due to very fast growth in ICT activity
compared to enrolments. The US report on International Assessment of Research and Development in SimulationBased Engineering and Science [11] found that
Finding 2: Inadequate education and training of the next generation of computational scientists threatens
global as well as U.S. growth of SBE&S. This is particularly urgent for the United States; unless we
prepare researchers to develop and use the next generation of algorithms and computer architectures, we
will not be able to exploit their game-changing capabilities. [11, p xv.]
Finding 3: There is a clear and urgent need for a new, modern approach to educating and training the next
2 http://www.cs.cmu.edu/

~CompThink/
math and science education through the eﬀective use of modeling and simulation technologies http://www.shodor.org/
4 http://sc10.supercomputing.org/?pg=edprog.html
3 Improving

Valerie Maxville. / Procedia Computer Science 4 (2011) 1953–1963

1955

Figure 2: The scientiﬁc knowledge ecosystem [1]

generation of researchers in high performance computing speciﬁcally, and in modeling and simulation
generally, for scientiﬁc discovery and engineering innovation.[11, p xviii.]
A recent NNSA address highlighted the need for the technical base for creating computer simulations to provide solutions - predictive science. To have impact, we need to consider the desired outcomes for eScience education. The
ICEAGE Curriculum Development workshop indicated the drivers as: “an urgent social and economic need to:
1) Equip ﬁrst degree students in all disciplines with a level of skills in digital-systems judgement or computational
thinking suﬃcient to support and progress the knowledge-based economy.
2) Invest in undergraduate and Masters courses to develop experts capable of innovating in the provision and exploitation of e-Infrastructures and e-Science” [7].
An additional challenge to education is the ﬂuidity and rapid change in technology, along with the growing breadth
of knowledge deemed relevant to eScience. The ICEAGE workshop refers to these challenges in developing curricula
for e-Science as “far from straightforward. Multiple methods and modes of delivery must be considered. Diﬀerent
target audiences would require the presentation of diﬀerent principles, concepts and examples”[7].
iVEC is based in Perth, Western Australia with the mission of fostering and promoting scientiﬁc and technological innovation through the provision of supercomputing and eResearch services. iVECs Education Program provides
training to support use of its infrastructure. Our aim, however is to ensure that researchers have knowledge of the
available techniques to allow them to select or develop appropriate tools and workﬂows to solve their research problems.
To support this, we believe that the development of an inclusively scoped Body of Knowledge (BoK) would be
beneﬁcial. The value of this would initially be in education and training - guiding course development, assisting in
providing an overview of the ﬁelds to attendees of iVEC training and as extension material. The BoK could also
be used be individuals for extending their skills and for career development. Researchers may ﬁnd it useful for
identifying technology applicable to their research and to help deﬁne the skills required for research teams. The
process of building the BoK should assist in highlighting similarities across disciplines, for example, techniques used
in materials science that are common between chemistry and physics.

1956

Valerie Maxville. / Procedia Computer Science 4 (2011) 1953–1963

3. Building a BoK
A Body of Knowledge can be deﬁned as: (1) “Structured knowledge that is used by members of a discipline
to guide their practice or work.” (2) “The prescribed aggregation of knowledge in a particular area an individual is
expected to have mastered to be considered or certiﬁed as a practitioner.” [12]. Fields with published BoKs include:
• Software Engineering Body of Knowledge (SWEBOK)5
• Project Management (PMBOK)6
• The ICT Profession Body of Knowledge (CBOK)7
• Usability Body of Knowledge8
eScience pervades all other disciplines, thus using the BoK to set boundaries would not be productive. It does not
displace but extends and interprets other BoKs from related areas.
A well-established BoK is the Software Engineering Body of Knowledge (SWEBOK), implemented as a Guide
to the SWEBOK [13]. The project plan comprised three successive development phases: Strawman, Stoneman, and
Ironman. An early prototype, Strawman, demonstrated how the project might be organised. The publication of the
Trial Version of the Guide in 2001 marked the end of the Stoneman phase. Trial usage and feedback on the Ironman
phase resulted in a Guide that has achieved community consensus.
The Guide to the Software Engineering Body of Knowledge (SWEBOK) was established with the following ﬁve
objectives:
1. To promote a consistent view of software engineering worldwide
2. To clarify the place - and set the boundary - of software engineering with respect to other disciplines such as
computer science, project management, computer engineering, and mathematics
3. To characterize the contents of the software engineering discipline
4. To provide a topical access to the Software Engineering Body of Knowledge
5. To provide a foundation for curriculum development and for individual certiﬁcation and licensing material
All of these objectives would be considered of value for eScience.
Recording a BoK requires the deﬁnition of terms and main conceptual groupings for the ﬁeld. This is coloured by
the perspective taken, for example the view of an algorithm from computer science may diﬀer to how it is viewed from
the application domain. As the ﬁelds and application areas drive the science, and are the researcher starting point,
this would be a preferred lead perspective. The technology and techniques used in the ﬁelds can be factored out and
assembled to provide and overview from the technical perspective. This diﬀers from the SWEBOK which builds on
ten technical knowledge areas. There are additional topics that become important when undertaking eScience, such
as data issues for ownership, licencing and ethics, which will need to be included.
Discussions of concepts and terms across disciplines/communities is often supported by ontologies. This deﬁnes
the objects, classes, attributes and relations in an area. For example, in material science, objects may include types of
problems and the techniques applied to them. A class may be used to deﬁne groupings of problems and techniques.
Ontologies exist for genes9 and proteins10 and allow for the deﬁnition of terms and their relations. A visualisation of
an ontology can help to communicate the concepts and how an area ﬁts together.
The SWEBOK was developed through community input over a period of time. This was facilitated through
documents for comment and workshops. Another common approach for recording a knowledge base is via wikis
such as wikipedia11 . The Usability BoK provides a draft BoK and wiki for community comment12 . Subject speciﬁc
5 http://www.swebok.org/
6 http://www.projectsmart.co.uk/pmbok.html
7 http://www.acs.org.au/attachments/ACSCBOKWorkingPaperV5.0Oct2008.pdf
8 http://www.usabilitybok.org/
9 The

Gene Ontology: http://www.geneontology.org/
Ontology (PRO): http://www.obofoundry.org/cgi-bin/detail.cgi?id=protein
11 http://en.wikipedia.org/
12 http://www.usabilitybok.org/
10 PRotein

Valerie Maxville. / Procedia Computer Science 4 (2011) 1953–1963

1957

Figure 3: Dominant techniques by discipline, with Computer Science shown to include both numerical and statistical models [7]

wikis include the SWAN Project13 , a project to develop a knowledge base for the neurodegenerative disease research
community. SWAN has an ontology ecosystem generated through Semantic Web technology and self-organised online
communities. Wikis provide a transparent and open process for disseminating, tracking and reviewing documents and
allow for entire communities to be editors.
The preferred approach in this case will be the development of a strawman (prototype) BoK from existing resources. Initially this will be housed on the iVEC Education web pages. This can then be made available and editable
for the eScience community via a wiki or similar. Feedback will also be sought through Birds of a Feather sessions
and workshops at conferences such as eScience, Supercomputing, ICCS and eResearch Australasia.
4. An eScience BoK
Many useful resources exist that can be drawn upon in building a BoK for eScience. The BoK itself can focus on
high level coverage and refer to these materials. A BoK with detailed descriptions of all of the techniques would be
diﬃcult to maintain (with a rapidly changing ﬁeld) and be likely to be unbalanced in depth of coverage.
As this initiative is coming from the education perspective, the existing curricula and surveys around eScience,
supercomputing, data management, visualisation, collaboration and networks will be included. The knowledge areas
will encompass the traditional disciplines as visualised in Figure 3. Although this diagram is helpful in communicating
the commonalities between disciplines, the BoK will be more easily understood if opened out into a ﬂat format and
links added to represent interactions.
A more formal structure for the knowledge areas may be drawn from the categories deﬁned for the Australian
and New Zealand Standard Research Classiﬁcation (ANZSRC)[14]. The ANZSRC was developed by the Australian
Bureau of Statistics and Statistics New Zealand. It is used in applications and reporting on competitive grants in
Australia, and is the basis for the subject element in the RIF-CS schema used by the Australian National Data Service
(ANDS)14 , making it a suitable choice in the Australian context. The terminology used in the ANZSRC may provide
a basis for an eScience ontology.
The ANZSRC Field of Research (FOR) classiﬁcation is where the methodology used in the R&D is considered.
The FOR has three hierarchical levels: Division, Group and Field. Table 1 provides an example of levels in the
Physical Sciences. There are 22 Divisions (2-digit), 157 Groups (4-digits) and below them 1238 Fields (6-digit). The
added value of this system is that where a ﬁeld could be assigned to more than one category, the ANZSRC deﬁnes
which area it is placed in/excluded from. This BoK will use the Division level (Table 2) to deﬁne the majority of the
“Knowledge Areas” for the BoK.
In addition to these, the BoK will cover Technology and Techniques as two separate Areas. In characterising the
Areas, the prototype BoK will use the following format: overview of KA, including sub-areas, then consider each
13 Semantic

Web Applications in Neuromedicine: http://swan.mindinformatics.org/

14 http://www.ands.org.au/resource/rif-cs.html

1958

Valerie Maxville. / Procedia Computer Science 4 (2011) 1953–1963

Table 1: ANZSRC Field of Research for the Physical Sciences[14]

Level
Division

Code
02

Description
Physical Sciences

Group

0201
0202
0203
0204
0205
0206
0299

Astronomical and Space Sciences
Atomic, Molecular, Nuclear, Particle and Plasma Physics
Classical Physics
Condensed Matter Physics
Optical Physics
Quantum Physics
Other Physical Sciences

Field

020603

Quantum Information, Computation and Communication

Table 2: ANZSRC Field of Research (FOR) Divisions[14]

Code
01
02
03
04
05
06
07
08
09
10
11

Description
Mathematical Sciences
Physical Sciences
Chemical Sciences
Earth Sciences
Environmental Sciences
Biological Sciences
Agricultural and Veterinary Sciences
Information and Computing Sciences
Engineering
Technology
Medical and Health Sciences

Code
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22

Description
Built Environment and Design
Education
Economics
Commerce, Management, Tourism and Services
Studies in Human Society
Psychology and Cognitive Sciences
Law and Legal Studies
Studies in Creative Arts and Writing
Language, Communication and Culture
History and Archaeology
Philosophy and Religious Studies

Phase of research and the techniques used in each. The phases align to the cycles of research in Figure 1. Some
commonality is expected between sub-areas and across the FOR Knowledge Areas. It is expected that the phase with
the most speciﬁc techniques will be in the experimentation/computation for each area. Table 3 maps the framework
across the Knowledge Areas and Research Phases.
Table 3: eScience Body of Knowledge framework

Research Phase
Data Collection
Experimentation
Analysis
Communication
Archive/Share

Technology

Techniques

FOR Knowledge Areas

4.1. Technology Knowledge Area
When introducing eScience, the iVEC approach has been to outline the ﬁve main technology resources provided
by our organisation: Compute; Data; Visualisation; Networking and Collaborative tools.
Each of these areas is complex enough to have its own Body of Knowledge. The typical compute is via a supercomputer running parallel code. Alternatives might be distributed systems (for example Grid, Cloud, BOINC), hybrid
systems and standalone workstation processing. Any of these may be used in the Research Phases for data collection,
experimentation or analysis.

Valerie Maxville. / Procedia Computer Science 4 (2011) 1953–1963

1959

When working with Data, researchers can use their local storage and media, institutional or group servers, the
iVEC petascale datastore or the ARCS15 Data Fabric. A range of these would be used through the life of a research
project.
Networks are the key to much of eScience. Aspects of interest would be latency, protocols and security issues.
These are most likely to have an impact on collaboration tools and on moving data between machines.
Visualisation can take place on dedicated visualisation resources, or increasingly at researchers workstations.
Dedicated options include front/rear projection, immersive systems, 3D stereo and high resolution display walls.
Other user interface options are also grouped under visualisation, including haptics, motion and eye tracking, EEG16
and user monitoring. Visualisation takes place mainly in the ﬁrst four Research Phases (Table 3).
On the social side, collaborative tools can have a strong impact on the operation and interaction of teams. Collaborative tool can run the spectrum from chat to multi-cast video-conferencing, from email to wikis and portals. These
can be classiﬁed in terms of their collocation and sync/async nature, as shown in Table 4.
Table 4: Collaboration Tools

Diﬀerent Time

Same Location
Whiteboard, Noticeboard

Diﬀerent Location
Fax, Post, Email, Web, SMS, Wiki, Social
Networking tools, Online Forums

Same Time

Meeting, Water-cooler conversation

Access Grid, Telephone, Videoconference,
Teleconference, Instant Messaging

Shared instruments are also included within data collection and experimentation. These include Synchrotrons,
the Large Hadron Collider, telescopes and sensor networks. An example of organised knowledge to support user
access to instruments is the Australian Microscopy and Microanalysis Research Facility (AMMRF)17 . Researchers
can access a complete list of available resources, or work through the Technique Finder, entering type and scale for
their investigation to view a list of recommended techniques.
As with all of the Knowledge Areas, the information in the BoK will always be representative, not exhaustive.
Localised information on the technology available would be of value for educators and researchers.
4.2. Techniques Knowledge Area
The Techniques refer to eScience processes collated from use in the FOR Knowledge Areas. They can be considered in reference to the same categories as the Technologies, as well as by the Phase of the Research. The following
discussion is a selection of the Techniques in the general, parallel, data management and visualisation areas.
There are also some techniques across the entire project, such as ethics, project management, and software engineering. Social aspects of teams collaborating across geographic, time zone and cultural barriers are common.
Collaborative tools and organisation of virtual teams have well-developed knowledge bases to draw upon.
A previous paper on preparing scientists for scalable software development identiﬁed the key SWEBOK areas
based on the size and audience of the project. Table 5 gives an overview of the SWEBOK Knowledge Areas and their
priority as a skill-set for researchers/teams.
The ICEAGE Report [7] included the following topics in the Programming for e-Science component: looselycoupled programming (includes communications, networks issues, workﬂows...); programming to APIs; Code re-use
& component publishing; API production; code maintenance, versioning, etc.; technical documentation for re-use;
standards; programming environments; security; introduction to existing CS methods & concepts.
One of the more established areas within eScience is parallel code development. The International Working
Group on Software Engineering for Parallel Systems (SEPARS) publishes an overview of parallelism and multicore/manycore in curricula around the world [16]. Their classiﬁcation of course topics includes: algorithms; architec15 Australian

Research Collaboration Service: https://www.arcs.org.au/index.php/arcs-data-fabric
(EEG) is the recording of electrical activity along the scalp produced by the ﬁring of neurons within the brain

16 Electroencephalography

(wikipedia).
17 http://www.ammrf.org.au/

1960

Valerie Maxville. / Procedia Computer Science 4 (2011) 1953–1963

Table 5: Project stage and Coverage of SWEBOK Knowledge Areas [15]

Knowledge Area

Individual

Group

Public

Requirements

++

+++

+++

Design

++

+++

+++

+

++

+++

++

+++

+++

+

++

+++

++

+++

+++

Engineering Mgmt

+

++

+++

Engineering Process

+

++

+++

Tools and Methods

++

+++

+++

Construction
Testing
Maintenance
Conﬁguration Mgmt

Quality
+
++
+++
+ light ++ deeper +++ formal coverage
ture/hardware; programming; distributed computing; multicore programming; scientiﬁc computing/HPC; theory of
parallel computing; and no classiﬁcation.
In the practical nature of a BoK, this would need to be extended to include more speciﬁc topics such as languages, task and data parallelism, memory hierarchy, benchmarking, debugging and libraries. Platforms types are
also expanding, and matching techniques are required for distributed computing, grid, cloud, GPU and heterogenous
computing.
Many resources exist in software development for HPC, such as SEPARS, SC Education Program and VSCSE18 .
The last two are taking up a focus on petascale and exascale computing - a computing power transition that will require
new software and tools at all levels of supercomputing. Algorithms, their implementation and their performance
proﬁles are key Technique resources that are useful across all Knowledge Areas.
The relatively recent shift to open data in research has made data management a critical area. The Australian
National Data Service (ANDS)19 provides guides for research data management. When working with repositories,
[6] highlights digital rights management, copyright ownership, database rights, fair dealing, licences and Z39.50
in the “Introduction to EGEE” course. Atkinson [? ] provides an outline of a masters course in eScience with a
data management component including: storage, movement, provenance, life-cycle, validation, security, schemas /
data formats and documentation. The data track at eResearch Australasia adds to this list with : Data Commons;
Data Grids and Clouds; Building Data Management Capabilities; Data Utilities; Generating Data; Discovering Data;
Exchanging Data; Reusing Data; Combining Data; and Publishing Data.
Visualisation can be used to check input data, as a key result of experimentation/computation, for analysis and for
communication of results. Information visualisation can utilise mind maps, conceptual diagrams, visual metaphors
and concept mapping [17]. A popular analysis and visualisation tool is social network analysis and mapping techniques to non-social and non-geographic data, showcased in the Atlas of Science 20 . Bresciani [18] indicate that
interactive and annotation-friendly visualisations have a positive impact on knowledge sharing, regardless of the form
of the diagram.
Many computational science application areas consider visualisation critical, including Computational Fluid Dynamics and Material Science. In scientiﬁc visualisation, the data may be made up of points, a rectangular grid, a
curvilinear grid or an unstructured grid [19]. These can be surface or volume rendered and the information enhanced
through surface shading, isosurfaces, clipping/slicing or adding particle traces. For communication purposes, the
relative merits of images (frames), movies/animations and interactive models needs to be considered.
18 Virtual

School of Computational Science and Engineering: http://www.vscse.org/summerschool/2010/petascale.html

19 http://ands.org.au
20 http://scimaps.org/atlas/

Valerie Maxville. / Procedia Computer Science 4 (2011) 1953–1963

1961

The Techniques Knowledge Area will continue to expend and for some may be the key Section of the BoK.
However, for a scientist, the FOR Knowledge Areas will be most relevant. This will give a select set of techniques
which can be traced through to broader information and then link to more detailed discussions.
4.3. FOR Knowledge Areas
There is wide variation in the uptake of eScience across the 22 divisional categories. It is likely that some groupings of these Knowledge Areas are possible to reduce repetition and to further identify commonality between ﬁelds.
Candidates may be in the humanities and social science areas. Although, over time, there may be more new techniques
that result in diﬀerentiation.
This section will highlight three of the courses in the SC Education Program 2008 and 2009. Some surveys
of computational techniques exist, including biochemistry networks [20] and quantum dots and nanosystems [21].
These, and similar articles, will provide a resource for generating coverage of techniques. Summarising the topics in
the SC training courses can provide a quick overview of established techniques and tools in ﬁelds. Table 6 provides
this for Biology, Chemistry and Engineering.
Table 6: FOR Knowledge Area Summaries

Field
Biology

Techniques and Tools
Bioinformatics, Computational Genomics, Dynamic Modelling, Molecular Phylogenics,
Transcriptomics, Homology Modelling
Tools: MATLAB, BLAST, R

Chemistry

Molecular Mechanics, Ab Initio Hartree Fock, Semiempirical and Density Functional Theory
Tools: SIESTA, GULP, GDIS

Engineering

Computational Fluid Dynamics, Modelling, Image Processing
Tools: Matlab, OpenFoam

In a similar manner, a succinct overview of the research ﬁelds and their use of eScience techniques can be developed. This would include which techniques are used in which Research Phases, pros and cons of the techniques and
the underlying algorithms used.From this a survey of the eScience practice can develop.
4.4. Characterising Research Projects
Another use for the BoK is to be able to eﬃciently characterise a research project. This may be for planning and
resourcing, or for communicating the approach taken for support, reporting or publication purposes. At an individual
project level, the information about techniques used in the Research Phases (3-7) would be positioned with information
about the problem (1) and the overall research methodology (2). Compiling this information would provide the
overall project workﬂow as follows: 1) Research Problem, 2) Methodology, 3) Data Collection, 4) Experimentation,
5) Analysis, 6) Communication, 7) Archive/Share
An example from Material Science:
1: An investigation of how diﬀerent density functional theory (DFT) functionals perform when they are used to
examine the interaction between two molecules.
2: To assess how each DFT functional performs, calculations for each functional would be performed and then the
resulting atomistic and electronic properties would be compared to each other or literature theoretical or experimental
results.
3: Data collection for this type of problem can be built from information published in similar problems, or with
other computational software, and then this information is transformed into the required format for the particular
software code we have chosen to use.

1962

Valerie Maxville. / Procedia Computer Science 4 (2011) 1953–1963

4: The experimentation or computation, in this case, may directly utilise code suites such as SIESTA21 , or GULP22
on high-performance super-computing facilities, or utilise similar software via a Grid submission tool.
5: The analysis may be done using a tool such as GDIS23 , a Grid-enabled application for for the display and
manipulation of isolated molecules and periodic systems. GDIS also allows the following functions to be performed
through other packages: model rendering, energy minimisation, morphology calculation, space group processing
or view the periodic table. Additional analysis may utilise visualisation software including GNU Plot24 , Povray25 ,
VMD26 and Materials Studio27 .
6: Communication of results is primarily through peer-reviewed journal articles in the relevant area. Within
the research group, plots and animations may be exchanged, with visualisation session using 3D stereo facilities to
enhance understanding of the results.
7a: At this point, data is not typically shared with other research groups, although some electronic journals allow
additional (supplemental) data, such as the optimised coordinates of structures, or enhanced visualisation images to
be downloaded by researchers to improve understanding of the research.
7b: Input ﬁles for calculations are typically stored temporarily on the particular supercomputer that is used and/or
on the researcher’s workstation, with all resulting data backed up to the iVEC petascale datastore.
5. Conclusion and Future Work
In this paper we have described the need for an eScience BoK, particularly as a resource for educators. The value
does extends beyond education, as a means for researchers to survey applicable techniques in their problem space.
Support for eScience can also utilise the BoK for infrastructure planning, staﬀ development and communication of
tangible aspects of eScience.
In the future, the BoK will be made available for contribution, discussion and evolution. The mechanism for this
sharing should eventually support mash-ups for reusing the knowledge base. For example, the BoK could provide the
back-end to a research recommender system. As eScience grows in usage and techniques, tools to support researchers
in understanding and selecting techniques will be of value. Support and education of the researchers will be assisted
by the availability of a comprehensive guide to technology - the eScience BoK.
Acknowledgment
Thanks to my colleagues at iVEC for feedback and discussion of the eScience BoK idea, and to the researchers
who provide information on their projects.
About iVEC: Our mission is to foster and promote scientiﬁc and technological innovation, through the provision
of Supercomputing and eResearch services to the research community, commercial organisations and government
agencies. iVEC is a joint venture among CSIRO, Curtin University of Technology, Edith Cowan University, Murdoch
University and The University of Western Australia and is supported by the Western Australian Government.
Bibliography
[1] T. Clark and J. Kinoshita Alzforum and SWAN: the present and future of scientiﬁc web communities. Brieﬁngs in Bioinformatics, vol 8(3)
p163-171, 2007.
[2] National Nuclear Security Administration, “NNSA Administrator Addresses Next Generation of Computational Scientists”, Department of Energy: Computational Science Graduate Fellowship Conference, http://www.nnsa.energy.gov/mediaroom/speeches/
csgfremarks062210, Jun 22, 2010

21 http://www.icmab.es/siesta/
22 http://www.ivec.org/gulp
23 GTK

Display Interface for Structures: http://gdis.sourceforge.net/

24 http://www.gnuplot.info/
25 Persistence

of Vision Raytracer: http://www.povray.org/
Molecular Dynamics:http://www.ks.uiuc.edu/Research/vmd/
27 http://accelrys.com/products/materials-studio/
26 Visual

Valerie Maxville. / Procedia Computer Science 4 (2011) 1953–1963

[3]
[4]
[5]
[6]

1963

T. Hey, S. Tansley, and K. Tolle, The Fourth Paradigm: Data-Intensive Scientiﬁc Discovery, Microsoft Research, 2009.
H. Foreman, “Editors’ Update: Your network for knowledge”, Elsevier Editors’ Update, Issue 30, June 2010.
R. Sidi, “The Heart of a New Science Ecosystem”, Elsevier Editors’ Update, Issue 30, June 2010.
B. Mann, M. Dove, M. Mineter, J. Oliver and R. Sinnott, “Education and Training in UK e-Science”, UK e-Science Technical Report Series
UKeS-2005-01, URL: http://www.nesc.ac.uk/technical papers/UKeS-2005-01.pdf
[7] ICEAGE, Report from the ICEAGE Curricula Development Workshop, Brussels, 14-15 February 2008
[8] G.F. Fox, “Parallel Computing and Education”, Daedalus, Vol 121(1), Winter 1992, p111-118.
[9] P.D. Lax, “Report of the Panel on Large Scale Computing in SCience and Engineering”, Sponsored by Department of Defence and the National
Science FOundation, December 1982, Accessed March 2011, URL: http://www.pnl.gov/scales/docs/lax report 1982.pdf
[10] M. Anderson and E. Vander Meer, “Policy for Supporting Grid and e-Science Education and Training”, GFD-I.153, Open Grid Forum, 2009.
[11] S.C. Glotzer (Chair) et.al., International Assessment of Research and Development in Simulation-Based Engineering and Science, World
Technology Evaluation Center, Inc. 2009
[12] T. I. Oren, Toward the Body of Knowledge of Modeling and Simulation, Interservice/Industry Training, Simulation, and Education Conference
(I/ITSEC) 2005.
[13] Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers, Inc., Guide to the Software Engineering Body of Knowledge, New York, NY, USA. 2004.
Available online http://www.swebok.org.
[14] B. Pink and G. Bascand, “Australian and New Zealand Standard Research Classiﬁcation (ANZSRC)”, ABS Catalogue No. 1297.0, 2008.
[15] V. Maxville, ”Preparing scientists for scalable software development,” SECSE, pp.80-85, 2009 ICSE Workshop on Software Engineering for
Computational Science and Engineering, 2009
[16] D.J. Meder, V. Pankratius and W.F. Tichy, “Parallelism in Curricula - An International Survey”, The International Working Group on Software
Engineering for Parallel Systems (SEPARS), December, 2009.
[17] M.J. Eppler, “A comparison between concept maps, mind maps, conceptual diagrams, and visual metaphors as complementary tools for
knowledge construction and sharing”, Information Visualization, Vol 5, p.202 –210, 2006.
[18] S. Bresciani and M.J. Eppler, “The Beneﬁts of Synchronous Collaborative Information Visualization: Evidence from an Experimental Evaluation”, IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics, Vol. 15 (6), November/December 2009.
[19] P. Navratil, “Overview and Introduction to Scientiﬁc Visualization”, Scaling to Petascale Summer School, July 9, 2010.
[20] J. Decrane and T. Hinze, “A Multidisciplinary Survey of Computational Techniques for the Modelling, Simulation and Analysis of Biochemical Networks”, Journal of Universal Computer Science, vol. 16, no. 9 (2010), 1152-1175.
[21] J.B. Wang, C. Hines and R. D. Muhandiramge, “Electronic structure of quantum dots and other nanosystems”, invited review chapter in the
Handbook of Theoretical and Computational Nanotechnology, vol 10, chapter 10, p545-604, American Scientiﬁc Publishers, 2006.

