Available online at www.sciencedirect.com

Procedia Computer Science 4 (2011) 1554–1562

International Conference on Computational Science, ICCS 2011

Ascent of Bubbles in Magma Conduits Using Boundary Elements
and Particles
Gabriele Morra∗
Complex Systems Group, School of Physics, University of Sydney, 2006 NSW, Australia
Earthbyte group, School of Geosciences, University of Sydney, 2006 NSW, Australia

Leonardo Quevedo
Earthbyte group, School of Geosciences, University of Sydney, 2006 NSW, Australia

Dave A. Yuen
Minnesota Supercomputer Institute, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN 55415-1227, USA

Philippe Chatelain
Institute of Mechanics, Materials and Civil Engineering, Universit´e catholique de Louvain, 1348 Louvain-la-Neuve, Belgium

Abstract
We investigate the use of the Multipole-accelerated Boundary Element Method (BEM) and of the Singularity
Method for studying the interaction of many bubbles rising in a volcanic conduit. Observation shows that the expression of volcanic eruption is extremely variable, from slow release of magma to catastrophic explosive manifestation.
We investigate the application of the Fast Multipole Method to the solution of (i) the Boundary Element Formulation
of the Stokes ﬂow and of (ii) the particle formulation using the Stokeslets, the Green Function of the Stokes ﬂow law,
as a particle kernel. We show how these implementations allow for the ﬁrst time to numerically model in a dynamic
setting a very large number of bubbles, i.e few thousands with the BEM models, allowing investigating the feedback
between the single bubble deformation and their collective evolution, and few hundred of thousands of bubbles with
the particle approach. We illustrate how this method can be used to investigate the intense interaction of a large
number of bubbles and suggest a framework for studying the feedback between many bubbles and a complex thermal
nonlinear magmatic matrix.
Keywords: Boundary Elements, Fast Multipole Method, Fluid Dynamics, Bubble Dynamics, Volcanology,
Strombolian Activity, Explosive Eruption

∗ Corresponding

author
Email address: gabrielemorra@gmail.com (Gabriele Morra)

1877–0509 © 2011 Published by Elsevier Ltd. Open access under CC BY-NC-ND license.
Selection and/or peer-review under responsibility of Prof. Mitsuhisa Sato and Prof. Satoshi Matsuoka
doi:10.1016/j.procs.2011.04.168

Gabriele Morra et al. / Procedia Computer Science 4 (2011) 1554–1562

1555

1. Introduction
Magmas are multiphase ﬂows transporting solid and gas components that undergo shear deformation [8, 4], making the calculation of their rheology —or in general their non-steady dynamic response— a complex problem. The
gas component is always involved in volcanic eruptions. In fact the three main types of eruptions are (i) magmatic
(magma+gas, but magma driven), (ii) phreatomagmatic (magma+gas, but gas driven), (iii) phreatic eruption (steam
superheating due to contact with magma). While the observation of the large variety of volcanic activity, from slow
eruption to explosive [2], illustrates how the system dynamics can diverge, many volcanic conduit release their gas
and magma through a frequent and repetitive controlled explosive manifestation called “Strombolian Activity” [3].
Another way is to distinguish between types of eruptions is to order them in term of activity, Hawaiian, Strombolian, Volcanian, Plinian and Palean, where the last is the most intense. This works aims at analysing bubbles dynamics
for the Strombolian case, in which the activity is gas (and therefore bubble) dominated, but in which the dynamics is
not yet explosive [6]. In such type of activity the gas component inside the ascending magma is separated in bubbles
that expand due to the rise of magma and the consequent reduction of pressure [1]. The bubble expansion, increasing
the speed of rise and the amount of interaction with the bubbles with each other, is believed to be responsible of the
emergence of a drift in complexities of the bubble collective dynamics, but such results has never been modelled. This
work focuses on how this interaction acts, how its numerical modeling can be numerically tackled and what early
results suggest [7].
We show here how the Boundary Element Method applied to Stokes ﬂow can be used to study the complex
dynamics of a large number of Bubbles, revealing the feedback between their morphological evolution and their
collective dynamics. In the limit where the deformation of the bubbles is negligible, i.e. when the surface tension
is suﬃciently strong to compensate the shear forces applied to a single bubble, the dynamics of a large number of
bubbles can be investigated with the simpler Singularity Method, using the fundamental Stokes’ ﬂow solutions called
Stokeslets, as recently employed in geophysical ﬂuid dynamics [10] and bio-ﬂuid dynamics [11]. If the Strombolian
Activity is a manifestation of the nonlinear interaction of the rising bubbles, which spontaneously evolves toward a
regime of marginal stability [9]analogously to many other complex systems [5], our approach is the most suited for
detecting the phase transition responsible of the observed patterns at the surface.
The present work illustrates how the Fast Multipole (FM) can be combined with (i) the Boundary Element Method
(BEM), achieving the most eﬃcient strategy to analyse the two phase ﬂow represented by the bubbles-magma interaction; and with (ii) the Particle approach, where particles are deﬁned by Stokeslets, i.e. Green Functions of the Stokes
equation, to model the interaction of a large number (up to 100, 000 per processor) of almost rigid bubbles. The two
approaches are used for studying these systems at two diﬀerent scales. The ﬁrst for analysing the feedback between
the morphological evolution of the single bubble and the evolution of the collectivity of bubbles, and the second to
analyse the large scale patterns formed by large sets of above millions of bubbles.
This paper is structured as follows. In Sect. 2, we summarise our approach and present several resolution and
scaling tests. In Sect. 3 and Sect. 4 we show the Boundary Element Method-based and the Stokeslet-based models
respectively. Insights on the use of this approach for understanding the real cases such as the Strombolian Activity are
ﬁnally suggested in Sect. 5.
2. Simulation of Stokes Flow
2.1. Governing Equations
We consider the Stokes equation for a steady, highly viscous ﬂow
∇ · σ + ρb = 0

(1)

where b is the body force, and the stress tensor term ∇ · σ = −∇P + μ∇2 u is related to P the pressure; u, the velocity
ﬁeld and μ, the dynamic viscosity.
The Stokes equation can be recast into a variety of integral equations. We follow here the formulation of [13], to
which we refer for further details. We denote as D is the domain where (1) holds and we write
ui (xo ) =

1
8πμ

σik (x)nk Gi j (x, xo )dS (x) +
D

1
8π

ui (x)nk T i jk (x, xo )dS (x)
D

(2)

1556

Gabriele Morra et al. / Procedia Computer Science 4 (2011) 1554–1562

Figure 1: Stokeslet fundamental solutions. On the left the representation of the Velocity Green Function, on the right the induced pressure.

where Gi j and T i jk are the steady, Green’s functions for velocity and stress respectively, also known as the Stokeslet
and the Stresslet
Gi j (x − xo )
T i jk (x − xo )

δi j xˆi xˆ j
+ 3 ; xˆ = x − xo and r = |ˆx|
r
r
xˆi xˆ j xˆk
= −6 5 .
r

=

(3)
(4)

In turn, (2) is cast into a form more appropriate for quasi-steady multiphase ﬂows in the presence of a gravity ﬁeld.
Hence for x ∈ S i we obtain
1 + λi
u(x) −
2

N
j

1 − λj
8π

PV

n · T · u dS = −

Sj

1
8πμ0

N

G · Δf dS ,
j

(5)

Sj

where PV denotes the principal value of the integral, μ0 is the viscosity of the mantle taken as a reference for λi =
μi /μ0 , and the normal stress jump Δf that accounts for gravity is given by
Δf = Δρ (b · x) n .

(6)

2.2. Numerical Method
The surfaces S i and the supported quantities u, Δf, . . . are discretized with panels. The boundary integral equation
(5) thus becomes a linear system
(7)
((1 + λ)/2 + T) U = F .
Where U and F are the vectors deﬁning the velocity u and the right hand side of equation (5), respectively. Many
2
approaches rely to the construction of the matrix T , a computation that scales as N panels
both memory- and computation
time-wise, making them impractical for large systems.
We use a fast multipole method (FMM) [14, 15, 16] for the evaluation of the integrals in (5). The FMM scales as
N log(N), which is far more tractable and still allows the use of a Generalised Minimal Residual method (GMRES) or
any Krylov space based method that does not rely on the storage of the full matrix.
A multipole method exploits the decay of the kernel to convolve and makes a controlled approximation. More
explicitly, let us compute
u(xo ) =

G(xo − x)ρ(x)dV(x) .
D

(8)

Gabriele Morra et al. / Procedia Computer Science 4 (2011) 1554–1562

1557

We consider the contribution from Di , a part of D that is far enough from our evaluation point xo and proceed with a
Taylor expansion of the kernel G about xc ∈ Di
u(xo )

=

G(xo − x)ρ(x)dV(x)
Di

(G(xo − xc ) − ∇G(xo − xc ) · (xo − xc ) + . . .) ρ(x)dV(x)
Di

G(xo − xc )

ρ(x)dV(x)
Di

−∇G(xo − xc ) ·

(xo − xc )ρ(x)dV(x) + . . .

(9)

Di

We note that the equation involves successive moments of the ρ distribution in Di . The FMM algorithm sorts the
sources in a tree structure whose cells contain the moment integrals —or multipoles— and carries out a ﬁeld evaluation
through a tree traversal. The reﬁnement of the interactions is determined by a tree traversal stopping criterion based
on a prescribed tolerance. The reader is referred to [14, 15, 16] for further details.
The present FMM code can handle convolutions with the Green’s functions for the Poisson equation, the Stokeslet
or the Stresslet. It employs up to the second order moments of the source distributions (quadrupoles).
2.3. Performances
The FMM-BEM drastically improves the computational cost of the method. For the coarse resolutions, the method
displays the nominal N 2 scaling of a direct interaction code. The scaling then quickly approaches a nearly linear one
(N log(N)) for the ﬁner resolutions. In its current implementation the FMM-BEM uses a shared tree, thus reducing
the communication load at the expense of memory requirements.
The FMM-BEM has been parallelised using MPI and tested on a Opteron cluster with Quadrics connections,
displaying a very good scaling up to 64 CPUS, still keeping 90% of eﬃciency. Another test has been performed on
the Silica Science and Engineering High Performance Computing system at The University of Sydney. Silica is a SGI
Altix XE1200 Cluster with Inﬁniband connections in which each computing node has 8 processors. On this system,
taking the maximum load of a node (8 CPUs) as a reference, was always above 80%, up to 64 processors.
Because parallel eﬃciency is mainly aﬀected by geometrical mesh query and manipulation routines, more tests
with eﬃciency vs. number of particles and mesh density per particle are however still necessary.
3. Modeling Bubble Dynamics with the Boundary Element Approach
As in existing numerical models in the literature [7], the bubbles are modelled as non-viscous nearly dense-less
bodies immersed in a viscous matrix. Many implementations of such setting exist but they all need extremely high
numerical eﬀort to model a relatively low number of bubbles. For example the largest system modelled today with
FD or FE is composed by 1000 × 1000 × 1000 cells, which allows less than a hundred of highly resolved bubbles.
Other methods, such as spectral, do not allow the high and sharp viscosity ratio required by the exact setting. BEM is
instead the ideal setup for solving such kind of problems, allowing modelling already 1, 000 bubbles at high resolution
(128 elements per bubble) with a relatively little computational eﬀort, consisting in 64 processors and less than 24h
for calculating 1, 000 steps.
A ﬁrst example of such simulations is displayed in Figure 2, where 4 steps of the evolution of 625 regularly spaced
bubbles with diﬀerent radiiand negligible surface tension illustrate their collective behavior. Although each bubble
has a radically diﬀerent radius the resulting cooperative pattern resembles the one of a single coherent plume. This
highlights a striking characteristic of this model: the overall collective dynamics is unaﬀected by bubble heterogeneity.
Bubbles, instead, undergo a very strong deformation that depends on the relative position of the single bubble from the
axis of the collectively controlled diapirism, but is largely independent from the single bubble size. It is particularly
striking to observe that the ﬁnal stage of the model approximates a completely symmetric solution, which could be
obtained with a quarter sized setup, however the bubbles sizes are not symmetric respect to vertical planes, so the

1558

Gabriele Morra et al. / Procedia Computer Science 4 (2011) 1554–1562

Figure 2: Four snapshots of 625 bubbles rising. The bubbles, initially regularly spaced, deform and evolve in a complex fashion responding to the
surrounding ﬂow created by their collective forces

symmetric outcome is purely the results of the natural smoothing due the superposition of the far ﬁeld forcing of each
bubble.
While this simulation allows a detailed look at the single bubble morphology, the study of the long term behaviour
of a much greater set of bubbles can be more eﬃciently performed with the alternative approach described in the
following section.
4. Using the Green Functions of the Stokes ﬂow for Modelling the Collective behaviour of a Very Large Number
of Bubbles
Figure 3 represents the long term evolution of a very large number of particles, each representing one bubble with
diﬀerent size characterised by diﬀerent buoyancy compared to the external magma and undergoing a diﬀerentiated
drag. We assume here that the surface tension of the bubble restrains the geometrical deformation of the single
bubble, so the system is a diﬀerent end-member case compared to the last section where the surface tension was
instead negligible. Physically the predominance of the role of the surface tension arises in sets of particularly small
bubbles.
The calculations of ﬁgure 3 have been performed on a laptop on one processor in less than one hour. This
means that using an appropriate Parallel Multipole solver, such as the recently developed PetFMM, or alternative
implementations, it will be possible to scale this approach to many millions or tens of millions of particles, with the
possibility to study the interactions of very large sets of bubbles and investigate the possible emergence of waves
and other solitonic solutions, which might explain the observation of the regular low energy Strombolian and other
volcanic activities.
This simple approach is numerically comparable to a standard particle technique as the Vortex method [17, 18, 19].
The sum of the linear contribution of each particle’s kernel, deﬁned by the Stokeslet Green Functions, is performed
employing the Fast Multipole Method. As the particles tend to cluster, it is predictable that in the long term the bubbles
will coalesce. Although this has not been implemented yet, no technical complications are foreseen for adding this

Gabriele Morra et al. / Procedia Computer Science 4 (2011) 1554–1562

1559

Figure 3: Simulation of 100,000 bubbles each modelled as a rigid sphere. The conduit size is much bigger than the dimensions of the modelled
conﬁguration, therefore the model is laterally unbounded. The bubbles collectively join attracted by the presence of their neighbours. It is striking
how almost all bubbles merge into the collective dynamics, even when each one has a diﬀerent size and therefore diﬀerent buoyancy. The ﬂow
induced in the surrounding magma is the main driver of their dynamics. This model illustrates how a big sets of separate bubbles is able to
collectively rise and coalesce into a larger bubble.

extra feature. Deﬁning a critical distance threshold inferior to the sum of the radius of two neighbouring particles, it
will be possible to implement a merging “event” in which a particle whose volume is the sum of each bubble will be
produced.
A striking observation of the many bubbles models such as the one of Figure 3 is that the formation of a collective
morphology is mainly driven by the global induced ﬂow. Although the bubbles are diﬀerent, being characterised by
diﬀerent sizes, they are dragged and clustered by the ﬂow itself. This suggests that the global dynamics of bubbles is
described by fewer parameters representing the initial spatial distribution, maybe even disregarding particular bubble
size. We stress again that the bubble sizes are not symmetric respect to vertical planes, so the global symmetric
outcome is the result of the collective eﬀect of the bubbles and not by symmetric initial conditions.
We propose that the regular pulsation characteristic of Strombolian Activity has its origin in the non-linear collective behaviour of the bubbles [1, 2, 3]. However to establish the eﬀects of such behaviour in the dynamics of
Strombolian and other more general intricate magma, it is necessary to study in more detail the complex interaction
between bubbles, crystals and the background magma. The next section illustrates a method to integrate the non-linear
and temperature-dependent complexities of the magma rheology into this numerical setting.
5. Coupling Boundary Elements and ﬁnite diﬀerences for Modelling Thermal and Non-linear Magmas
Many works have been devoted to the study of the role of nonlinear rheologies in magma. Experiments have
shown how a slight variation of few tens of degrees in magma temperature produces several orders of magnitude
of variation in the viscosity. How such strong non-linearities in the dynamics of the rising bubbles and suspended
crystals might inﬂuence the models above is uncertain. We propose here a simple strategy to “perturb” the numerical
approach presented before through its coupling with a standard ﬁnite diﬀerence (FD) setup.
Figure 4 shows a simulation in which temperature was calculated in the FD background and advected using the
velocity ﬁeld from the Fast BEM solution projected to the Nodes of the FD mesh. By superimposing a FD Multigrid
advection-diﬀusion solver we simulate the thermodynamical evolution of the system, which is not accessible with the
BEM solver, and use it to change the rheology of the magma. In fact if each node of the grid represents a diﬀerent

1560

Gabriele Morra et al. / Procedia Computer Science 4 (2011) 1554–1562

Figure 4: Snapshot of a simulation of the rise of three bubbles modelled with Boundary Elements, surrounded by a FD mesh representing the
continuous temperature ﬁeld. The visualised colours are interpolated from the FD solution, red being the bubble interior temperature (here assumed
ﬁxed) and blue the background temperature controlled by a diﬀusion process. The bottom scheme represents the staggered scheme employed to
solve the feedback between Boundary Elements and FD. The velocity ﬁeld in the 3D space is deduced from the BEM solution and projected into a
ﬁnite diﬀerence grid where it contributes to the advection diﬀusion of heat in the medium. This approach allows setting non-homogeneous viscosity
in the 3D space and projecting than it back to the panels, changing the deﬁning coeﬃcient of the BEM solver.

Gabriele Morra et al. / Procedia Computer Science 4 (2011) 1554–1562

1561

local viscosity, the response of the magma to the moving bubble can be again recalculated using the particle solver, as
shown in [13]. This deﬁnition of the local rheology enables the application of the techniques described before to the
study of the non-linear response of the mantle to the immersed components.
In simple terms the forcing on the boundary of the bubble is classically expressed by
Δf1 = (ρBubble − ρMagma ) g z n,

(10)

where z is the depth of the conduit and g is the gravity acceleration, assumed vertical and constant: b = −g x/r.
The complex rheology is instead deﬁned at the bubble boundary through the reference viscosity: μ Magma , and the
bubble-magma viscosity ratio λ = μBubble /μ Magma . Because this ratio is virtually zero, being the bubble virtually
inviscid, the magma complex rheology will only inﬂuence the μmagma coeﬃcient. This method can be employed to
reformulate the Stokeslet response and the Boundary Element formulation embedding higher moments representing
the non-linearity of the magma dynamics. The drawback of this method is that it requires to calculate such response
in the entire ﬁlled 3D space and not only on the equations conveniently projected on the Boundaries or Particles. Still
this allows separating the less time consuming procedure (the calculation of the higher moments) on the FD nodes,
from the expensive calculations necessary to invert the system on the bubble boundaries.
6. Conclusions
We have presented a novel computational approach for modeling the interaction of a very large number of bubbles
immersed in magma. The method can be extended to any other system in which bubbles are suspended, such as
corn syrup, honey, many types of gelatine (solving the elasticity equation as well). We employed the fast multipole
acceleration to improve the traditionally slow Boundary Element approach, avoiding the calculation of the dense
matrix that characterises it.
Several examples of collective behavior of bubbles have been illustrated, from the highly resolved BEM model of
each bubble’s free surface evolution, to a simpliiﬁed formulation in which each bubble is replaced by sphere whose
linear response with the surrounding ﬂuid is entirely described by the Green Functions of the Stokes ﬂow, called
Stokeslets. We have shown how both methods show similar results illustrating how the bubbles always tend to cluster.
This important result must be tested in other cases for very large number of particles to determine at which lengthscale such clustering will break down and determine the interval between two manifestations of the bubble rise as in
the Strombolian Activity.
Observation of natural behaviour of the volcanos exhibiting Strombolian Activity indicates that they are really in
a state of marginal stability, as shown by the return of the system into the same pulsating mode after each destructive
explosive eruption. Whether the approach here proposed is able to explain the complexities and the emergence of
waves of bubbles from volcanic conduit can be determined only with much more testing. We have however shown how
this is a computationally feasible problem with the present available computational tools, combining the Boundary
Element, the Particle (Stokeslets) and the Finite Diﬀerence approaches.
7. References
[1] R.S.J. Sparks The dynamics of Bubble Formation and Growth in Magmas: a Review and Analysis Journal of Volcanology and Geothermal
Research, 3, (1978), Pages 1-37
[2] C. Jaupart and S. Vergniolle: Laboratory models of Hawaiian and Strombolian eruptions In: Nature, Vol. 331, Pages 58-60, 1988
[3] P. Allard and J. Carbonelle and N. Metrich and H. Loyer and P. Zettwoog: Sulphur output and magma degassing budget of Stromboli Volcano
In: Nature, vol 368, Pages 326-330
[4] N. Petford: Which eﬀective viscosity? In: Mineralogical Magazine, April 2009, Vol. 73(2), pp. 167191
[5] B.F. Houghton and C.J.N. Wilson A vesicularity index for pyroclastic deposits Bulletin of Volcanology (1989) 51:451-462
[6] S. Hurwitz and O. Navon: Bubble nucleation in rhyolitic melts: Experiments at high pressure, temperature, and water content In: Earth and
Planetary Science Letters 122 (1994) 267-280
[7] M. Manga and H. A. Stone: Buoyancy-driven interactions between two deformable viscous drops Journal of Fluid Mechanics (1993), vol. 256,
pp. 647-683
[8] L. Caricchi, L. Burlini, P. Ulmer, T. Gerya, M. Vassalli, P. Papale: Non-Newtonian rheology of crystal-bearing magmas and implications for
magma ascent dynamics In: Earth and Planetary Science Letters 264 (2007) 402419
[9] I. Sumita and M. Manga: Suspension rheology under oscillatory shear and its geophysical implications In: Earth and Planetary Science Letters
269 (2008) 468-477

1562

Gabriele Morra et al. / Procedia Computer Science 4 (2011) 1554–1562

[10] R.C. Kerr and C. Meriaux and J.R. Lister: Eﬀect of thermal diﬀusion on the stability of strongly tilted mantle plume tails Journal of Geophysical Research, Vol. 113, B09401, doi:10.1029/2007JB005510, 2008
[11] Drescher, Knut and Leptos, Kyriacos C. and Tuval, Idan and Ishikawa, Takuji and Pedley, Timothy J. and Goldstein, Raymond E.: Dancing
Volvox: Hydrodynamic Bound States of Swimming Algae In: Phys. Rev. Lett., vol 102, num. 16, pages 168101-5, 2009
[12] G. Morra and P. Chatelain and P. Tackley and P. Koumoutzakos: Earth Sphericity Eﬀects on Subduction Morphology In: Acta Geotechnica,
vol 4, number 2, pages 95-105, 2008
[13] Pozrikidis, C.: Boundary Integral and Singularity Methods for Linearized Viscous Flow (1992).
[14] Barnes, J. and Hut. P., A hierarchical O(N log N) force-calculation algorithm, Nature (1986), 324
[15] Greengard, L. and Rokhlin, V.: A Fast Algorithm for Particle Simulations. In: Journal of Computational Physics A (1987), Volume 73,
325-348
[16] Warren, M.S. and Salmon, J.K.: A parallel hashed Oct-Tree N-body algorithm. In: Supercomputing, 1993, Pages 12-21
[17] Hockney and J.W. Eastwood: Computer simulations using particles (1988)
[18] P. Koumoutsakos: Multiscale ﬂow Simulations using particles In: Annual Review of Fluid Mechanics, Vol. 37: 457-487, 2005
[19] P. Chatelain, A. Curioni, M. Bergdorf, D. Rossinelli, W Andreoni and P. Koumoutsakos: Billion vortex particle direct numerical simulations
of aircraft wakes In: Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering, Volume 197, Issues 13-16, Pages 1296-1304

8. Acknowledgements
Gabriele Morra thanks the Swiss National Science Found for the support through the Fellowship for Advanced
Researcher (PA0022-121475). Leonardo Quevedo thanks the Australian Research Council for ﬁnancial support (Discovery Grant). Dave A. Yuen is grateful to the American National Science Fundation and CMG programs.

