Available online at www.sciencedirect.com

ScienceDirect
Procedia Computer Science 108C (2017) 2141–2150

International Conference on Computational Science, ICCS 2017, 12-14 June 2017,
Zurich,
Switzerland
Learning Outcomes
Based
Evaluation of HPC

Learning
Based
Evaluation
Professional
Learning Outcomes
Outcomes
BasedTraining
Evaluation of
of HPC
HPC
Professional
Professional Training
Training
Nia Alexandrov1and Maria-Ribera Sancho1,2
Barcelona
Supercomputing
Center, Barcelona, Spain1,2
1
Nia
Alexandrov
1and Maria-Ribera Sancho1,2
2
Nia
Alexandrov
and
Maria-Ribera
Sancho
Universitad
Politècnica
de
Catalunya,
Barcelona,
Spain
1
Barcelona Supercomputing Center, Barcelona, Spain
1

1
Supercomputing Center,
Barcelona, Spain
nia.alexandrov@bsc.es,
maria.ribera@bsc.es
2 Barcelona
2Universitad Politècnica de Catalunya, Barcelona, Spain

Universitad Politècnica de Catalunya, Barcelona, Spain
nia.alexandrov@bsc.es, maria.ribera@bsc.es
nia.alexandrov@bsc.es, maria.ribera@bsc.es

Abstract
Supercomputing Centres worldwide, such as BSC, face the challenge of supporting a growing base
Abstract
of HPC users with little or no HPC experience and with mainly scientific background. In addition, HPC
Abstract
Supercomputing Centres worldwide, such as BSC, face the challenge of supporting a growing base
Supercomputing
worldwide,
such
faceobserved
the challenge
of supporting
a growing
training
centres feel Centres
the need
to respond
to as
theBSC,
clearly
convergence
of Data
Science base
and
of HPC users with little or no HPC experience and with mainly scientific background. In addition, HPC
of
HPC users with
little research
or no HPC
experience
and with
scientific
background.
In addition, HPC
Computational
Science
methods
into Data
and mainly
Compute
Intensive
Science methods.
training centres feel the need to respond to the clearly observed convergence of Data Science and
training
centres
feeltraining
the need
to respond
clearly
of Data and
Science
and
The goals
of the
evaluation
are to
to the
capture
the observed
impact of convergence
the training program
to afford
Computational Science research methods into Data and Compute Intensive Science methods.
an insight in theScience
personal
progress
of the attendees,
as well
as to provide
understanding
how to support
Computational
research
methods
into Data and
Compute
Intensive
Science methods.
The goals of the training evaluation are to capture the impact of the training program and to afford
the The
attendees
in the
implementing
the learned
work. The
paperand
presents
the
goals of
training evaluation
are methodologies/tools
to capture the impactinoftheir
the training
program
to afford
an insight in the personal progress of the attendees, as well as to provide understanding how to support
an
insight
in the
personaland
progress
of the
attendees,
well as to
provide
understanding
how evaluation
to support
work
by BSC
Education
Training
team
to designasa suitable
exit
evaluation
and follow-on
the attendees in implementing the learned methodologies/tools in their work. The paper presents the
the
attendees
in implementing
learned methodologies/tools
in their work. The paper presents the
to tackle
the issues
of on-the-jobthe
implementation
of training.
work by BSC Education and Training team to design a suitable exit evaluation and follow-on evaluation
work by BSC Education and Training team to design a suitable exit evaluation and follow-on evaluation
to 2017
tackle
theAuthors.
issues of
on-the-job
implementation
of training.
©
The
Published
by
Elsevier
B.V. Indicators,
Keywords:
Learning
Key
Performance
HPC Professional Training
to tackle the
issues Outcomes,
of on-the-job
implementation
of training.
Peer-review under responsibility of the scientific committee of the International Conference on Computational Science
Keywords: Learning Outcomes, Key Performance Indicators, HPC Professional Training
Keywords: Learning Outcomes, Key Performance Indicators, HPC Professional Training

1 Motivation
1
1.1.
Education and Training in BSC
1 Motivation
Motivation

1.1.
Education
and
BSC
of the central
missions ofin
as the leading Supercomputing centre in Spain is to train
1.1.One
Education
and Training
Training
inBSC
BSC

and educate researchers with HPC career path from academia and industry, and those from the
One of the central missions of BSC as the leading Supercomputing centre in Spain is to train
One of the
missions
BSC as the leading Supercomputing centre in Spain is to train
supercomputing
(SC)central
scientific
users’ofcommunities.
and educate researchers with HPC career path from academia and industry, and those from the
BSCresearchers
Education and
teampath
basesfrom
the academia
evaluationand
of HPC
professional
on
and educate
with Training
HPC career
industry,
and thosetraining
from the
supercomputing (SC) scientific users’ communities.
learning
outcomes
order tousers’
assess
the impact of its courses and the degree of on-the-job
supercomputing
(SC)inscientific
communities.
BSC Education and Training team bases the evaluation of HPC professional training on
BSC Education
and Training
evaluation
HPCPartnership
professional
on
implementation
by the trainees.
In theteam
pastbases
four the
years,
as part of the
fortraining
Advanced
learning outcomes in order to assess the impact of its courses and the degree of on-the-job
learning outcomes
in order
to assess
theofimpact
of its courses
andAdvanced
the degree
of on-the-job
Computing
in Europe
(PRACE)
and one
the designated
PRACE
Training
Centres
implementation by the trainees. In the past four years, as part of the Partnership for Advanced
*, BSC has
implementation
by participated
the trainees.in the
In development
the past fourofyears,
as partEuropean
of the Partnership
for Advanced
(PATC)
appropriate
HPC professional
training
Computing in Europe (PRACE) and one of the designated PRACE Advanced Training Centres
Computing
in Europe
(PRACE)
and partnership.
one of the BSC
designated
PRACE
Advanced
Training
curricula,
available
beyond
the PRACE
is building
its training
program
based onCentres
topics
(PATC)*, BSC has participated in the development of appropriate European HPC professional training
(PATC)*, BSC has participated in the development of appropriate European HPC professional training
curricula, available beyond the PRACE partnership. BSC is building its training program based on topics
curricula,
available beyond the PRACE partnership. BSC is building its training program based on topics
* http://www.bsc.es/PATC
*
*

http://www.bsc.es/PATC
http://www.bsc.es/PATC

1877-0509 © 2017 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V.
Peer-review under responsibility of the scientific committee of the International Conference on Computational Science
10.1016/j.procs.2017.05.135

Nia Alexandrov et al. / Procedia Computer Science 108C (2017) 2141–2150

2142	

derived from cutting-edge scientific research and development of models, software tools and simulation
environments for HPC and application areas. The PATC HPC curriculum as envisaged by the PATC
OMB (Operational Management Board) caters for users with varying degrees of HPC competence. One
may enter training at any level according to their knowledge, and by having achieved the learning
outcomes of the course, if desired, to progress on to courses at higher levels (often demanding skills
from courses at lower levels, as pre-requisites). The curriculum was designed to showcase the skills that
create understanding of the HPC ecosystem at an entry point through to acquiring the right level of
competence to use the SC technology at an advanced level (Sancho, 2016).
At BSC the courses cover wide subject areas. From workshops for the Tear-0 † systems,
through core HPC subjects providing access to BSC developed technology, to topics in Computational
Science and courses developing programing and analytical skills for the Big Data and Exascale
computing context.
In this respect, BSC has dual character – Education and Training. It is a research hub for early
stages researchers as well as postgraduate students, as nearly 30% of the Centre’s staff falls into this
category. With its four research departments spanning from Computer Science and Applications to Life
and Earth Sciences, the Centre’s various research areas demand the doctoral studies to be managed
under several doctoral programs awarded by several universities.
The Centre aims to create a stimulating educational environment for the development of the
next generation of HPC researchers. By combining HPC and Digital Science ‡ professional training
program with strong postgraduate studies in the context of a state-of-the-art supercomputing technology
and international research projects environment, the Centre has created a multidisciplinary learning
context (Sancho, 2016).
Mode of
teaching
Degree
Studies

Professional
Training

Approaches
-Degree route
integrated subject
modules – some
Compulsory
-Sequentially
increasing cognitive
complexity
-Formative and
Summative assessment
-Standalone courses by
design with potential
for student led
aggregation
-Prerequisites
informed, student
(home organization)
led sequence
-Diagnostic testing or
attainment of practical
skills based
certification

Overlaps

-Subject wise there
is a lot of common
ground
-Significant part are
Post Doc, PhD and
the number of
Science students
grows
-Significant % of
PATC attendees
describe themselves
as academics

Integration of results

Impact Assessment

-Long term career
Impact
Knowledge acquirement
and development of
meta-skills

-Trough curricula
integration
-Progression to higher
level of cognitive
complexity of same
subject (further
specialization or higher
degree)
-Employability of
students

-Broader Subject area
coverage

-Current demands driven
-Practical skills based
outcomes
-Subject specific fast
changing knowledge

-Impact is visible (if
tracked) at home
institution
-Kirkpatrick model of
training value
assessment

Table1. Comparison of Degree Studies and Professional Training
† Tier-0 systems, e.g. the 3 to 6 most advanced computing systems in Europe available for deployment and benchmarking of
prototypes at petascale level as well as porting, optimizing and peta-scaling of applications. (http://www.prace-ri.eu/)
‡ https://ec.europa.eu/futurium/en/content/mathematics-europe-report-open-consultation

	

Nia Alexandrov et al. / Procedia Computer Science 108C (2017) 2141–2150

This duality of the Centre’s teaching character, both an institution with significant postgraduate
studies and an outward looking professional training program, poses a challenge to the BSC Education
and Training team how best to evaluate the impact of the training program and define KPIs (Key
Performance Indicators) that reflect teaching environment targeting learners whose results traditionally
are integrated and assessed in a diverse manner (Table 1).
Although there is a significant overlap in the students’ profile and subject areas, the main
challenge is how to capture the impact of short, standalone courses and link training KPIs with the onthe-job implementation of acquired skills and knowledge. As best practice shows, just evaluation on its
own is unable to point to a solution. Right teaching methods, appropriate evaluation of training and
adequate post-training support have to be all employed in order to achieve meaningful results
(Kirkpatrick, 1996).

2 Key Performance Indicators and Evaluation of Professional
Training
2.1

Defining KPIs

KPIs as part of commonly employed business metrics are used to track performance at critical
institutional areas. Organisations usually use them as a tool to inform decision making on strategic goals
and as such, they are expected to be focused, measurable and reflecting customer success as outcome of
the institutional functions they define. As such, they have migrated from the strictly business
environment and in the past couple of decades have been used in Higher Education (HE) as part of
transparent and unified quality assurance measurement.
In order to make them a basis for inter-institutional performance comparison, used mainly in
league tables, KPIs have been reduced to highly aggregated data on student statistics measuring success
in terms of attracting the right profile student applicants and producing graduates with degrees at the
higher end of the scale (Martin, et al, 1998). In the process, very often the value of “cohesive evaluation
of education” (Terenzini, et al, 1994) takes a back seat and more financially orientated indicators are
brought forward (Georgiadou, 2012). On a positive note, KPIs can be used on subject or departmental
level, to analyse the global picture when developing quality policies, and to inform the implementation
of methodologies and procedures taking into account not only management statistics but also learning
outcomes and student satisfaction.

2.2

Evaluating Professional Training - Kirkpatrick model

In the context of professional training, the outcomes of a course are often assessed through
feedback forms/exit questionnaires that treat training as a business transaction and focus on the provider
performance by evaluating the immediate experience of the participant, e.g. delivery of training as
service rather than impact of learning in terms of relevance and transfer of knowledge to implementation
on-the-job. Although, the statistics on training organisation and the assessment of value-for-money, in
terms of cost per head, should not be completely ignored, this type of evaluation is more important at
the starting point of a training program and the evaluation should progress and mature with the maturity
of the program itself.
One very well established model of evaluation of professional training is the Kirkpatrick
model (Kirkpatrick, 1996). In his seminal work, Techniques for Evaluating Training Programs,

2143

Nia Alexandrov et al. / Procedia Computer Science 108C (2017) 2141–2150

2144	

published in 1957 and further revised and updated in 1996, Donald Kirkpatrick defines the four levels
of progression in evaluation of training and what type of information can be derived on each of them.
According to that model, level 1 – Reaction is the customer satisfaction feedback on the
different aspects of training delivery, e.g. topic, speaker, organisation and venue. Coupled with the
standard statistics of registered/cancelled attendees and some diversity and education/background
statistics that can be derived by a registration form, these are the most commonly used as evaluation of
training. This is very useful to gauge the overall satisfaction of the target audience but the fact remains
that it is a feedback on how the training organisation is performing in terms of organisation and teaching,
and it is not focussed on how the attendees are performing in terms of learning and possible
implementation of knowledge, as such, it is rather limited.
Although, the participants satisfaction is important as a factor to motivate them to study, this
type of evaluation gives very little understanding of the level of learning that has, or has not occurred.
After all, the fact that an instructor taught is no guarantee that a participant learned. To measure the level
of progression on behalf of the participants, Kirkpatrick names the second level Learning. He defines it
as assessing “knowledge acquired, skills improved, or attitudes changed” (Kirkpatrick, 1996). Even if
some understanding can be derived from exit questionnaires or specific practical activities, as outlined
in section 2.4, it is obvious to anyone engaged in education that learning can be fully measured by
assessment not evaluation. Marked assessment is not only dependent on subject specifics and assumes
homogeneity of the subjects to be fair, but also has credibility when it is based on well-established and
recognised grading systems. For practical reasons it is often missing from the training programs.
Level three, Behaviour is an evaluation of training in terms of impact of learning, and more
specifically the post-training on-the-job implementation, or as Kirkpatrick defines it, changed
“behaviour because of training”. When training participants external to one’s institution, a training
provider can receive a feedback on training impact only when working with the participants’ employer
or when a post-training learning community is established and maintained. BSC has the ability to gain
an understanding for its staff and students participating in the training courses by quality assurance
routines within their Personal Development Plan. Some general methods to trigger the participants’
interest in implementation of learned skills and support to that process are discussed further in section
2.4.
The forth level, Results is an evaluation of the alignment of the training results and the
business objectives of the trainee’s organisation measured through the positive outcomes due to
heightened skills set of the work force, its increased productivity and further related benefits. Kirkpatrick
recognises that the complexity of measuring the training impact significantly increases from one level
to the next.

2.3

Evaluating learning outcomes vs. delivery of training

With the progression from evaluating delivery of training to that of learning outcomes, to their
on-the-job implementation and finally the impact that can have on the institutional business objectives,
the evaluation of training becomes a significant factor in defining the KPIs related to training and
knowledge management in the organisation. It no longer focuses on how training is delivered in terms
of organisation and as service but on the benefits for the trainees by their ability to implement the skills
they have learned.
BSC is committed to provide an international high-level education and training program and
as part of that commitment a study of the learning outcomes from the centre’s courses, and how they
affect the transfer of knowledge into improved work methodologies/ routines is conducted.
The goals of the evaluation are to capture the impact of the training program and allow an
insight in not only the personal progress of the attendees but as well provide understanding how to
support the attendees in implementing the learned methodologies/tools in their work. The trainees

	

Nia Alexandrov et al. / Procedia Computer Science 108C (2017) 2141–2150

should be able to bridge the gap between the training classroom and the work/studies after that and to
develop the ability to recognise the context for direct implementation or re-design of a methodology/
tools solution. These skills are directly linked to the impact of training and should be perceived as a
learning outcome. Usually these skills are developed by using appropriate teaching methods over time,
which is possible in the context of a longer-term learning environment, e.g. university degree.

2.4

BSC methodology

In the context of BSC education and training program and initiatives there are two distinct
areas, one is the hosting of MSc and PhD projects that are evaluated and degrees are awarded by other
institutions, e.g. the universities where the students are registered. Another is the dissemination of HPC
expertise and skills through various networks, initiatives or project related training courses. In both
cases, the official assessment of achieved results happens somewhere else, the degree awarding
institution in the first and the home institution in the latter. Combined with the need to prescribe to not
only clearly defined but also widely acceptable assessment and grading system (as discussed in section
2.2), assessment of learning in professional training environment is not a very easily executed. This is
the reason why in BSC we have opted out of it on the training courses and focussed instead on evaluation
strongly influenced by the level 3 (Behaviour) of the Kirkpatrick’s model (Kirkpatrick, 1996).
This type of evaluation, is concentrating on the impact of learning and the ability to transfer
skills and methodologies from the classroom environment to the specific on-the-job environment. To
ensure successful transfer it is important to implement specific teaching methods. For example, most
of the BSC programming and tools courses have at the end hands-on sessions in which attendees can
bring their own problems and get advise on how to implement the learned skills in their work. Another
way to encourage attendees to reflect on how they can implement what they have learned is through the
exit questionnaire, asking them to think and list ways in which they would like to apply the new
methodologies or skills.
An important element of post-training support is opening channels of communication and the
availability of further study materials and courses which was possible to organise thorough our
participation in the PRACE training program and through the PRACE Training Portal§ repository of
teaching materials.
For the study, we are using combination of already existing and specifically designed
registration forms, exit and post-training questionnaires as information gathering tools.
2.4.1. Profiling the attendees with the PATC registration form
PATC OMB have designed a generic registration form with the intent to get the same profiling
information from all training events using it not just for the PATC courses. As the courses and seasonal
schools organised by PRACE are located across Europe, organised by multiple partners and have
different subject focus, having registration which consistently asks the same questions on HPC
background and reason to participate, accumulatively can afford understanding of who and why is
attending PRACE training.
The form has several sections relevant to our study, which outline the attendee HPC
experience in terms of self-evaluation of HPC know-how as beginner, intermediate or advanced level
which corresponds with the entrance levels of the PATC training courses. As well as their awareness of
systems architectures and size, and finally familiarity of parallel processing paradigms. These coupled
with the personal information on the current level of education regarding PhD studies and type of
§

http://www.training.prace-ri.eu/material/index.html

2145

2146	

Nia Alexandrov et al. / Procedia Computer Science 108C (2017) 2141–2150

employment such as academic, industrial or government affords the instructors some understanding of
the makeup of their classroom audience.
In order to be effective the form needs to ensure that supplying information cannot be avoided
which can be achieved by avoiding negative or neutral default option in the case of multiple choice
answers but ensuring that the key questions are mandatory to answer.
2.4.2. BSC exit questionnaire
With the start of this study, we have opted out from the standard PRACE exit questionnaire
for two reasons; first, in its essence the existing evaluation form is focused on training delivery instead
of learning outcomes with questions regarding venue, teaching style and pace of delivery. Second, as
the majority of the questions are multiple choice and for each question there is an “I don’t know” option,
it allows an easy opt out.
Our believe is that an exit questionnaire should create an opportunity for the attendee to start
a personal reflection on the impact of the course on their way of working, and how the new knowledge
and skills can be implemented on-the-job. This way of ending a training course is prescribing to the
Kirkpatrick’s evaluation model and more specifically is viewing training in terms of post-training
effectiveness defined by the model’s Behaviour (3rd) level and onwards.
Consequently, in the BSC exit questionnaire were included questions on course relevance to
one’s work, ability to reinforce or change their understanding of the topic, as well as the intention to
further apply the learned tools or methodology. Regarding the later, attendees were asked to give specific
details on what and how they intend to apply in their work.
2.4.3. Six months post-training BSC questionnaire
The six months-later questionnaire was designed to evaluate the confidence in understanding
gained during the course, to review if attendees had the possibility to implement the learned skills as
well as to inquire what type of post-training support they would find useful in view of the reasonable
amount of time that have passed after the end of their training. It is looking at the impact of learning as
self-evaluation and does not rely on information coming from the attendee’s institution or manager as
PATC courses, which constitute the majority of the BSC planned training program, are free of charge
and very often institutions are not engaged in formal customer – supplier relationship with BSC. This
means as well that the training centre does not work towards particular goals to train employees for
specific duties but rather is engaged in training attendees to increase their HPC knowledge and skills in
the program areas, regardless of their immediate work responsibilities.
Another reason not to rely on home institution assessment of impact of training is the fact
that in general, HPC professional courses have predominantly academic audience with MSc, PhD and
junior Post-Doctoral students and researchers taking the classes prior to entering industrial employment
or as part of their postgraduate studies. In the latter case, impact is couple of degrees removed from
practical results that can be viewed through publications but very often cannot be measured by increased
efficiency and productivity in the usual return of investment sense, professional training is mostly
viewed.

3 Results and Analysis
The study started in February 2016 and until February 2017, the combination of PATC
registration form and BSC designed exit questionnaire have been implemented over sixteen courses with
492 attendees and 342 exit questionnaire returns, which constitutes 69,51%.

	

Nia Alexandrov et al. / Procedia Computer Science 108C (2017) 2141–2150

3.1

Registration form

“I don’t know” option from the dropdown menu multiple choice answers, does not give much
information. It is not clear why people have chosen it especially when the question is not about very
specific technical information as systems architecture or number of nodes but is regarding the personal
knowledge and experience of the person. It seems that in some of the cases, people have opted for it
only because it is the default answer and it saves time to leave it checked in. As the results from the first
six months of the study show, 37% of all attendees have chosen the default option of “I don’t know” on
both questions for their HPC know-how and user profile (Figure 1A).
Abolishing the “I don’t know” option in the section “Your level of HPC know-how can be
considered as…” while keeping it mandatory will give better understanding of the actual background
level of the attendees on a particular course helping the instructors to gauge their audience ahead of the
course. It will also afford an understanding of the level of know-how of participants on the program as
a whole and if the “beginners” level attendees are gaining better general HPC awareness a priory of the
start of their professional training courses. With the trend of increased presence of computational
scientists on PhD and Post-Doctoral level on HPC professional training programs and the fact that their
supervisors are usually subject matter and not HPC specialists how to best advise them for the most
suitable training program is partially dependent on the accuracy of their self-assessed HPC
understanding (Figure1).

Figure 1, 1A: Profiling with the PATC
registration form: Answers to the questions on HPC know-how and user profile
In the section “Are you a developer, application user, sys-admin/support staff?” the “I don’t
know” answer option can be substituted with “I have no experience with HPC applications” which
covers the spectrum combined with the other available options:
 I mainly use HPC applications developed by others,
 I mainly write/maintain my own or community code,
 I'm both a code developer AND use HPC applications written by others,
 I mainly administer HPC systems and/or provide support for users,

3.2

Exit questionnaire and Post-training questionnaire

The BSC Exit questionnaire is purposefully very concise and focusing solely on the learning
outcomes of the courses. The first run indicates that it succeeds in the effort to encourage the attendees
to reflect on the way they may apply what they have learned.
From the 342 respondents, only 28 have responded negatively on the question “Have you been
introduced to a technique or a method that you would like to apply in your research/work or study
further?” by choosing, “I’m not interested to further pursue the topic” response. 67.5% from the rest

2147

2148	

Nia Alexandrov et al. / Procedia Computer Science 108C (2017) 2141–2150

have given further details on how they intend to do that. Preliminary analysis shows that the majority of
the responses reference the use of specific software packages or tools (Figure 2).

Figure 2. Exit questionnaire responses on the BSC courses between February’16 and February’17
For the BSC Post-training questionnaire it is still in its infancy to pronounce results with any
statistical significance as we do not have yet sufficient data. We have executed only one post-course
survey but early indicators are that the questionnaire is suitably designed to obtain the relevant data.
In the exit questionnaire, we have asked attendees to leave their email address if they agree to
be approached six months after the course to review the impact of the course on their research/work.
After a listless initial online response, we have approached all local attendees 134 PhD students from
UPC, UB, UPF and BSC researchers. 51% of them have responded (Figure 3). The obtaining of
sufficient responses to make the results of this survey statistically viable is a challenge. We need to
address it in the future or consider applying methodology that is based in analysing the subjectivity of
the participants instead. In this case, instead of trying to approach considerable numbers but to look for
an adequate representation of the body of attendees.

Figure 3. Respondents of the 6 months after the course questionnaire

	

Nia Alexandrov et al. / Procedia Computer Science 108C (2017) 2141–2150

Again, as with the exit questionnaire it was important to provoke a reflection on the on-thejob implementation of the learned skills. It was important to gauge the confidence to implement as well
as to assess the need of after-course care. The questions in this post-training questionnaire are clustered
in several groups, the perceived level at the beginning of the course; the use of learned skills; the course
impact on their work; and the need of after-course care.

Figure 4. Confidence to implement the learned skills/methods six months after the course
Figure 4 presents the responses on the main questions, although proper analysis can be made
after further runs of the post-training survey to ensure even spread of attendees from all courses. There
is a consensus among the current respondents that the preferred method of after-course care is “on-line
information for further studies” which clearly does not substitute the need of further face-to –face
courses which all of them stated that they would like to attend (Figure 5).

Figure 5. Need of after-course care – six months after the course responses

4 Conclusions
This evaluation exercise and its initial results indicate that when formulating Key
Performance Indicators in HPC professional training, the learning outcomes need to be considered as a

2149

Nia Alexandrov et al. / Procedia Computer Science 108C (2017) 2141–2150

2150	

main factor. They can be defined through representation of the relevance and value of content for
specific attendee and interest to further engage with the introduced topics. The impact of learning is
exhibited in the confidence to implement the learned skills and to compare or further develop presented
methodologies. These are not indicators easily translated to financial spreadsheet.
The need to define measurable indicators comes from their business related nature. In the
process, there is a danger to focus on assessing the monetary efficiency of training delivery,
concentrating mainly on the trainer’s performance in financial terms, and inadvertently to lose the global
picture and the fact that training as an educational service has in its core the care to support personal
development and skills attainment.
This work is far from over and the Education and Training team at BSC has in its immediate
plans the continuation of implementing the newly designed exit and post-training questionnaires as well
as including the rest of the stakeholders, at least from BSC, into the evaluation. A better understanding
of how well the current program is fulfilling its objectives can be obtained by interviewing the
supervisors and research leaders of the attendees and thus deriving the requirements for the expected
training outcomes.
In view of BSC’s dual character, both education institution and training provider, a deeper
look into the existing practices of designing the research staff’s individual training plan as part of the
on-boarding procedures is needed. New ways in which it is managed and monitored can be derived
from some of the results of the current evaluation and that require further scrutiny.

References
Cave, Martin, et al (1998), The use of KPI in HE: The challenge of the quality movement, Jessica
Kingsley Publishers, ISBN-13. 978 1 85302 395 3
Georgiadou, Elli (2012), The role of Key Performance Indicators in Higher Education Quality
Enhancement, keynote on the Quality Assurance in Higher Education Institutes: Leverage for
development
Conference,
November
2012,
Thesaloniki,
http://www.modip.teithe.gr/qaconference/uploads/presentations/keynote/georgiadou-1.pdf , accessed
January 2017
Kirkpatrick, Donald (1996), Great Ideas Revised, Training & Development, January 1996,
http://www.kirkpatrickpartners.com/, accessed January 2017
Sancho, Maria-Ribera, BSC Best Practices in Professional Training and Teaching for the HPC
Ecosystem, Journal of Computational Science, Volume 14, May 2016, Pages 74-77, ISSN 1877-7503,
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jocs.2015.12.004.
Terenzini, P. T., & Pascarella, E. T. (1994). Living with myths: Undergraduate education in
America, Change: The Magazine of Higher Learning, Volume 26, Issue 1, 1994,
http://www.tandfonline.com/doi/pdf/10.1080/00091383.1994.9938488?redirect=1, accessed January
2017Voronkov, A. (2004). EasyChair conference system. Retrieved from easychair.org

