Procedia Computer Science
Volume 80, 2016, Pages 999–1010
ICCS 2016. The International Conference on Computational
Science

Supermodeling in simulation of melanoma progression
W. Dzwinel1, A. .áXVHN1 and O.V.Vasilyev2

1

AGH University of Science and Technology, Department of Computer Science, Krakow, Poland
2
University of Colorado at Boulder, Department of Mechanical Engineering, Boulder, USA
dzwinel@agh.edu.pl, klusek@student.agh.edu.pl, oleg.vasilyev@colorado.edu

Abstract
Supermodeling is an interesting and non-standard concept used recently for simulation of complex and
non-linear systems such as climate and weather dynamics. It consists in coupling of a few ³imperfect´
sub-models to create the ³superior´ supermodel. We discuss here the supermodeling strategy in the
context of tumor growth simulation. To check its adaptive flexibility we have developed a basic, but
still computationally complex, 3-D modeling framework of melanoma growth. The supermodel of
melanoma consists of a few coupled sub-models, which differ in values of a parameter responsible for
tumor cells and extracellular matrix interactions. We demonstrate that due to synchronization of submodels, the supermodel is able to simulate qualitatively different scenarios of cancer growth than
those observed for sub-models when run separately. These scenarios correspond to the basic types of
melanoma cancer. This property makes the supermodel very flexible to follow and to predict real cases
of melanoma development through learning the coupling coefficients between sub-models from real
data. On the basis of preliminary simulation results, we discuss the prospects of supermodeling
strategy as a promising coupling factor between formal and data-based models of tumor.
Keywords: supermodeling, melanoma growth, computer simulation

Introduction
Mathematical and computer modeling of cancer is one of the greatest challenge in computational
biology and the principal goal of computational oncology. There are numerous overview papers and
books about modeling of tumor dynamics, which contain the knowledge and experience collected
during almost 40 years of history of cancer simulation (see, e.g., Bellomo, et al., 2008; Vittorio and
Lowengrub, 2010; Deisboeck and Stamatakos 2010; Deisboeck, et al., 2011; Barillot, et al., 2012;
Wolkenhauer, et al., 2014, Wodarz and Komarova, 2014). Though the progress in deeper conceptual
understanding of interactions between multiple multiscale processes taking part in the cancerogenesis
cannot be underestimated, the habitual application of cancer progression monitoring in clinical
medicine by employing computer simulations is still in an infant stage. Countless of interrelated
microscopic and macroscopic factors underlying tumor development from the moment of its birth to

Selection and peer-review under responsibility of the Scientiﬁc Programme Committee of ICCS 2016
c The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V.

doi:10.1016/j.procs.2016.05.396

999

Supermodeling in simulation of melanoma progression

W. Dzwinel, A. Klusek and O. Vasilyev

its irresistible proliferation throughout the whole organism, highly complicated growth medium, very
individual properties of invaded organism and its surrounding environment, and sensibility on current
physical conditions, make the whole system computationally irreducible. Therefore, making longer
and reliable prognosis about tumor dynamics just on the basis of mathematical models (even well
parametrized) and assumed initial conditions (even well defined) is a nonsense like that of weather
forecast for a week by using only existing numerical models and current measurements of
temperature, pressure, humidity and wind fields. The intuitive approach to make computer simulation
useful for predicting dynamics of such the complex systems is prediction/correction scheme, where
numerical simulations are continually verified by incoming data and are reinforced by data models. In
our opinion, data-based models will be in the future the key modeling components in predicting
behavior of biological systems. The formal mathematical models could play the role of an additional
knowledge, which defines more precisely the feature space topology for machine learning tools. In this
context, the following question can be posed: How complex and detailed such the models should be?
In machine learning, very complicated data models involving many parameters are difficult to
teach (adapt to data) and are prone to overfitting. Hence, their usefulness in generalization and
knowledge extraction can be questionable. Exactly the same deficiency concern intricate mathematical
models, which ± taking into account their nonlinearity ± may become completely out of control,
producing numerical and methodological artifacts. The state of the art in machine learning shows that
ensemble learning, where data models are made of coupled simple sub-models, results in the best
classifiers. It can be observed following the successes of boosting algorithms, neural networks
(Alpaydin, 2014) and recently the Hinton's deep belief networks (Hinton et al., 2006). Such the
ensemble models are adapted to data through learning both the parameters of sub-models and their
coupling strength.
Very similar concept can be applied when imperfect or approximate formal models of a complex
process are available. In this case, the supermodel is created as a combination of coupled sub-models
(van den Berge, et al., 2011). However, unlike in ensemble learning, only the coupling coefficients
between sub-models can be learned from data. The imprecise fit of their internal parameters can be
compensated assuming that they values are different in every sub-model. The role of coupling
coefficients is to correct sub-models imperfections and fit them to real data via synchronization.
Synchronization is the fundamental phenomenon, which allows for coordinating the dynamics of
multiple mutually coupled systems. In (Duane, et al., 2006; Yang, et al., 2006) the synchronization
mechanism was proposed as a method for data assimilation in climate science. Moreover, it was
shown in (Duane, 2009) that by coupling various imprecise models and by developing a supermodel,
one can increase substantially modeling quality and efficiency. The research teams from SUMO FET
European Project (http://projects.knmi.nl/sumo/) greatly extended the theory and practice of
supermodeling. They employ synchronization mechanism to construct ensembles of coupled models
consisting of perturbed variants of a single model, heterogeneous models and ensembles of
heterogeneous models (e.g. atmosphere and ocean models). It was shown that by assuming sufficient
coupling strength, the sub-models in the supermodel can synchronize and come into a consensus state.
Furthermore, when coupling coefficients are learned from data, the dynamics of the synchronized state
may provide a better representation of realistic behavior than the sub-models would do.
In this paper we propose to apply the supermodeling strategy for simulating cancer proliferation.
To this end we have developed a computational model of melanoma skin cancer. It is based on a
single phase continuum mathematical description and includes only the most important tumor growth
factors such as angiogenesis, vascular system remodeling, and basic interactions of tumor cells with
extracellular matrix. The mathematical model of cancer and its parameters were taken from the
previously published papers (Chaplain, et al., 2006; Welter and Rieger, 2010). We have embedded it
in the layout mimicking realistic skin structure. To simulate tumors of one centimeter in size or larger,
in a reasonable computational time, we have implemented our model in CUDA GPU environment.
Moreover, in contrast to the previous models (Chaplain, et al., 2006; Welter and Rieger, 2010), we

1000

Supermodeling in simulation of melanoma progression

W. Dzwinel, A. Klusek and O. Vasilyev

have added additional terms responsible for interaction between cancer cells and extracellular matrix
(Ramis-Conde, et al., 2008). Tumor growth speed is monotonically dependent on a constant, which
parametrizes this term. The supermodel of melanoma consists of coupled ³imperfect´ models differing
in the values of this parameter.
In the case of weather dynamics, the trajectories are located on a strange attractor of a finite
volume in the phase space. Meanwhile, the type of initial conditions of tumor growth is very different,
what may considerably influence sub-models synchronization. Therefore, we address here the question
if the competitive growth simulated by tumor sub-models will not hamper the synchronization
between them. In the following sections we present the main principles of supermodeling, the
computational model of melanoma, and simulation results of melanoma supermodeling. Finally, we
discuss the conclusions and the main directions of future work.

Supermodeling principles
Here we describe briefly the supermodeling basics with original notation from (van den Berge, et
al., 2011). Let us assume that the supermodel consists of a few ȝ=1,...,M imperfect sub-models, which
are described by a set of differential equations (ODE or PDE) of the form:
(1)
xȝ =(xȝ1,...,

xȝm)

where the state vector
consists of m dynamical system variables. We introduce
coupling terms between sub-models ȝ and v such as:
(2)
where coupling tensor
ensemble average, i.e.:

. The supermodel evolution xsumo with time t is described by the

(3)
.
A measure of the quality of synchronization between ȝ and v is the average of squared distance
between corresponding points. The synchronization error is defined as follows:
(4)
where: N is the number of computational grid nodes, lp is the number of PQ pairs, 'r is the grid
vector. The tensor of coupling coefficients C={CiPQ} is learned from the ³ground truth´ (data) vector
xgt by minimizing the weighed squared error E(C) in K following timesteps, i.e.:
(5)
where Ȗt is a discount factor, with 0<Ȗ< 1 (van den Berge, et al., 2011). The error function E(C)
measures a supermodel error and internal error (numerical error, imperfection of initial conditions etc.)
growth. The second term surpasses the first one at later times in the short-term integration (see (van
den Berge, et al., 2011)). The discount factor is included to decrease the contribution of internal error
increase.
There are many questions which have to be answered prior the supermodel development: How to
combine the individual models? By coupling of all or only some of the most important dynamical
variables? Or maybe by exchanging some fields or fluxes as it is in climate modeling (Hiemstra, et al.,
2012; Mirchev, et al., 2012)?. Can the supermodel follow changes in the real system, which are
unknown for sub-models but are present in training data? In this context the remarkable result was
published in (van den Berge, et al., 2011). It was shown that the supermodel made of imperfect Lorenz

1001

Supermodeling in simulation of melanoma progression

W. Dzwinel, A. Klusek and O. Vasilyev

systems was able to accurately follow the modifications of the Lorenz attractor. Another problem with
supermodeling is that there are many local minimums of E(C). As shown in (Hiemstra, et al., 2012),
with different starting conditions completely different values of C can be found. It appeared, however,
that the supermodels with these various minimums all produce very similar attractors close to the
³ground truth´ with about the same performance quality.
As shown in (van den Berge, et al., 2011; Hiemstra, et al., 2012), not all dynamical system
variables have to be coupled. Particularly, in case of some complexity constrains. Similarly, when the
sub-models are incomplete and are focused on different aspects of reality, some dynamical variables
cannot be shared by all of them. This is the reason to consider partially coupled sub-model ensemble
as well.
The supermodeling is a very interesting idea, which is used for climate and weather simulation.
However, unlike climate and weather, many complex biological phenomena ± such as tumor
proliferation ± represent growth dynamics. In this case, subsequent patterns produced by the system in
time are substantially different from those obtained in the past and in the future. Additionally, they
strongly depend on a growth setup and initial simulation conditions. Therefore, the question can be
addressed here if the supermodeling can also be used for modeling the systems representing growth
dynamics?

Melanoma supermodel
Melanoma belongs to the most aggressive and malignant tumors. This neoplasm has the highest
resistance to anticancer therapy in its advanced stage (seer.cancer.gov/statfacts/html/melan.html). Up
to now, to the best of our knowledge, there are no computer models of melanoma dynamics in an
environment simulating skin. To this end, we have developed a general model of melanoma on the
basis of models published in (Chaplain, et al., 2006; Ramis-Conde, et al., 2008; Welter and Rieger,
2010; Manning, 2013) and we have created a setup that mimics layers and vasculature of real skin (see
Fig.1).

Figure 1: The modeling layout with growing melanoma at the center. The skin tissue layers are depicted from
the top to the bottom as follows: stratum corneum, stratum spinosum, basement membrane, dermis and
hypodermis. The vasculature is shown in red and the tumor from black (the necrotic center) through blue (the
lowest concentration of cancer cells) to red (the highest concentration of cancer cells).

1002

Supermodeling in simulation of melanoma progression

W. Dzwinel, A. Klusek and O. Vasilyev

Of course, the skin vasculature is greatly simplified comparing to the real one. It is modeled by two
regular meshes of blood capillaries placed horizontally on the top of dermis and hypodermis,
respectively. Their nodes are connected by vertical blood vessels. The Dirichlet boundary conditions
are defined at the computational box boundaries. The tumor starts to growth at the center of the
epidermis just above the basement membrane. Our mathematical model of melanoma is of a single
phase continuous type (Vittorio and Lowengrub, 2010). It is described by means of mainly diffusionreaction partial differential equations. Their numerical integration simulate spatio-temporal evolution
of density fields of tumor angiogenic factors (TAF), oxygen, cancer cells and the process of vascular
remodeling. Below we enumerate the main equations describing the tumor model, which come mainly
from (Chaplain, et al., 2006; Welter and Rieger, 2010). The parameters description and their values,
adopted from (Ramis-Conde, et al., 2008; Chaplain, et al., 2006; Welter and Rieger, 2010; Barillot, et
al., 2012; Manning, 2013), are collected in Table 1.
a) The equation below describes endothelial cell dynamics, i.e., the vascular network evolution. We
denote by n the endothelial cell density per unit area, which spatio-temporal evolution is as follows:
(6)
b) The chemotactic migration is characterized by the X(c) function, which reflects the decrease in
chemotactic sensitivity with increased TAF concentration and:
(7)
c) Tumor angiogenic factors (TAF) concentration c decays close to blood vessels according to:
(8)
where ni=1 in the vicinity of endothelial cells and 0 elsewhere.
d) The following equation describes the spatio-temporal changes in fibronectin concentration, i.e.,
(9)
e) The equation below represents the evolution of density field of Matrix Degrading Enzymes (MDE).
Proliferating endothelial cells secrete MDE to penetrate the extracellular matrix (ECM).
(10)
f) The oxygen concentration is described by the Poisson equation, where o(B) is the blood O2 level:
(11)
g) Hypoxic tumor cells (which means that locally o<oTC) produce TAF. Its concentration c in the
tissue LVFRPSXWHGE\XVLQJ*UHHQV¶IXQFWLRQ-like method (Welter and Rieger, 2010) and
.
h) The following equation describes the evolution of density field of cancer cells:

(12)

(13)
i) where J is the tumor cell flux and b+ and b- are source (cell birth) and sink (cell death) terms,
respectively. The flux depends on the gradient of tumor pressure P:

1003

Supermodeling in simulation of melanoma progression

W. Dzwinel, A. Klusek and O. Vasilyev

(14)
In the model we have introduced an additional flux component equal to rbA (Ramis-Conde, et al.,
2008), which is responsible for interaction between degraded extracellular matrix and cancer cells.
Hence:
(15)
.
For each of skin layer we have assumed a proper diffusion coefficient Db of tumor cells by employing
experimental data from (Manning, 2013). The diffusion coefficients reflect various proliferation
speeds of tumor cells in corresponding skin layers.
j) The sources and sinks are computed from the following expressions:
,

(16)
(17)

k) The next equation represents time evolution of ECM density in tissue:
(18)
.
l) The evolution of density A of degraded ECM in the tissue is described by:
(19)
.
Hence, vector x=(b,n,c,f,m,M,A) is the state vector of all dynamical system variables representing
concentration fields in 3-D space. To implement the model in the most efficient way on multiple GPU
boards in CUDA environment, we have introduced some simplifications.
First of all, we approximated the formula described by Eq.12, by the Poisson equation, where c(B)
means the density of necrotic cells, hence:
.
Similarly, the equation responsible for oxygen distribution was also simplified and reads now:

(20)
(21)

where įc and įo are the constants (see Table 1). It is not necessary to solve this equations in every
timestep. We periodically match the concentration density of oxygen to follow the diffusion limits
reported in (Manning, 2013). Having in mind that dynamics of vasculature is a key process influencing
tumor dynamics, we included to our model the most of processes described in (Welter and Rieger,
2010) such as vessel sprout initiation, sprout migration, vessel wall degradation and their collapse.
In this paper, we consider partially coupled supermodel, i.e., the system of sub-models is linked by
a single variable, namely, density of tumor cells x1=b (see Eq.13). Because we are focused on the
growth type dynamics, we decided to construct the supermodel by using three melanoma sub-models
differing in values of rb (see Eq.15) i.e., rb=0.0001, 0.0003, 0.0005, respectively. Just rb is directly
responsible for the speed of tumor growth. We simulate the spatio-temporal dynamics of uncoupled
model consisting of three independent sub-models (i.e., C={0} and the supermodel is represented as
the average of sub-models (Eq.3)) and three supermodels connected by ³weak´ Cw1 , ³strong´ Cs1 and
³very strong´ Cvs1 coupling coefficients:

1004

Supermodeling in simulation of melanoma progression

Cw1 =

Cs1 =

W. Dzwinel, A. Klusek and O. Vasilyev

Cvs1 =

We have checked that increasing the number of sub-models l does not change substantially the
supermodel behavior. The coupling term between sub-models is turned on after 2500 timesteps to
avoid the amplification of large errors produced at the beginning of simulations and caused by
different tumor growth speeds for various rb. The quality of models synchronization is measured by
summing the synchronization error from Eq.4 over all sub-models pairs (ȝ,v) (ȝ,v =0,1,2).
Table. 1 Description of the melanoma model parameters and their values.

Symbol

Description

Value
(dimless)

Haptotactic cell migration (Chaplain, et al. 2006)
Diffusion of endothelial cells (Chaplain, et al. 2006)
Chemotactic cell migration (Chaplain, et al. 2006)
Chemotactic constant (Chaplain, et al. 2006)
TAF consumption rate (Chaplain, et al. 2006)
Production rate of fibronectin (Chaplain, et al. 2006)
Degradation rate of fibronectin (Chaplain, et al. 2006)
Production rate of MDE (Chaplain, et al. 2006)
Diffusion coefficient of MDE (Chaplain, et al. 2006)
Degradation rate of MDE (Chaplain, et al. 2006)
Diffusion coefficients of tumor cells in the air and various
skin layers ( StratumCorneum, StratumSpinosum, BM, Dermis,
Hypodermis) (Manning, 2013)
rb
Tumor cells chemoattractant sensitivity (Manning, 2013)
c norm
Normal and maximum density of tumor cells (Welter and
,
b
cbmax Rieger, 2010)
TTC Tumor cells proliferation time (Welter and Rieger, 2010)
Instantaneous reaction rate (Ramis-Conde et al., 2008)
Wb
oTC Tumor cells proliferation O2 threshold (Welter and Rieger,
2010)
Pb
Maximum stimulated mitosis rate (Ramis-Conde et al., 2008)
TTCdeath Hypoxic tumor cells survival time (Welter and Rieger, 2010)
oTCdeath Tumor cells hypoxia O2 threshold (Welter and Rieger, 2010)
Production rate of attractants (Ramis-Conde et al., 2008)
J$
PR$ Decay rate of the digested ECM (Ramis-Conde et al., 2008)
ȤD$ Diffusion coefficient of the digested (Ramis-Conde et al.,
2008)
Diffusion rate of TAF(Manning, 2013)
Dc
Diffusion rate of O2 (Manning, 2013)
Do
Timestep (min.)
't
_'r| Mesh size (ȝP
Nt
Number of timesteps in simulations.
Un
Dn
Ȥn
Gn
Kc
Ef
Jf
Dm
Hm
Xm
Db

0.28
0.0003
0.38
0.6
0.025
0.0125
0.1
0.0000015
0.0025
0.75
20; 83.0;
8.3; 41.5;
20;0.0166

1-3-5x10-4
1;2
10
0.5
0.1
0.001
100
0.01
0.5
0.01
0.01
1
1
6
20
2x104

The supermodel equations are discretized on a cubic grid of size 250x250x150, filling the layout from
Fig.1. We ran the simulations on a single node of GPGPU server, equipped with one CPU Intel Xeon
X5660, 2.8 GHz (6 cores) and 4 Nvidia boards EVGA GeForce GTX 580. As shown in Fig.2a, the
computational box is decomposed among 4 GPU boards. In Fig.2b, we present the execution time and

1005

Supermodeling in simulation of melanoma progression

W. Dzwinel, A. Klusek and O. Vasilyev

speedups related to 1 CPU and 1 GPU. Unfortunately, in our code the computations spending on
vessels remodeling should be executed on CPU. This considerably slows down the computations
performed on multiple GPU boards, that is why, the speedup equal to 1.4 on 4 GPUs is not
impressing. However, GPU implementation of the code, ensures adequate computational power for
our simulations giving in total speedup close to 60 comparing to a single core of Intel Xeon CPU.

a

b

System
Execution Speed-up
configuration
time
to 1 CPU

Speed-up to
1 GPU

[seconds]

Xeon X5660

12720

1

-

1 GTX580

307

41

1

2 GTX580

255

50

1,2

3 GTX580

224

56,7

1,37

4 GTX580

218

58,3

1,41

Figure 2. a) Domain decomposition of the computational box and b) Execution time and speedups obtained for
1000 timesteps.

Results of modeling
As shown in Fig.3a, the sub-models do not synchronize for uncoupled and weakly coupled models.
What is rather surprising, the weakly coupled supermodel synchronizes even worse than the uncoupled
model. Furthermore, these two models are deficient, producing nonphysical shifts in tumor cell
density (see Fig.3b). Conversely, the supermodels with strong and very strong couplings synchronizes
very well. The slow growth of synchronization error (see Eq.4) for the strongly coupled supermodel
after 8000 timesteps is caused by the fact that the tumor is expanding very fast and reaches the
boundaries of the computational box very quickly what introduces additional numerical errors. This
effect is negligible small for the very strongly coupled supermodel. As shown in Fig.4, due to small
synchronization error, also the standard deviation calculated in every node of computational grid for
all sub-models is the smallest for the strongly and very strongly coupled supermodels.

Figure 3: a) The synchronization error (Eq.4) for uncoupled model and weakly, strongly and very strongly coupled
supermodels. The red arrow shows the moment of turn on the sub-models coupling (Nt=2500 timestep). b) Tumor cell density
produces nonphysical shifts (see white arrows) for the first two cases.

1006

Supermodeling in simulation of melanoma progression

W. Dzwinel, A. Klusek and O. Vasilyev

Figure 4: The standard deviations calculated per each computational grid node for the supermodel with a) the strongest coupling
strength, b) the supermodel with strong and c) weak couplings. In d) we display the case with the lack of coupling between submodels. The supermodels (a) and (b) demonstrate very good synchronization between the sub-models. The largest error is
colored in rad while the lowest one in blue.

Figure 5: Snapshots from melanoma simulation obtained by: (a,b,c) independent melanoma models for rb=0.0001, 0.0003,
0.0005 after Nt=1.6-1.4-1.2x104 timesteps, respectively; d) the strongly coupled supermodel after Nt=104 timesteps; f) the very
strongly coupled supermodel after Nt=0.8x104 timesteps. The sizes of all tumors are approximately the same. Density of tumor
cells is displayed in colors from red (the highest) to blue (the lowest). The necrotic center is invisible. e) The micrograph image
of acral lentiginous melanoma is included for comparison (www.mmmp.org/MMMP).

1007

Supermodeling in simulation of melanoma progression

W. Dzwinel, A. Klusek and O. Vasilyev

In Fig.5(a,b,c) we display the structures of simulated tumor for three melanoma models which differ in
value of rb,. Greater value of rb means faster tumor proliferation. The models producing snapshots
from Fig.5a,b,c are uncoupled and were run independently. One can recognize growth structures
typical for nodular melanoma in which tumor spreads out both radially and vertically from its center,
and develops the cone-like shaped nodules.
In Fig.1 and Fig.5d,f we present the snapshots from simulation of melanoma progression produced
by very strongly and strongly coupled supermodels, respectively. In Fig.1 one can see the tumor
location in skin and its shape after approximately ten weeks of growth. The tumor penetrates dermis
and proceeds towards hypodermis. The real process of melanoma growth is preceded by a long lasting
silent phase of tumor cells development, which is neglected in our simulations. However, its growth
considerably accelerates in the later phases, so the estimated evolution time is quite realistic.
As shown in Fig.5d, the supermodel demonstrates qualitatively different behavior, which is similar
to the acral lentiginous melanoma (Fig.5e) with stronger bias to superfacial radial growth. This
qualitative difference can also be seen in Fig.6. One can see that for both the strong and very strong
supermodel cases, melanoma grows distinctly faster (see the scale of Y axes in Fig.6). Consequently,
for the single model with rb=0.0003 the necrotic center is developed much later than for the
supermodel. In Fig.5a,b,c the necrotic centers have not developed after Nt=1.4x104. Meanwhile, it is
quite large for the strongly and very strongly coupled supermodels after Nt=104 timesteps. By further
increase of the coupling strength one can obtain the situation from Fig.1, where superficial growth
dominate over vertical tumor expansion. This way the various types of simulated melanoma can be
potentially obtained by setting different values of coupling factors in the supermodel. It shows the
supermodel high flexibility to follow (by minimization of the cost function from Eq.5) the real
scenario of melanoma growth, which can be hidden in data.

Figure 6: The plots showing tumor growth dynamics ± the number of tumor cells with iteration number Nt (time) ± for the
supermodel from Fig.4d and the single model with rb=0.0003 (Fig.4b).

Conclusions
It is widely expected (e.g. (Bellomo, et al., 2008; Deisboeck, et al., 2011; Wolkenhauer, et al., 2014))
that planning cancer treatment in oncology of the future will be based on mathematical tumor models.
We postulate here that these models could simulate only the key processes influencing tumor
dynamics, and should be as simple as possible. The simplified tumor models can be combined to
create the supermodel ± a flexible coarse-grained modeling framework. All the fine-grained tumor

1008

Supermodeling in simulation of melanoma progression

W. Dzwinel, A. Klusek and O. Vasilyev

features and other unpredictable events, accompanying its proliferation and not included in the submodels, are hidden in data. Just the supermodel coupling coefficients, learned from data according to
the prediction/correction scheme ± similar to that used in weather forecast and climate modeling ± will
represent these latent tumor features. In this paper we demonstrate the results, which testify only the
first part of this postulate. To this end we have developed the numerical 3-D model of melanoma by
assuming the computational layout, which mimics the real structure of skin. Then we have created its
supermodel by coupling three sub-models differing in values of a single parameter responsible for
tumor growth. We observe that for the uncoupled and weakly coupled sub-models both radial and
vertical growth rates are approximately the same. Meanwhile, the strongly and very strongly coupled
sub-models synchronize each other and produce qualitatively different scenarios of melanoma growth.
For relatively high coupling strength the radial growth of tumor begin to dominate. Depending on the
values of the coupling coefficients we have obtained simulation results mimicking recognized
melanoma types: nodular (Fig.5a), lentigo maligna (Fig.5f), and acral lentiginous melanoma (Fig.5d).
The fourth type, i.e., superficial spreading melanoma, we have obtained for even stronger coupling.
All of these observations show that the supermodel can be fit to the various scenarios of tumor growth.
The second part of our postulate will be verified in the nearest future in a similar way as it was
demonstrated in deliverables of SUMO EU project. First, we plan to check in what extent the PDE
based supermodel can predict the behavior of the ³ground truth´, represented by more advanced model
of tumor or a model which exploits completely different computational paradigm (e.g., the PAM
SDUWLFOH DXWRPDWD PRGHO :FLVáR HW DO  ']ZLQHO HW DO  7KH H[SHULPHQWV ZLOO EH
performed for sub-models of various complexity to find the most parsimonious supermodel, which
could be a part of a future system for planning cancer treatment. Second, we will try to couple our
model with real data coming, e.g., from tumor tomography images.
However, to use our supermodeling scheme for making diagnosis of realistic cancer dynamics it
should be enforced by diagnostic methods, e.g., based on in vivo nanosensors and new MRI imaging
techniques (such as in (Chen, et al., 2015)), which will be developed and widely available in the
future. They should allow to measure simultaneously the concentrations of tumor cells and oxygen in
many locations distributed in the tumor mass. These measurements could be used directly in the
prediction/correction learning scheme of the supermodel coupling coefficients.
Acknowledgements: This research is financed by the Polish National Science Centre (NCN), project
DEC2013/10/M/ST6/00531. Thanks are due to Professor Dr Arkadiusz Dudek from University of
Illinois Cancer Center for his valuable comments and encouragement.

References
1. Alpaydin, E. (2014). Introduction to machine learning. MIT press. pp. 640
2. Barillot, E., Calzone, L., Hupe. P., Vert, J.P. and Zinovyev, A. (2012). Computational systems
biology of cancer. CRC Press, pp.. 461
3. Bellomo, N., Li, NK., and Maini, PK. (2008). On the foundations of cancer modelling: selected
topics, speculations, and perspectives. Mathematical Models and Methods in Applied Sciences.
18(04), 593-646
4. Chaplain, M.A., McDougall, S.R. and Anderson, A.R.A. (2006). Mathematical modeling of tumorinduced angiogenesis. Annu. Rev. Biomed. Eng. 8, 233-257
5. Chen, L.Q., Randtke, E.A., Jones, K.M., Moon, B.F., Howison, C.M. and Pagel, M.D. (2015).
Evaluations of Tumor Acidosis Within In Vivo Tumor Models Using Parametric Maps Generated
with AcidoCEST MRI. Molecular Imaging and Biology. 1-9
6. Deisboeck, T.S., Stamatakos, GS. (2010). Multiscale cancer modelling. CRC Press, pp.484

1009

Supermodeling in simulation of melanoma progression

W. Dzwinel, A. Klusek and O. Vasilyev

7. Deisboeck, T.S., Wang, Z., Macklin, P., and Cristini, V. (2011). Multiscale cancer modeling.
Annual review of biomedical engineering. 13
8. Hinton, G.E., Osindero, S. and Teh, Y.W. (2006). A fast learning algorithm for deep belief nets.
Neural computation. 18(7), 1527-1554
9. Duane, G.S., Tribbia, J.J. and Weiss, J.B. (2006). Synchronicity in predictive modelling: a new
view of data assimilation. Nonlinear Processes in Geophysics. 13, 601±612
10. Duane, G.S. (2009). Synchronization of extended systems from internal coherence. Phys.Rev.E.
80, 015202
11. Hiemstra, P.H., Fujiwara, N., Selten, F.M., and Kurths, J. (2012). Complete synchronization of
chaotic atmospheric models by connecting only a subset of state space. Nonlinear Processes in
Geophysics. 19(6), 611-621
12. DzwiQHO::FLVáR5<XHQ'$0LOOHU6 PAM: Particle Automata in modeling of
multi-scale biological systems. ACM Transactions on Modeling and Computer Simulation. 26(3),
A20, 1-21
13. Manning, C.S. (2013). Heterogeneity in melanoma and the microenvironment. PhD Thesis,
University College London, January 2013
14. Mirchev, M., Duane, G.S., Tang, W.K.S and Kocarev, L. (2012). Improved modeling by coupling
imperfect models. Commun. Nonlinear Sci. Numer. Simul. 17(7), 2741±2751
15. Ramis-Conde, I., Chaplain, M.A. and Anderson, A.R. (2008). Mathematical modelling of cancer
cell invasion of tissue. Mathematical and Computer Modelling. 47(5), 533-545
16. van den Berge, L.A., Selten, F.M., Wiegerinck, W. and Duane, G. (2011). A multimodel ensemble
method that combines imperfect models through learning. Earth System Dynamics, 2(1), 161±177
17. Vittorio, C., Lowengrub, J. (2010). Multiscale modeling of cancer: an integrated experimental and
mathematical modeling approach. Cambridge University Press, pp.278
18. Welter, M. and Rieger, H. (2010). Physical determinants of vascular network remodeling during
tumor growth. The European Physical Journal E. 33(2), 149-163
19. :FLVáR 5 ']ZLQHO : <XHQ '$ 'XGHN $=  $ QHZ PRGHO RI WXPRU SURJUHVVLRQ
based on the concept of complex automata driven by particle dynamics. Journal of Molecular
Modeling. 15(12), 1517 ±1539
20. Wodarz, D., and Komarova, N.L. (2014). Dynamics of cancer: mathematical foundations of
oncology. World Scientific, pp.514
21. Wolkenhauer, O., Auffray, C., Brass, O., Clairambault, J., Deutsch, A., Drasdo, D., Gervasio, F.,
Preziosi, L.,Maini, P., Marciniak-Czochra, A., Kossow, C., Kuepfer, L., Rateitschak,K., RamisConde, I., Ribba,B., Schuppert, A., Smallwood, R., Stamatakos, G., Winter, F., Byrne, H. (2014).
Enabling multiscale modeling in systems medicine. Genome Med. 6(3), 21
22. Yang, S-C., Baker, D, Li, H., Cordes, K., Huff, M., Nagpal, G., Okereke, E., Villafane, J., Kalnay,
E. and Duane, G.S. (2006). Data Assimilation as Synchronization of Truth and Model:
Experiments with the Three-Variable Lorenz System. J. Atmos. Sci. 63, 2340±2354

1010

