Available online at www.sciencedirect.com

Procedia Computer Science 18 (2013) 2454 – 2457

2013 International Conference on Computational Science

A Decision Making Support System for Ocean-Bottom
Seismometer Position Based on GIS
Guangping Zhanga,b, Chenxiao Zhangb, Zhong Xiea*
a

China University of Geosciences, No.388 Lumo Road, Wuhan 430074, China
b
Qinzhou University, NO.89 South Xihuan Road, Qinzhou 535000, China

Abstract
As the Ocean-Bottom Seismometer (OBS) in the engineering work put in difficulties and position inaccurate practical
problems, the position support systems for OBS has been designed and developed to accurately record the process,
accurately locate the submarine position of OBS, for the recovery services. This system mainly consisting of GIS platform,
application modules and graphical user interface. First, we describe the methodologies of OBS launch position in this
system. And then the Schematic overview of the position support system is designed. A position model which determines
the location of OBS on the seabed presented. Finally, the implementations are illustrated with application figure to
familiarize users with the system and its usage. The main advantage of the system is that it considers the demand of
lightweight for Spatial Data Engine, integrates GIS engine, achieves with hierarchical modular method.
access under
CC BY-NC-ND
license.
©
© 2013
2013 The
TheAuthors.
Authors.Published
Publishedby
byElsevier
ElsevierB.V.
B.V.Open
Selection
and/or
peer-review
under responsibility of the organizers of the
Selection
and
peer
review
under
responsibility
of
the
organizers
of
the
2013
International
Conference on Computational
2013 International Conference on Computational Science
Science

Keywords: Position system, GIS, OBS ;

1. Introduction
Ocean Bottom Seismometer (OBS) is a seismometer that is designed to record the earth motion under oceans
and lakes from man-made sources and natural sources [1]. OBS position is very important aspect in the
experiment of observation, directly affecting the OBS data recovery and post-processing. As the complexity of
water movement in the ocean, the gap which is from OBS reach the location to the delivery point by designing
will have a larger gap, up to 300 meters. If the delivery means of water surface is directly used, the bias will be
even greater. The recovery success rate is not high. If the specific location of OBS on the seabed is calculated,
you can select the appropriate location upon the survey ship to command the release of OBS, and very easy to
find the target surface of the OBS. The developed countries and the developing country have established their
systematic organizations and applied the advanced information software systems to improve the operation

* Corresponding author E-mail address:xiezhong68@gmail.com.

1877-0509 © 2013 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. Open access under CC BY-NC-ND license.
Selection and peer review under responsibility of the organizers of the 2013 International Conference on Computational Science
doi:10.1016/j.procs.2013.05.421

Guangping Zhang et al. / Procedia Computer Science 18 (2013) 2454 – 2457

2455

efficiency in OBS position. QIU et al. designed the direct wave, the actual OBS position is determined through
method of inversion [2]. HAJIME et al. published an article, the use of acoustic positioning system and
temperature-depth of the conductivity data to solve OBS position [3]. Zen proposed a new method using the
range between OBS and the survey boat to calculate the position of OBS, and analyzed some factors which
affect the positioning precision [4]. HU presented a new high - precision pseudo range measurement method.
The precision is achieved by bit synchronization, frame synchronization, code track algorithms and carrier
aided technique [5]. WANG De-gang et al. discussed the three dimension location theory based on USBL and
GPS principle and also analyzed the resources of USBL positioning data errors such as installation error,
acoustic error and the error caused by ship attitude movement [6]. TANG et al. combined calibration of an
ultra-shore baseline, GPS with the underwater acoustic positioning system. A method of space range
intersection is used in calculating the position of underwater transponder [7]. Nowadays, GIS is more and more
globalized and popular. Especially, in the fields of special-purpose system, applications of GIS have brought
much vitality to GIS development. It has also shown a great potential in decision-making support [8]. Therefore,
it is meaningful and important to develop GIS-based system software for the Ocean-Bottom Seismometer
position. So, we developed GIS-based computer tool, aiming to provide easy-to-use and visual display for
position system, to achieve accurate and precise services for OBS position.
2. Designed of system
2.1. Schematic overview of the OBS position system
The OBS position system is designed to meet the actual requirements of the OBS position. It consists of
support data, GIS engine platform, business logic module and presentation. It is as illustrated in Fig. 1.
Technical advantages of the system as follows: using GIS architecture that is lightweight, flexible four tier
architecture, it is easy to realize development and maintenance of business logic.
Graphical User Interface

Survey lines module

OBS launch module

OBS position module

Gun point stations module

MapGIS/Sql engine

OpenGL/Mesa 3D
GIS
Engine

PROJ.4

Geographic
Database

System
Resource
Database

GDAL/OGR

Posiitiion
Support
Database

Fig. 1. The schematic overview of decision making support system

2456

Guangping Zhang et al. / Procedia Computer Science 18 (2013) 2454 – 2457

2.2. Maintaining the Integrity of the Specifications
three Application modules as follows:
I
Survey lines module: This module is designed to manage the Survey vessel navigation and distance
monitoring and provide quick inquiries of these data.
Gun point & Stations module: One of the most important tasks in this software is to determine the gun point
& stations locations of the operating target.
OBS launch module: Upon completion of the survey line design, gun point design, station design for the
OBS can be launched in operation.
2.3. The model of OBS position
The ships were sailing with the measured line around the OBS transponder where the directions are in the
north, the east and the south. Were measured point absolute coordinates X Y Z, and the transponder relative
coordinates (x, y, and z).Through the acoustic position measurement and the statistical processing, the distances
are measured form the transducer to the four directions of space transponder distance S1 S2 S3 S4 .
1) The observation position equation of four-point spatial intersection:
(X

X 1 )2

(Y

Y1 ) 2

(Z

Z1 ) 2

S12

(X

X 2 )2

(Y

Y2 ) 2

(Z

Z 2 )2

S2 2

(X

X 3 )2

(Y

Y3 ) 2

(Z

Z 3 )2

S 32

(X

X 4 )2

(Y

Y4 ) 2

(Z

Z 4 )2

S4 2

2) Obtain the coordinates of OBS transponder
According to the least-squares principle, the precise coordinates of the transponder (X, Y, Z) is obtained. By
the least squares principle, the fellow formula can be obtained.
Using the matrix B

X=(BT B)-1BT L
L, find the correct values of X
Y
0
X=X + X

2

Z.

Y=Y 0 + Y
Z=Z0 +

Z

3

Then iteration to calculate the geographic coordinates of the transponder (X, Y, Z) which is the actual spatial
coordinate of OBS.
3. System implementation
The system designed in this paper provides an interactive and intuitive geographic interface providing users
easy access to information and offering technological transparency, visual interaction with data and position of
the OBS received decision support.
As shown in Fig. 2, the main interface contains three part frames. The first part is the system menus and
toolbars, many which allow the users to quickly execute map operation, environment data management. The
second Part is the GIS layer control. The users can easily enable or disable the visibility of any GIS layer. The
users can also add or delete any layer which you selected. The third part is the map display area, in which all
geographically referenced data can be display visually in static or dynamic way. Users can easily interact with
the contents of the data or run sub-modules by clicking buttons, to acquire their own concerned results.

Guangping Zhang et al. / Procedia Computer Science 18 (2013) 2454 – 2457

2457

Fig. 2. Graphical user interface for the decision making support system.

4. Conclusion
A position support system for Ocean-Bottom Seismometer based on GIS designed and presented in this
study. A position model presented, in this paper, and practiced in the Practical applications. Using the GIS
system, the data management and visualization can also be easy designed and implemented in the system in a
simple and efficient development model. All these aims are to provide a powerful OBS positioning support tool
for the position and reclaim services.
Acknowledgements
The author would like to thank our teachers who provided constructive suggestions and comments, the
Department of Education of Guangxi Zhuang Autonomous Region for their support under the Research
Projects 201010LX453, and the Qinzhou city for their support under the scientific research and technological
development projects 2011813901.
References
[1] F. Rinaudo, E. Agosto, P. Ardisone, GIS and Web-GIS, commercial and open source platforms: general rules for cultural heritage
documentation, XXI International CIPA Symposium, Athens, Greece, 2007.
[2] QIU Xuelin, ZHAO Minghui, et al., Ocean Bottom seismometer and Onshore Offshore seismic experiment in northeastern south
China sea, Geotectonica et Metallogenia, 2004, p. 28 35.
[3] HAJIME SHIOBARA,et al., Precise Positioning of Ocean Bottom Seismometer by Using Acoustic Transponder and CTD, Marine
Geophysical Researches, 1997, p. 199 209.
[4] ZHEN Fanxiang. OBS range positioning theory and its accuracy analysis, china science and technology information, 2010, p. 31-34.
[5] HU Hui. Study on GPS Receivers Pseudo Range Measurement, GNSS World of China, 2008, p.22-26.
[6] WANG De-gang et al., The localization theory and corresponding correction methods of USBL, Marine Sciences, 2011, p. 77-81.
[7] TANG Qiu-hua et al. calibration of ultra-short baseline acoustic positioning system, Technical Acoustics, 2006, p. 281-287.
[8] Y. Li, Z. Chen, C. Huang, et al., Ecological information system in Zhelin Bay based on GIS, Journal of Oceanography in Taiwan
Strait, 2005, p. 216-222.

