Procedia Computer Science
Volume 51, 2015, Pages 914–923
ICCS 2015 International Conference On Computational Science

Optimised robust treatment plans
for prostate cancer focal brachytherapy
John M. Betts1 , Christopher Mears1 , Hayley M. Reynolds2,3 , Guido Tack1,4 ,
Kevin Leo1,4 , Martin A. Ebert5,6 , and Annette Haworth2,3
1

Faculty of Information Technology, Monash University, Australia
{john.betts,chris.mears,guido.tack,kevin.leo}@monash.edu
2
Department of Physical Sciences, Peter MacCallum Cancer Centre, Victoria, Australia
{Hayley.Reynolds,Annette.Haworth}@petermac.org
3
Sir Peter Mac Department of Oncology, The University of Melbourne, Victoria, Australia
4
National ICT Australia
5
Radiation Oncology, Sir Charles Gairdner Hospital, Nedlands, Western Australia
6
School of Physics, University of Western Australia, Perth, Western Australia

Abstract
Focal brachytherapy is a clinical procedure that can be used to treat low-risk prostate cancer
with reduced side-eﬀects compared to conventional brachytherapy. Current practice is to manually plan the placement of radioactive seeds inside the prostate to achieve a desired treatment
dose. Problems with the current practice are that the manual planning is time-consuming and
high doses to the urethra and rectum cause undesirable side-eﬀects. To address this problem,
we have designed an optimisation algorithm that constructs treatment plans which achieve the
desired dose while minimizing dose to organs at risk. We also show that these seed plans are
robust to post-operative movement of the seeds within the prostate.
Keywords: optimization, brachytherapy, simulation

1

Introduction

The prostate gland is a walnut-sized organ forming part of the male genitourinary system. The
prostate gland is positioned at the base of the bladder, adjacent to the rectum, with the urethra
running through its center. Prostate cancer is one of the most commonly occurring cancers in
males [1]. The incidence of prostate cancer varies according to a variety of factors including
age, ethnicity and living conditions. Males in the developed world are most at risk with an
incidence of the order of 100 new cases detected per 100,000 males annually [8].
There are a range of treatment options for localized prostate cancer (that is, cancer which
has not spread beyond the prostate) including surgery and radiotherapy. Brachytherapy is a
specialized type of radiotherapy whereby tiny radioactive sources (seeds) are implanted, either
permanently or temporarily, into the prostate to kill the cancer cells. The side eﬀects from this
914

Selection and peer-review under responsibility of the Scientiﬁc Programme Committee of ICCS 2015
c The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V.

doi:10.1016/j.procs.2015.05.225

Optimised robust treatment plans for prostate cancer focal brachytherapy

Betts et al.

type of treatment vary [5]. In the case of low dose-rate permanent brachytherapy (LDR), acute
urinary toxicity typically peaks in the ﬁrst few months following implant with most patients
returning to pre-treatment function by 12-18 months [18]. One third of LDR cases however have
persistent troublesome urinary toxicity at 12 months and this is associated with larger doses
to the entire prostate [5, 9]. Rectal complications are rare as long as the seeds are not placed
in or adjacent to the rectal mucosa [14]. However, rectal bleeding is observed in approximately
one quarter of patients receiving LDR 1 to 3 years after implantation [15, 14].
The common approach for treatment of prostate cancer uniformly targets the entire gland.
In contrast, focal therapy has been proposed as an alternative treatment approach that focuses
treatment on only those parts of the prostate shown on biopsy or with magnetic resonance
imaging (MRI), to contain disease [10, 17]. Biopsy or imaging studies may not locate all tumor
deposits, however, and since prostate cancer is a multi-focal disease it is necessary to consider
not only the detected lesions but any low-volume disease that may also be within in the prostate.
As a consequence, focused therapy has been proposed as a form of focal therapy whereby, in
addition to delivering high doses to speciﬁc regions of the prostate, the remaining gland receives
smaller doses suﬃcient to control low-volume disease [7].
A disadvantage of focal plans is that they are diﬃcult to design using the current manual
techniques. A further complication is that post-operative movement of the seeds can have a
larger negative impact on the eﬃcacy of the treatment than in conventional brachytherapy, due
to the reduced safety margins resulting from having fewer seeds.
In response to these challenges, this paper introduces an optimization algorithm, using a
biological model for its objective, to determine the optimal placement of the radioactive seeds
to achieve high rates of tumor control with minimal dose to the urethra and rectum. Simulation
modelling is then used to determine the eﬃcacy of the focal models in the presence of postoperative seed displacement using estimates of variability obtained directly from clinical data.

2
2.1

Background
Prostate Brachytherapy

The brachytherapy treatment studied in this paper is based on the permanent implantation of
seeds containing radioactive iodine I-125. The seeds are inserted into the patient as strands
within a needle whereby active seeds are separated by inert spacers. Thus, multiple seeds can
be inserted using a single needle. The treatment procedure consists of the following stages:
images of the patient’s prostate are made axially (parallel with the template in Figure 1) using
trans-rectal ultrasound at 5mm intervals to create a 3 dimensional map of the prostate; the
images of the prostate at each axial slice are overlaid with a 5mm by 5mm template deﬁning
potential needle locations; a plan is created by adding seeds to each slice using the template,
following seed placement rules (described in Section 3.2), until a suﬃciently high dose and Tumor Control Probability (TCP) is obtained over the prostate (the TCP calculation is described
in Section 2.2). Current clinical practice is to determine seed placement manually using commercially available software to calculate radiation dose; ﬁnally, using the seed plan, needles are
prepared and inserted into the patient via the perineum under anaesthesia using trans-rectal
ultrasound guidance as shown in Figure 1.

2.2

The Radiobiological Model for TCP Calculation

TCP is calculated using the radiobiological model developed by Haworth et al. [6, 7]. For
a prostate divided into N independent subsections (voxels), the TCP is calculated at each
915

Optimised robust treatment plans for prostate cancer focal brachytherapy

Betts et al.

Urethra

Template

Prostate
Bladder

Needles containing
seeds for implantation
Ultrasound Probe
Rectum

Figure 1: Prostate brachytherapy operation showing major relevant body structures, seeds
implanted in prostate, seed containing needles and template.
subsection for a given level of radiosensitivity, αk , using Equations 1 to 5.
i
Tcrit
TCP i (αk ) = exp −ρi Vi exp −αk di RE i + ln(2)
,
(1)
Tpot
Where
i
i
1 − exp −2λTcrit
2βRi λ
(μ + λ))
1 − exp(−Tcrit
RE i = 1 +
×
−
i
2λ
μ+λ
αk (μ − λ)(1 − exp(−λTcrit ))
(2)
and
ln(2)
Ri
di =
−
.
(3)
λ
αk λTpot
Inputs to the model are: for the ith subsection, ρi is the tumor cell density; Vi is the volume;
i
is the time
di is the eﬀective dose delivered to the subsection; Ri is the initial dose rate; Tcrit
at which the radioactive source ceases to be eﬀective; the constant λ is the rate at which the
radioactive source decays; Tpot is the potential tumor regeneration rate; μ is the exponential
repair rate, β is an additional radiosensitivity parameter based on tissue type. RE i is the
eﬀectiveness of the radiation dose in retarding cell proliferation.
TCP for the whole prostate at a given level of radiosensitivity αk is then evaluated as the
product of the individual subsections, thus:
N

TCP (αk ) =

TCP i (αk ).

(4)

i=1

Tumors in a single patient may contain cells with a heterogenous distribution of radiosensitivities. To account for this variability, αk is modelled as having a discrete log-normal distribution by applying weighting factors w(αk ) [6]. Taking the expected value over αk gives:
n

TCP =

w(αk )TCP (αk ).

(5)

k=1

The radiation dose at each subsection, Ri , is the sum of radiation received from each of the
implanted seeds, and is determined by the distance of the subsection from the seed according
to the TG-43 formalism [13].
916

Optimised robust treatment plans for prostate cancer focal brachytherapy

3

Betts et al.

Automatic Focal Treatment Planning

The aim of focal brachytherapy is to deliver higher doses of radiation to the regions of the
prostate where tumorous tissue is more likely. In typical clinical practice the seed plans are
created manually, requiring the user to balance the conﬂicting objectives of protecting sensitive
tissue, respecting planning constraints, and achieving a high chance of sterilizing any tumor.
To develop a satisfactory plan manually takes an experienced practitioner around an hour.
This is too long to permit intra-operative planning, whereby plans are created at the time of
the implant. Currently, a two-stage process is required, where ﬁrst the planning ultrasound
volume study is conducted, and some weeks later the implant is made [12]. Furthermore, the
software used to create plans does not support the use of the biological model described in Section 2.2, which is a novel feature of our approach. Previous authors have applied mathematical
optimization and genetic algorithms to seed placement [11]; however, the optimization is based
only on dose distribution and not on a biological approach.
Our goal is to construct satisfactory robust seed plans quickly and automatically. The user
speciﬁes the patient data and planning constraints, and the system provides a seed plan within
seconds, allowing experimentation with diﬀerent planning objectives.

3.1

Regional Model of the Prostate

Calculating the TCP requires that the tumor cell density is known for every part of the prostate.
This information can be derived from multi-parametric MRI, however, for the purpose of this
study, the prostate is divided into several regions, with a single tumor cell density for each
region [7]. Ultrasound scans taken at 5mm intervals give a sequence of 2-dimensional slices of
the prostate, showing the contour of the organ itself and the urethra. The prostate is divided
into upper, central and lower slices, each of which is further divided into 16 rectangles, yielding
48 regions. Each region is assigned one of ﬁve tumor cell density categories according to tumor
location statistics determined in a study by Zeng et al. [19].

3.2

Placement Constraints

The following constraints apply to all patients. The seeds must be placed on the points of a
5mm x 5mm x 5mm grid. This restriction is due to the method of delivery, where needles are
inserted through a metal template with holes at a 5mm x 5mm spacing. Ultrasound scans are
also taken at a 5mm spacing. No two seeds may be adjacent – at neighbouring grid points –
in any axis-aligned direction. That is, the presence of a seed at a grid point excludes a seed in
any of its six orthogonal neighbours. The intention is to prevent a local region from having a
severely high dose.
No needle may be placed in the central column of grid points. The grid is aligned such that
the central column coincides with the urethra; any needle placed in this column risks perforating
the urethra. Seeds must be placed inside the planning target volume (PTV), or within 5mm
posteriorly or laterally of the PTV. However, seeds may not be placed between the PTV and
the rectum. A needle must not deliver only one seed – if a needle is used, it must deliver at
least two seeds. This restriction is so that the tissue is not perforated any more than necessary.
The following dose-related constraints are user-customizable for each patient. The dose
received by the urethra must be restricted. For example, the volume of the urethra which
receives a dose of more than 217 Gray (which is 150% of the conventional, whole gland prescribed
dose of 145 Gray) is limited to at most 10%. There may be more than one such constraint on
the urethral dose, each at diﬀerent thresholds. Similar constraints may be placed on the dose
received by the rectum.
917

Optimised robust treatment plans for prostate cancer focal brachytherapy

Betts et al.

Figure 2: Sample seed plan created by the optimization algorithm

3.3

Focal Plan Optimization Algorithm

The goal of the optimization algorithm is to determine where to place the seeds so that the TCP
is as high as possible while maintaining the dose threshold constraints on critical structures such
as the urethra and rectum. In addition to the dose constraints, there are anatomical restrictions
that restrict certain arrangements of seeds. Figure 2 shows a seed plan created by the algorithm,
illustrating seed positions, dose contours and physical structures.
Algorithm 1 improves a plan using local search. It begins with an empty conﬁguration,
having no seeds, and at each step it takes the best conﬁguration found so far. It calls Improve
to try to ﬁnd a small change that leads to a better conﬁguration. The Improve procedure is
called repeatedly until a suﬃciently good plan is found or the user terminates the search.
Algorithm 1 Improve on the current best seed plan.
1: procedure Improve(best)
2:
conﬁguration ← best ; prob ← U (0.1, 0.9)
3:
for needle N in conﬁguration do
4:
delete needle N from conﬁguration with probability prob
5:
loop:
6:
moves ← random selection of 150 moves
7:
for m ∈ moves do
8:
c ← conﬁguration resulting from executing m on conﬁguration
9:
compute doses for c
10:
if c violates constraints then
11:
discard c and continue with next move
12:
compute TCP of c
13:
if TCP of c is better than TCP of conﬁguration then
14:
conﬁguration ← c
15:
goto loop
16:
if TCP of conﬁguration is better than TCP of best then
17:
return conﬁguration
18:
else return best
A needle N is a set of seeds on the 5mm x 5mm x 5mm grid that have the same x and y
coordinates. The set of moves considered on line 6 is the union of possible needle additions,
rearrangements and replacements. The possible needle additions are every combination of
918

Optimised robust treatment plans for prostate cancer focal brachytherapy

Betts et al.

needle position (i.e. x-y pair) inside the target volume and seed positions on that x-y line, such
that none of the seeds lie on adjacent grid positions. The possible needle rearrangements are
every possible rearrangement of the seeds inside a single needle in the conﬁguration. That is,
for a chosen needle, the seeds inside that needle are discarded and a new set is inserted as for
a needle addition above. The possible needle replacements are every possible combination of a
deletion of an existing needle and an addition (as above) of a new needle.

3.4

Search Eﬃciency

To make the search as eﬃcient as possible, we limit the amount of recalculation required when
considering moves. The moves are chosen so that they preserve as many of the constraints as
possible, to reduce the number of moves that must be trivially discarded. The seeds-per-needle
constraint is always preserved, and when adding seeds, only legal seed positions are considered.
It is straightforward to add any other constraints, e.g. limiting the total number of seeds or
needles, or the dose in a certain region.
The dose calculation is the most computationally expensive part of the search algorithm.
The dose at each sample point is computed as the sum of the doses contributed by each seed
in the plan, giving a complexity for a naive algorithm of O(nm), with the number of seeds n
typically between 50 and 100 and the number of sample points m typically in the thousands.
We take advantage of the additive nature of the dose calculation. When a seed is added to
the plan, only the new seed’s contribution is added, keeping the contributions from the existing
seeds. (Similarly, for a removed seed we subtract its contribution.) This incremental approach
reduces the complexity to O(m).
In addition, some care is taken to make the dose calculation itself as eﬃcient as possible.
The major expense of the calculation is the evaluation of a piecewise-linear function deﬁned by
a lookup table. We experimented with several methods of calculating this function, ultimately
unrolling the entire lookup loop into a series of simple branches.
Using these techniques, the optimization algorithm can ﬁnd suﬃciently good plans within
a few seconds in all cases we have tried, including those in Section 5.

4

Post-operative seed displacement

Discrepancies commonly occur between the planned seed placement and the actual, postoperative, seed location. This is due to a number of factors including deformation of the
prostate as needles are inserted, swelling, inaccuracy in needle placement, and post-implant
seed migration [3]. This discrepancy has the potential to signiﬁcantly aﬀect the radiation dose
distribution to the prostate and surrounding organs and structures [16, 2]. Because the focal
plans proposed in this research are designed to deliver location-speciﬁc radiation doses as well
as a lower dosage to the prostate overall, seed displacement has the potential to undermine the
eﬃcacy of this form of treatment. To address this, the amount of seed displacement observed
in clinical patients is modelled from (pre-operative) treatment plan and the post-operative
computed tomography (CT) images. The eﬃcacy of the clinical plans created manually and
the focal plans obtained using computational optimisation are then evaluated subject to the
modelled seed displacement.

4.1

Comparing Pre- and Post-operative Seed Plans

To evaluate the post-operative displacement in the x, y and z axes, the seeds in the pretreatment plan are matched to those in the post-operative CT images by creating pairs of seeds
which minimise the total squared displacement across the entire prostate. Algorithm 2 uses
simulated annealing to match the pairs. Pre-treatment of the data is limited to the creation
919

Optimised robust treatment plans for prostate cancer focal brachytherapy

Betts et al.

of dummy seeds to obtain an equal number of pre and post operative seeds. The cause of this
anomaly is due to (a) seed migration out of the prostate via blood vessels or (b) the insertion
of extra unplanned seeds during the implant surgery when a radiation oncologist determines
that additional dosing is required to a certain region in theatre.
Algorithm 2 Find pairing between pre- and post-operative seed positions.
Inputs Ipre and Ipost are vectors of tuples (xi , yi , zi , ki ) where xi , yi , zi are the seed location
and ki is an indicator variable where ki = 1 if the seed is real and ki = 0 if the seed is a
dummy.
procedure FindPairing(Ipre, Ipost)
maxseeds ← max(M, N )
if N > M then append (maxseeds − M ) dummy (0,0,0,0) seeds to Ipre
if N < M then append (maxseeds − N ) dummy (0,0,0,0) seeds to Ipost
Iprei ← (xi − x, yi − y, zi − z, ki ) ; Ipostj ← (xj − x, yj − y, zj − z, kj )
count ← 0
repeat
Smax ←

maxseeds
i=1

(kPre i )(kPost i )||Iprei − Iposti ||2

choose a1 , a2 uniformly from (0, maxseeds)
swap Iposta1 and Iposta2 ; calculate Sswap as for Smax
if Sswap < Smax or random U [0 , 1 ] > 1 − exp( −count
) then
Λ
Smax ← Sswap
else undo swap
count ← count + 1
until Smax unchanged for T iterations

4.2

Analysis of Post-operative Displacement of Clinical Plans

The clinical plans of the patients selected for this study were analysed to determine the distribution of post-operative seed displacement that had occurred in actual treatments. 10 patients
were selected for this study; their selection is described in Section 5. Seed displacement for
all patients in each of the x, y and z directions is approximately normally distributed, having
mean 0mm and standard deviation approximately 3.8mm. Distributional form was conﬁrmed
by visual inspection and by a normal probability plot for each data set. These results were
consistent with those obtained by Bues et al. [3], using visual inspection on a small data set. In
the robustness analysis of the focal plans following, the treatment plans are subject to normally
distributed displacements and the eﬀect on TCP and dose to organs at risk is analysed.

5

Evaluation of Focal Plans

Three focal plans were designed for clinical patients who had previously received conventional low dose-rate brachytherapy over the whole prostate. Ten consecutive patients were
selected from the Peter MacCallum Cancer Centre for this retrospective Human Research Ethics
Committee-approved study. The focal plans are: FocalA, where the objective is to achieve TCP
of 0.90 - 0.95, with the volume of urethra receiving 125% of conventional dose less than 10%;
FocalB is based on FocalA but allowing the planner to edit the machine-optimised plan; FocalC
is computed with a TCP objective of 0.80 - 0.85. The performance of these focal plans and
the original clinical plan is evaluated under diﬀerent levels of post-operative displacement. For
920

Optimised robust treatment plans for prostate cancer focal brachytherapy
Tumor Control Probability

Urethral dose > 217Gy

Rectal dose > 145Gy
2.5

0.8

0.4

2.0

TCP
0.4

Clinical
FocalA
FocalB
FocalC

0.2

Volume cc

0.5

Proportion

1.0

0.6

1.5

0.3

1.0

0.2

0.5

0.1

0.0

0.0

0.0
0

1

2

3

4

5

Standard Deviation Seed Displacement (mm)

Betts et al.

0

1

2

3

4

5

Standard Deviation Seed Displacement (mm)

0

1

2

3

4

5

Standard Deviation Seed Displacement (mm)

Figure 3: TCP, urethral and rectal doses as function of seed displacement
comparison, the original clinical plan is also evaluated under the same conditions.
The TCP indicates the eﬀectiveness of the brachytherapy treatment. The proportion of the
urethra receiving a dose equal to or greater than 217 Gray (150% of the conventional, whole
gland prescribed dose), and the volume of the rectum receiving a dose equal to or greater than
145 Gray (100% of the conventional dose), indicate the risk of adverse side eﬀects [4]. The
focal plans were created using each patient’s 3 dimensional map of the prostate in x = 2mm, y
= 2mm, z = 5mm voxels, with each voxel assigned an initial clonogen number indicating the
probability of ﬁnding tumor cells in that voxel. Other parameters in the TCP calculations are
from [7].
The generated focal plans in all cases require signiﬁcantly fewer seeds and needles than the
clinical plans. The clinical plans required, on average, 85 seeds and 28 needles whereas Focal
plans A and B required 73 seeds and 23 needles, resulting in lower overall radiation dosage to
the prostate as well as less trauma caused by the brachytherapy operation. The focal plans all
achieved the desired TCP values.

5.1

Robustness of clinical and focal plans to post-operative seed displacement

To test the robustness of the treatment plans, we simulated displacements that typically occur
post-operatively. Each plan was subject to varying levels of seed displacement and the eﬀect on
performance measures recorded. Displacements were simulated as normally distributed random
variables in each of the x, y and z directions, having mean 0 and standard deviations of 1, 2,
3, 4, 5mm. Every seed was displaced in each trial. 100 trials were run at each level and the
average value of each performance measure calculated.
The TCP for each plan as a function of seed displacement is shown in Figure 3. It can be
seen that TCP values for all plans degrade as seed displacement increases. The clinical plan and
Focal plans A and B are robust to small amounts of displacement with a very small eﬀect on
TCP observed for small displacements. Even at the largest displacement tested, these plans all
maintain TCP values in excess of 0.62 (as indicated in the ﬁgure), which is the minimum TCP
required with the current set of input parameters for a high degree of biochemical control [7].
Focal plan C degrades more rapidly than the other plans, and at higher levels of displacement
results in TCP values below the minimum required for biochemical control. Thus it is likely
that these plans would not be acceptable in clinical settings without measures in place to ensure
post-implant accuracy.
921

Optimised robust treatment plans for prostate cancer focal brachytherapy

Betts et al.

Figure 3 also illustrates how focal plans could reduce potential side eﬀects of brachytherapy.
It is evident for all plans that as post-operative seed displacement increases the amount of radiation to the urethra and the rectum also increases. The focal plans, by design, produce very
small levels of radiation in the urethra and rectum, and preserve this even as seed displacement
increases. In the case of the urethra, the proportion receiving 150% of the conventional, whole
gland prescribed dose is about half that given by the clinical plan, with this proportion remaining constant as seed displacement increases. For rectal doses, the advantage of focal plans is
even greater, with doses approximately one third of that given by the clinical plan across all
levels of seed displacement.

6

Summary and Conclusion

This paper has presented an algorithm for optimizing the seed placement for focal brachytherapy
treatment. It enables plans to be created more quickly than current manual methods, to focus
the radiation dose on known tumor locations while keeping a lower radiation dose on other
regions of the prostate.
We have also demonstrated that the focal plans generated by the algorithm are robust to
post-operative movement of the seeds, within the range of variability that is observed in clinical
practice. Overall, the focal plans oﬀer high treatment eﬃcacy and reduced radiation dose in
the tissue in the urethra and rectum.
The next stage of research is to better integrate the optimization with the robustness modelling in order to obtain patient treatment plans that minimize radiation dose to surrounding
organs even in the presence of post-operative seed displacement.
Acknowledgements The authors would like to thank A/Prof Scott Williams who contributed to the project design. This work was supported by PdCCRS grant 628592 with
funding partners: Prostate Cancer Foundation of Australia, Radiation Oncology Section of
the Australian Government of Health and Ageing and Cancer Australia. This work was also
sponsored by the Australian Research Council grant DP110102258. Dr Reynolds is funded
by a Movember Young Investigator Grant awarded through Prostate Cancer Foundation of
Australia’s Research Program. NICTA is funded by the Australian Government through the
Department of Communications and the Australian Research Council through the ICT Centre
of Excellence Program.

References
[1] AIHW 2013. Prostate cancer in Australia. Canberra: Australian Institute of Health and
Welfare, 2013.
[2] Luc Beaulieu, Louis Archambault, Sylviane Aubin, E Oral, Richard Taschereau, and Jean
Pouliot. The robustness of dose distributions to displacement and migration of 125 I permanent seed implants over a wide range of seed number, activity, and designs. International
Journal of Radiation Oncology · Biology · Physics, 58(4):1298–1308, 2004.
[3] Martin Bues, Edward J Holupka, Paul Meskell, and Irving D Kaplan. Eﬀect of random
seed placement error in permanent transperineal prostate seed implant. Radiotherapy and
oncology, 79(1):70–74, 2006.
[4] Brian J. Davis, Eric M. Horwitz, W. Robert Lee et al. American Brachytherapy Society
consensus guidelines for transrectal ultrasound-guided permanent prostate brachytherapy.
Brachytherapy, 11(1):6–19, 2012.
[5] Peter Grimm, Ignace Billiet, David Bostwick et al. Comparative analysis of prostatespeciﬁc antigen free survival outcomes for patients with low, intermediate and high risk
922

Optimised robust treatment plans for prostate cancer focal brachytherapy

[6]

[7]

[8]
[9]

[10]

[11]

[12]

[13]

[14]

[15]

[16]

[17]

[18]

[19]

Betts et al.

prostate cancer treatment by radical therapy. results from the prostate cancer results study
group. BJU International, 109:22–29, 2012.
Annette Haworth, Martin Ebert, David Waterhouse, David Joseph, and Gillian Duchesne. Assessment of I-125 prostate implants by tumor bioeﬀect. International Journal of
Radiation Oncology · Biology · Physics, 59(5):1405–1413, 2004.
Annette Haworth, Scott Williams, Hayley Reynolds, David Waterhouse, Gillian M. Duchesne, Joseph Bucci, David Joseph, Sean Bydder, and Martin Ebert. Validation of a radiobiological model for low-dose-rate prostate boost focal therapy treatment planning.
Brachytherapy, 12(6):628–636, 2013.
IARC. Globocan 2012: Estimated cancer incidence, mortality and prevalence worldwide
in 2012. http://globocan.iarc.fr. Retrieved 2014-12-16.
Mira Keyes, Stacy Miller, Veronika Moravan, et al. Predictive factors for acute and late
urinary toxicity after permanent prostate brachytherapy: Long-term outcome in 712 consecutive patients. International Journal of Radiation Oncology · Biology · Physics, 73(4):
1023–1032, 2008.
Stephen Langley, Hashim U. Ahmed, Bashar Al-Qaisieh, et al. Report of a consensus
meeting on focal low dose rate brachytherapy for prostate cancer. BJU International, 109
(s1):7–16, 2012.
Eva K Lee, Richard J Gallagher, David Silvern, Cheng-Shie Wuu and Marco Zaider. Treatment planning for brachytherapy: an integer programming model, two computational approaches and experiments with permanent prostate implant planning. Physics in Medicine
and Biology, 44(1):145–165, 1999.
Subir Nag, Jay P. Ciezki, Robert Cormack et al. Intraoperative planning and evaluation of permanent prostate brachytherapy: report of the American Brachytherapy Society.
International Journal of Radiation Oncology · Biology · Physics, 51(5):1422–1430, 2001.
Mark J Rivard, Bert M Coursey, Larry A DeWerd, et al. Update of AAPM Task Group
no. 43 report: A revised AAPM protocol for brachytherapy dose calculations. Medical
physics, 31(3):633–674, 2004.
Kurt M Snyder, Richard G Stock, Suzanne M Hong, Yeh Chi Lo, and Nelson N Stone.
Deﬁning the risk of developing grade 2 proctitis following 125 I prostate brachytherapy using
a rectal dose–volume histogram analysis. International Journal of Radiation Oncology ·
Biology · Physics, 50(2):335–341, 2001.
Nelson N Stone and Richard G Stock. Long-term urinary, sexual, and rectal morbidity in
patients treated with iodine-125 prostate brachytherapy followed up for a minimum of 5
years. Urology, 69(2):338–342, 2007.
Richard Taschereau, Jean Roy, and Jean Pouliot. Monte Carlo simulations of prostate
implants to improve dosimetry and compare planning methods. Medical physics, 26(9):
1952–1959, 1999.
Massimo Valerio, Hashim U. Ahmed, Mark Emberton, et al. The role of focal therapy in
the management of localised prostate cancer: A systematic review. European Urology, 66
(4):732–751, 2014.
Scott G. Williams, Jeremy L. Millar, Gillian M. Duchesne, Michael J. Dally, Peter L.
Royce, and Ross M. Snow. Factors predicting for urinary morbidity following 125 iodine
transperineal prostate brachytherapy. Radiotherapy and Oncology, 73(1):33–38, 2004.
Jianchao Zeng, John J Bauer and Seong K Mun. Modeling and mapping of prostate cancer.
Computers & Graphics, 24(5):683–694, 2000.

923

