Procedia Computer Science
Volume 51, 2015, Pages 443–452
ICCS 2015 International Conference On Computational Science

Agent Based Model and Simulation of MRSA Transmission
in Emergency Departments
Cecilia Jaramillo1 , Manel Taboada3 , Francisco Epelde2 , Dolores Rexachs1 , and
Emilio Luque1
1
Department of Computer Architecture & Operating Systems
Universitat Autonoma de Barcelona, Bellaterra, 08193, Barcelona, Spain
cjaramillo@caos.uab.es, dolores.rexachs@uab.es, emilio.luque@uab.es
2
Medicine Department, Hospital Universitari Parc Taul´ı
Universitat Autonoma de Barcelona, Sabadell, 08208, Barcelona, Spain
fepelde@tauli.cat
3
Tomas Cerda Computer Science School
Universitat Autonoma de Barcelona, Sant Cugat, 08714, Barcelona, Spain
manel.taboada@eug.es

Abstract
In healthcare environments we can ﬁnd several microorganisms causing nosocomial infection,
and of which one of the most common and most dangerous is Methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus Aureus. Its presence can lead to serious complications to the patient.Our work uses
Agent Based Modeling and Simulation techniques to build the model and the simulation of
Methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus Aureus contact transmission in emergency departments.
The simulator allows us to build virtual scenarios with the aim of understanding the phenomenon of MRSA transmission and the potential impact of the implementation of diﬀerent
measures in propagation rates.
Keywords: Agent Based Modeling and Simulation, MRSA Transmission, Emergency Department, Complex System.

1

Introduction

Methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus Aureus (MRSA)is one of the most common and most dangerous microorganisms that we can ﬁnd in a healthcare environment and it is an important
cause of nosocomial infection. A nosocomial infection has been deﬁned as a infection caused by
microorganisms acquired within healthcare environments [4]. MRSA bacteria could mean serious health problems for patiens and it means a longer hospital stay, expensive treatments and
increased mortality and morbidity rates [5]. MRSA bacteria is resistant to conventional antibiotics and they can live permanently on the skin of some people without showing any symptoms,
Selection and peer-review under responsibility of the Scientiﬁc Programme Committee of ICCS 2015
c The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V.
doi:10.1016/j.procs.2015.05.267

443

Agent Based Model and Simulation of MRSA Transmission in ED

Jaramillo et al.

making them colonized, or temporarily converting them into carriers and people that show
symptoms are known as infected. However, all these people could transmit MRSA to another
person by physical contact. Some researches suggest that the most common transmission vias
are: the transiently colonized hands of healthcare staﬀ, contaminated medical equipment and
objects[11]. In an emergency department (ED), this transmission could be through the interaction between patients, healthcare staﬀ and the environment. The risk of MRSA acquisition
is particularly high in elderly patients, in patients with severe underlying disease, patients with
open wounds or external devices, among other reasons [6].
The aim of ED is to take care of patients who arrive with some kind of illnesses and/or injuries
that require immediate medical attention. In an attempt to control MRSA transmission rate,
some concrete actions are performed in ED such as hand washing, hand disinfection and the
use of isolation material, all of which are called Prevention Policies. The ED is one of the most
complex and dynamic areas in a hospital because its operation is not linear and depends on
several factors such as the acuity level of the patient, the conﬁguration of the healthcare staﬀ,
the physical facilities of the ED among other factors. So, we can conclude that an ED is a
complex system.
Agent-based modeling and simulation (ABMS) allow us to model complex systems as a collection of autonomous decision-making entities called agents. Each agent individually assesses
its situation and makes decisions on the basis of a set of rules[2]. This work uses ABMS to
create a contact propagation model and simulator of MRSA in ED. It is worth noting that
MRSA bacteria is transmitted only through physical contact, when someone touch a person
who carries the bacteria or when someone touch something that an infected person touched,
therefore, this work focused only in this kind of transmission. Our model is based on the deﬁnition of active and passive agents and their interactions. Active agents are the people involved in
the attention process, patients and healthcare staﬀ with their speciﬁc function and behaviors.
Passive agents are the environmental objects and equipment used in the attention process. Our
model takes into account the direct and indirect MRSA transmission by physical contact. Direct
transmission is represented through the interaction (person-to-person), between patients and
healthcare staﬀ and indirect transmission represents the MRSA contact transmission between
patients and healthcare staﬀ through the environmental objects and equipment. This research
is carried out with the collaboration of healthcare staﬀ at the Emergency Department of Hospital Universitari Parc Taul´ı, one of the biggest hospitals in Catalonia - Spain. It is worth noting
that our work has been developed based on a previous ED model and a previous ED simulator,
both of which have been developed as part of previous works [3][13][8] by our research group.
These previous works describe the full attention process of an ED.
The remainder of this article is organized as follows: Section 2 describes some previous works
about nosocomial infection simulation. The Modeling of MRSA propagation is detailed in Section 3. Section 4 shows the Simulator of MRSA transmission and its conﬁguration and input
values. Some experimental results are detailed in Section 5. Finally, Section 6 closes this paper
with conclusions and future works.

2

Related and Previous Works

MRSA is a subject of global interest. There is no healthcare environment which is free of
complications related to the presence of this organism. So, this topic has already been widely
studied using diﬀerent techniques. In this section, we will refer to some relevant papers relating
to the modeling of the MRSA transmission.
In Barnes et al.[1], the authors presented a MRSA transmission reduction using agent-based
444

Agent Based Model and Simulation of MRSA Transmission in ED

Jaramillo et al.

modeling and simulation. This simulation is developed in a hospital ward which has a diﬀerent function to ED. The Model shows the interaction between patients-healthcare staﬀ, and
patients-visitors. Patients can take one of two states: susceptible or colonized. The patients
never arrive as infected but they can develop infection during their stay. Our work classiﬁed
the patients as non-colonized, colonized and infected. Healthcare staﬀ agents are created at
the beginning of the simulation in an uncolonized state and during the simulation could be
susceptible or colonized. Unlike our work, visitors are included in the simulation, in the ED
short stays of patients do not justify the inclusion of visitors in the simulation. In similarity to
our proposal, transmission of MRSA between agents is based on the risk level of the patient to
becoming infected and the behavior of the healthcare staﬀ members.
According to Meng et al.[10], an agent-based-simulation is designed to determine how to reduce
the transmission risk of MRSA in a hospital ward divided into bays, with some isolation rooms.
The simulation divided patients who have MRSA in primary and secondary cases. Transmission
is modeled by pairwise interaction between colonized and non-colonized patients, patient and
healthcare staﬀ (nurse and doctor) transiently or permanently colonized, patient-to-patient
contacts and transmission from a contaminated environment is also considered. This model
takes into account the susceptibility of the patient to colonization. A patient has some possible
states: colonization, detection, decolonization treatment and location status. This work considers the disinfection process, since the environment of the simulation is a hospital, in ED these
kinds of processes are not performed. The model assumes, unlike our model based on contact
transmission, that a susceptible patient may acquire MRSA due to the presence of colonized
patients in the vicinity, regardless of the mode of transmission.
In McBryde et al. [9], unlike our model based on agents, a stochastic mathematical model
of MRSA transmission is presented. The environment of the simulation is an intensive care
unit (UCI). The transmission model is based in mathematical formules. The model assumes
that there was no direct patient to patient or healthcare staﬀ agent to healthcare staﬀ agent
transmission. The model assumes that there is no environmental transmission and that all
patients who were colonized were detected on admission.
These works focus on contact transmission of MRSA mainly through the interaction between patients, doctors and nurses, other members of healthcare staﬀ are not included. These
researches have diﬀerent environment simulation such a UCI or a single hospital ward. In ge-

Figure 1: Possible physical contacts between active and passive agents.
445

Agent Based Model and Simulation of MRSA Transmission in ED

Jaramillo et al.

neral, the patients are divided into colonized or infected patients and the healthcare staﬀ are
divided into colonized and non-colonized or transiently colonized. Neither considers the severity
level of the patients and only two members of healthcare staﬀ are included in the simulation:
doctors and nurses.

3

Conceptual Model of Transmission

The physical space in which the simulation takes place is the ED. It is devided in two zones
according to acuity level of the patients. Zone A for patients I, II and III, and zone B for
patients IV and V. The acuity level is decided in the triage phase according to the Spanish
Triage System. Acuity level I means that the state of patient is very serious, and a patient
with acuity level V is the patient with the least severity. More details about the organization
of the physical environment are included in a previous research of our work group[13]. MRSA
bacteria could be introduced in ED through colonized or infected patients that are admitted.
These patients represent the percentage of transmission vectors (Percen TV ) that arrive per
day in ED. In addition, the model assumes that a percentage of total patients that arrive have
a certain predisposition (Percen Predis)to acquire MRSA.

3.1

Agents and their Behaviors

As mentioned above, two kinds of agents are deﬁned, active and passive agents. Active agents
have the ability to act by themselves, they are all people involved in the attention process.
Passive agents do not have their own initiative, they are the medical equipment and objects of
the healthcare environment(see Figure 1).
3.1.1

Active Agents

Active Agents are divided in two sets: patients and healthcare staﬀ. It is necessary to make
this classiﬁcation because each group can take a diﬀerent infectious status. The model uses
Infect Status variable to show the infectious status of active agents.
A Patient is any person who arrives at ED seeking healthcare. It is important to consider
that each patient on arriving at ED, regardless of their acuity level, has a probability of being a
MRSA transmission vector (Primar Status). A patient who is identiﬁed as transmission vector
at the admission time is labeled as a primary case, the Primar Status boolean variable shows
this condition and can take one of two values: true or false.
Our work classiﬁed patients, according their infectious status (Infec Status), in non-colonized,
colonized or infected. All non-colonized patients are susceptible to acquiring MRSA, but some
of them could be more susceptible than others, such as patients with open wounds, external
devices among other reasons. The Predis Status boolean variable shows if the patient has a
predisposition that could make them more susceptible to acquiring MRSA or not.
The model assumes that patients, who arrived as transmission vectors and patients who develop
a colonization or infection during their length of stay (LoS) in the ED, remain in this infectious status until the end of simulation. The model does not take into account disinfection or
decolonization process for patients because these processes usually have longer average length
of time than the average of LoS of patients in ED.
Healthcare staﬀ is divided in doctors, triage nurse, clinical nurses, admission personnel, auxiliary personnel and cleaning staﬀ, each one of which has an Infec Status variable. It has three
possible values: non-carrier, carrier and colonized. A member of the healthcare staﬀ could be a
carrier when they acquire MRSA temporarily as a result of interaction with any transmission
446

Agent Based Model and Simulation of MRSA Transmission in ED

Jaramillo et al.

vector, if healthcare staﬀ complies with some action of the prevention policies, the bacteria
could be eliminated and the healthcare agent will return to non-carrier. At the beginning, all
healthcare staﬀ agents are created as non-carrier. Doctor and clinical nurses are diﬀerent for
zones A and B, and are classiﬁed according to their experience in senior or junior.
Prevention policies are implemented in the model as behaviors performed by members of the
healthcare staﬀ. Three prevention actions can be evaluated in this model: hand washing, hand
disinfection and use of isolation material. Healthcare staﬀ have the oportunity to execute a
hand wash and/or hand disinfection before they ﬁnish their interaction with a patient. The
isolated material is required only when healthcare staﬀ attend an isolated patient. The model
allows us to deﬁne, at the beginning of the simulation, a likelihood of compliance for each action
through the variables HandW Prob, HandD Prob, and IsoMat Prob. Each of these actions can
be executed with a higher or lower level of compliance (probability between 0 - 100), which inﬂuence the likelihood or not of MRSA transmission. The variables Eﬀec HandW, Eﬀec HandD
and Eﬀec IsoMat are the eﬀectiveness of each prevention action.
3.1.2

Passive Agents

Passive agents are inanimate objects of the environment that might have interactions with the
active agents, but given that it is not possible to include all these objects and equipment, we
consider all these objects as a single agent. So, we represent the interaction between active
agents with the environmental objects through a single passive agent called Carebox.
The carebox is the physical room where a patient is accommodated during the treatment and
diagnosis process. Each carebox contains the equipment needed for patient care, it meaning
that when the patient is a transmission vector we have a lot of contaminated objects, though
all these objects are usually inside the carebox, therefore we consider them as a single object.
This carebox could be an isolated carebox, if the patient who is housed is a transmission vector.
CareB Type variable shows the type of carebox, isolated or non-isolated. The carebox has a
infectious status and can be representated through Infect Status variable, it can take one of two
values, contaminated or non-contaminated. The main diﬀerence between carebox and isolation
carebox is the value of transmission probability of each one. Trans Prob variable represents
this probability and it can take values between 0 and 100.

3.2

Direct and Indirec Transmission

Two kinds of contact transmission are deﬁned between agents through their interactions, direct
and indirect transmission. Direct transmission occurs when an active agent transmission vector
has interaction with another active agent, which is not a transmission vector, and this active
agent acquires MRSA bacteria.
Indirect transmission is when an active agent vector transmission has interaction with a passive
agent (touching some medical equipment or objects in the hospital environment), and MRSA
bacteria is transmitted to the object. Later, an active agent which is not a transmission vector
has contact with the same object and it acquires MRSA.
In the indirect transmission it is necessary to bear in mind the lifetime of MRSA on dead
surfaces. Considering that MRSA bacteria can live more than 90 days on diﬀerent surfaces [12]
and this period is very long compared with the LoS of the patients in the ED, then, we can
assume in our model that the lifetime of MRSA bacteria is unlimited on dead surfaces (objects
and medical equipment) but can be eliminated through a disinfection process carried out by
cleaning staﬀ.
447

Agent Based Model and Simulation of MRSA Transmission in ED

3.3

Jaramillo et al.

Transmission Model

Frequent interaction between patients and healthcare staﬀ is the principal way to MRSA transmission. Whenever an interaction between agents is given, we consider an MRSA transmission
is likely. However, there is a wide variety of factors that will determine if the transmission has a
direct impact on the infectious status of the susceptible agent and change it from non-carrier or
non-colonized, to carrier, colonized, infected or whether in contrast, the bacteria are removed
and the infectious status of the susceptible agent will not change. To assess the incidence of
transmission, a mechanism to allow us to determine the probability of either alternative is required. Our model considers in each interaction the susceptibility of the agent who is at risk of
acquiring MRSA. If the agent at risk is a patient, the analysis is based on the health state of the
patient (predisposition, infected status), but if the agent at risk is a member of the healthcare
staﬀ, the analysis takes in account other values such as accomplishment and eﬀectiveness of
prevention policies (hands wash, disinfection hands, etc).
The model takes into account the parts of the overall attention process in which the agents
interact with each other, because the contact propagation can take place in these moments.
The process starts when a patient arrives in the ED and they approach the admission zone.
Here the admission staﬀ ask for their health card and register their arrival, if the patients had a
previous admission, the ED has their clinical history and the infectious status of the patient is
identiﬁed. After, the patient goes to the waiting room and waits for the triage process. When
the triage nurse is available, they call the patient through the information system (IS), and take
vital signs (interaction) and ask for some additional information in order to identify the acuity
level of the patient, the infectious status, and other important data. If the acuity level assigned
to the patient is IV or V, they wait for the diagnosis and treatment process in a waiting room
(zone B), but patients with acuity level I, II or III are assigned to a carebox (zone A) and the
diagnosis and treatment phases should be done inside such a carebox, with the exception of
some speciﬁc tests. In the same way, when the infectious state of the patient is colonized or
infected, IS registers this state and makes an alert in the clinical history of the patient.
The diagnosis and treatment process is divided in 3 phases: 1) Initial evaluation; 2) Laboratory test; 3) Application of medication or treatment. When a doctor is available they call the
patient (through IS), perform the medical examination (interaction) and decide what the next
step is. The IS shows the clinical history of the patient, including the infectious status, and
the doctor has the opportunity to apply the prevention policies. The laboratory test phase is
optional, and the doctor decides if it is necessary or not. The treatment phase and the take of
samples for laboratory test are carried out by clinical nurses (interaction). Laboratory test and
treatment can be carried out several times. When the treatment has ﬁnished and additional
laboratory tests are not necessary, the doctor dicharges the patient from the ED. In the case of
patients IV and V, the interaction with the doctor and nurses will be carried out in attention
boxes of the doctor (zone B), and the patient will remain in a speciﬁc waiting room while there
is no interaction (between each one of these phases). Whenever the healthcare agent ﬁnishes
an attention task, they may or may not apply the prevention policies: hand washing, hand
disinfection or using isolated material. The action that is executed can be eﬀective or not. A
full explanation of attention process is detailed in a previous work [7].

4

Simulator by Contact Transmission of MRSA

The implementation of the model is in Netlogo 5.1.0. simulation environment. The initial
conﬁguration is described in Table 1 and Table 2. Some initial simulation parameters for the
448

Agent Based Model and Simulation of MRSA Transmission in ED

Jaramillo et al.

model are input directly via a text ﬁle and others such as HandW Prob and Eﬀec HandW can
be set in the graphical environment. It is possible to give values for each one of the three
prevention policy actions: hand washing, hand disinfection or using isolated material, and give
a eﬀectiveness value for each one action. At the beginning of the simulation the patient agents
are created based on the real ﬂow of patients in a single day in the ED with a distribution per
hour( Averag Pat = 397) and the healthcare agents are created based on the initial parametres
of the text ﬁle (see Table 2).
The simulator has an initial value for the percentage of colonized or infected patients
Table 1: Example of quantity conﬁguration of resourse for a single execution.
Description
Admission Personnel
Triaje Nurse
Junior Clinical Nurse Zone A
Senior Clinical Nurse Zone A

No.
4
4
1
7

Description
Junior Clinical Nurse Zone B
Senior Clinical Nurse Zone B
Junior Doctor Zone A
Senior Doctor Zone A

No.
1
2
3
3

Description
Junior Doctor Zone B
Senior Doctor Zone B
Auxiliary Personnel
Carebox

No.
2
2
10
60

Table 2: Input values for experiments.
Description
Simulation Time
Average patient arrive per day*
Percentage transmission vector that arrive ED
Percentage of patient with predisposition to acquire MRSA
Hand wash probability

Variable
Simul Time
Averag Pat
Percen TV
Percen Predis
HandW Prob

Value
1440 hours
398
2%
20%
100%

*The ﬂow of patients has a probability distribution per hour, considering hospital data.

(Percen TV ) that arrive at the ED per day. This variable can take values from 0 to 10. The
simulation gives a random value for the infectious state of each patient, taking into account
the Percen TV variable. In addition, the model assumes that 20% of the patients are more
susceptible than others to acquiring a nosocomial infection because they have some speciﬁc
condition such as open wounds, external devices, a weakened immune system as a result of a
cronic illness, etc. The patient interaction with the admission staﬀ is not taken into account
in the simulation because the physical contact between them is negligible compared with the
contact between patient and other members of the healthcare staﬀ. In order to analyze in depth
the transmission of MRSA person-to-person, in these executions we will assume that the only
possible route of transmission is direct transmission between patients with triage and clinical
nurses, doctors and auxiliary personnel.

5

Experimental Results

The input values for this experiments are detailed in Table 1 and Table 2. The experiments were
executed parallel on a 10-node cluster. In order to analyse the impact of hand washing in MRSA
transmission, we execute some experiments considering two speciﬁc variables, HandW Prob and
Eﬀec HandW. The ﬁrst variable represents the probability that a doctor washes their hands
after interaction with a patient, and the second variable represents the probability that this
action is carried out correctly, in such a way that enough bacteria have been removed to prevent
449

Agent Based Model and Simulation of MRSA Transmission in ED

Jaramillo et al.

future transmissions. For experiments we keep a constant value for HandW Prob = 100%, and
we vary the values of Eﬀec HandW in a range of 0% to 100% with increments of 10% for each
execution. The Table 3 summarizes the results of the experiments.

Table 3: Handwash Probability = 100%
Eﬀec HandW
Colon arrive
Infec arrive
NonCol arrive
TotPat arrive
Percen TV(%)
Colon ED
Infec ED
TotTV ED(%)

0
222
242
23491
23955
1,94
12868
8573
91,44

10
246
244
23467
23957
2,05
11326
7431
80,34

20
240
248
23468
23956
2,04
9411
6258
67,44

30
252
220
23483
23955
1,97
6634
4393
48,00

(a) Colonized and Infected patients in ED.

40
247
235
23474
23956
2,01
3723
2355
27,38

50
259
207
23490
23956
1,95
1568
1074
12,97

60
241
238
23476
23955
2,00
757
513
7,30

70
259
227
23469
23955
2,03
379
263
4,71

80
229
228
23498
23955
1,91
169
107
3,06

90
255
231
23471
23957
2,03
74
40
2,50

100
265
234
23458
23957
2,08
0
0
2,08

(b) Comparison percentage of TV arrive and leave ED.

Figure 2: Colonized and Infected Patients with a hand wash accomplishment of 100% and
diﬀerents values of eﬀectiveness.
This experiment is a proof of concept whose aim is to analyse the behaviour of the propagation rate of MRSA assuming that healthcare staﬀ always (HandW Prob = 100%), wash their
hands after an interaction with a patient. The average number of interactions between patients
and health staﬀ for each execution was 113872 interactions, meaning an average of 79 interactions per hour. The variation in the values of eﬀectiveness, Eﬀec HandW = [0-100], inﬂuences
the number of patients who were colonized and infected with MRSA during the attention process at ED, and these values are represented by Colon ED and Infec ED variables (see Figure
2). It is important to mention that the values obtained show a decreases in the number of
colonized and infected patient when the eﬀectiveness of hand washing increases.
The execution includes two extreme values for Eﬀec HandW, 0% and 100%. A value of 0%
means that, although healthcare staﬀ had practice hand washing after each patient interaction,
this action is never executed correctly. Then in the next interaction with a susceptible patient,
there is likely to be a transmission. A value of 100% means that each hand wash action is always
well done, and takes into account that direct agent-to-agent transmission is the unique way of
transmission, we can conclude that, in theory, the transmission rate of MRSA propagation in
450

Agent Based Model and Simulation of MRSA Transmission in ED

(a) Colonized patient leave ED.

Jaramillo et al.

(b) Infected patient leave ED.

Figure 3: Inﬂuence of hand wash eﬀectiveness in the number of colonized and infected patient
with MRSA during the attention process at ED.
the ED will be 0, which equals the result obtained in our simulation. These two values for
Eﬀec HandW are unlikely in the real world, but now, for us it is a way to validate that the
behavior of the simulator is the expected.
Other executions were carried out assuming diﬀerent values for percentage of transmission vectors that arrive daily at the ED (Percen TV). A comparison of the obtained result of this
executions is plotted in Figure 3 for Percen TV of 2%, 4% and 8%. According to the values
obtained, we can conclude that the percentage of transmission vectors, Percen TV, that arrive
daily at the ED has an important inﬂuence on the number of patients who acquire a colonization, Colon ED, or infection, Infec ED, during the attention process, unless the eﬀectiveness of
handwashing falls below 20%. Regardless of the input value of percentage of transmission vectors (2%, 4%, 8%), we can observe a signiﬁcant decrease in the number of colonized and infected
patients in the ED, Colon ED and Infec ED, from eﬀectiveness of hand washing, Eﬀec HandW,
of 60%.

6

Future Work and Conclusions

As a result of our research, we proposed an agent-based model and simulator of the contact
propagation of MRSA in emergency departments implemented in Netlogo simulation environment. Our model includes the deﬁnition of active and passive agents, their variables and
behaviors. Anyone who has a role in the attention process is deﬁned as an active agent, and
the objects and equiptment of the medical environment are deﬁned as a passive agent. The
transmission mechanism to the MRSA bacteria is the interaction between agents, as a result
of attention process. The predisposition level of the patients and the accomplishment level of
prevention policies of healthcare staﬀ are evaluated in each interaction. The results of the simulation show that the percentages of patients that arrive as colonized or infected has incidence
in the number of colonized and infected patients that acquire MRSA as a result of attention
process in ED. The level of eﬀectiveness of hand washing is a very important factor in the
percentage of propagation of MRSA in ED, if hand washing eﬀectiveness falls below 60% , it
registers an important increase in the number of colonized and infected within the ED.
Our future work is to implement the full contact propagation model of MRSA, in order to
451

Agent Based Model and Simulation of MRSA Transmission in ED

Jaramillo et al.

obtain the simulation of direct and indirect transmission. The full computational model will
allow us a better understanding of the MRSA transmission phenomena, as well as the impact
of other prevention policies on transmission rates.

7

Acknowledgments

This research has been supported by : MINECO (MICINN)Spain under contract TIN201124384. Ecuador government. SENESCYT, under contract 2013-AR2Q3067.

References
[1] Sean Barnes, Bruce Golden, and Edward Wasil. Mrsa transmission reduction using agent-based
modeling and simulation. INFORMS Journal on Computing, 22(4):635–646, 2010.
[2] Eric Bonabeau. Agent-based modeling: Methods and techniques for simulating human systems. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, 99(Suppl
3):7280–7287, 2002.
[3] Eduardo Cabrera, Manel Taboada, Ma Luisa Iglesias, Francisco Epelde, and Emilio Luque. Simulation optimization for healthcare emergency departments. Procedia Computer Science, 9:1464–1473,
2012.
[4] Julia S Garner, William R Jarvis, T Grace Emori, Teresa C Horan, and James M Hughes. Cdc
deﬁnitions for nosocomial infections, 1988. American journal of infection control, 16(3):128–140,
1988.
[5] Nicholas Graves, Diana Weinhold, Edward Tong, Frances Birrell, Shane Doidge, G Dip PH, Prabha
Ramritu, Kate Halton, David Lairson, and Michael Whitby. Eﬀect of healthcare-acquired infection
on length of hospital stay and cost. Infection Control and Hospital Epidemiology, 28(3):280–292,
2007.
[6] W Hryniewicz. Epidemiology of mrsa. Infection, 27(2):S13–S16, 1999.
[7] Cecilia Jaramillo, Dolores Rexachs, Emilio Luque, Francisco Epelde, and Manel. Taboada. Modeling the contact propagation of nosocomial infection in hospital emergency departments. The Sixth
International Conference on Advances in System Simulation (SIMUL) IARIA 2014, 2014.
[8] Zhengchun Liu, Eduardo Cabrera, Dolores Rexachs, and Emilio Luque. A generalized agent-based
model to simulate emergency departments. The Sixth International Conference on Advances in
System Simulation (SIMUL) IARIA 2014, 2014.
[9] ES McBryde, AN Pettitt, and DLS McElwain. A stochastic mathematical model of methicillin
resistant staphylococcus aureus transmission in an intensive care unit: Predicting the impact of
interventions. Journal of theoretical biology, 245(3):470–481, 2007.
[10] Yang Meng, Ruth Davies, Katherine Hardy, and Peter Hawkey. An application of agent-based
simulation to the management of hospital-acquired infection. Journal of Simulation, 4(1):60–67,
2010.
[11] Maury Ellis Mulligan, Katherine A. Murray-Leisure, Bruce S. Ribner, Harold C. Standiford,
Joseph F. John, Joyce A. Korvick, Carol A. Kauﬀman, and Victor L. Yu. Methicillin-resistant
staphylococcus aureus: A consensus review of the microbiology, pathogenesis, and epidemiology
with implications for prevention and management. The American Journal of Medicine, 94(3):313
– 328, 1993.
[12] Alice N Neely and Matthew P Maley. Survival of enterococci and staphylococci on hospital fabrics
and plastic. Journal of clinical microbiology, 38(2):724–726, 2000.
[13] Manel Taboada, Eduardo Cabrera, Francisco Epelde, Ma Luisa Iglesias, and Emilio Luque. Using
an agent-based simulation for predicting the eﬀects of patients derivation policies in emergency
departments. Procedia Computer Science, 18:641–650, 2013.

452

