Available online at www.sciencedirect.com

Procedia Computer Science 9 (2012) 1677 – 1686

International Conference on Computational Science, ICCS 2012

Urgent computing of storm surge for North Carolina’s coast
Brian Blantona,∗, John McGeea , Jason Flemingb , Carola Kaiserc , Hartmut Kaiserc , Howard Landera , Rick Luettichd ,
Kendra Dresbacke , Randy Kolare
a Renaissance

Computing Institute, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, 100 Europa Drive, Chapel Hill, NC, 27517, USA
b Seahorse Coastal Consulting, LLC, 3103 Mandy Lane, Morehead City, NC, 28557, USA
c Center for Computation and Technology, Louisiana State University, 216 Johnston Hall, Baton Rouge, LA, 70803, USA
d Institute of Marine Sciences, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, 3431 Arendell Street, Morehead City, NC, 28557, USA
e School of Civil Engineering and Environmental Science, University of Oklahoma, 202 W. Boyd St., CEC Room 334, Norman, OK 73019

Abstract
Forecasting and prediction of natural events, such as tropical and extra-tropical cyclones, inland ﬂooding, and
severe winter weather, provide critical guidance to emergency managers and decision-makers from the local to the
national level, with the goal of minimizing both human and economic losses. This guidance is used to facilitate
evacuation route planning, post-disaster response and resource deployment, and critical infrastructure protection and
securing, and it must be available within a time window in which decision makers can take appropriate action. This
latter element is that which induces the need for urgency in this area. In this paper, we outline the North Carolina
Forecasting System (NCFS) for storm surge and waves for coastal North Carolina, which is threatened by tropical
cyclones about once every three years. We initially used advanced cyberinfrastructure techniques (e.g., opportunistic
grid computing) in an eﬀort to provide timely guidance for storm surge and wave impacts. However, our experience
has been that a distributed computing approach is not robust enough to consistently produce the real-time results
that end users expect. As a result, our technical approach has shifted so that the reliable and timely delivery of
forecast products has been guaranteed by provisioning dedicated computational resources as opposed to relying on
opportunistic availability of external resources. Our experiences with this forecasting eﬀort is discussed in this paper,
with a focus on Hurricane Irene (2011) that impacted a substantial portion of the US east coast from North Carolina,
up along the eastern seaboard, and into New England.
Keywords: storm surge, wind waves, ADCIRC, North Carolina, real-time, operational, forecast

1. Introduction
Coastal North Carolina is impacted by a tropical storm or hurricane every 2-3 years and is the most vulnerable state
coastline on the east US coast except for the southern part of Florida [1]. In recent decades, several major hurricanes
have caused substantial coastal damage from direct storm surge, wind, and wave damage, as well as from inland
ﬂooding caused by storm-generated precipitation. This includes Hurricanes Fran (1996), Dennis/Floyd (1999), Isabel
∗ Corresponding

Author
Email address: Brian_Blanton@Renci.Org (Brian Blanton)

1877-0509 © 2012 Published by Elsevier Ltd. Open access under CC BY-NC-ND license.
doi:10.1016/j.procs.2012.04.185

1678

Brian Blanton et al. / Procedia Computer Science 9 (2012) 1677 – 1686

Figure 1: Example of a storm surge forecast from the North Carolina Forecast System (NCFS) for Hurricane Irene in 2011. NCFS uses two
main components; the ADCIRC Surge Guidance System (ASGS) to compute storm surge and wave forecasts, and the Coastal Emergency Risks
Assessment (CERA) post-processing and visualization system for near-real-time online publication of derived graphics products. This system is
discussed in this paper as a demonstration of our approach to urgent computing of storm surge and waves.

(2003), Ophelia (2005), and Irene (2011). On the Outer Banks of the coast (from Cape Hatteras northward toward
the North Carolina/Virginia border), extra-tropical cyclones cause substantial problems due to large waves that cause
heavy erosion and routinely close critical roadways along the islands. Considering that estimates of the aggregate cost
of evacuations are as high as one million per mile evacuated [2], the need to skillfully forecast potential storm surge,
winds, and waves is essential for simultaneously minimizing public costs and economic impacts and losses.
Urgent and on-time forecasting of potential and imminent disasters is needed in the days and hours before such
events. Figure 1 shows an example of a storm surge forecast for Hurricane Irene (2011). The information includes
the forecast storm track from the National Hurricane Center, the possible track spread (cone of uncertainty), and the
maximum predicted water level. This is discussed further below as a case study of our urgent computing experience.
Generally, this forecasting need is met by computing solutions in near-real-time such that the information can be
used by planners and emergency managers in a timely manner. For example, the National Centers for Environmental
Prediction compute and publish a 3.5 day weather forecast for the United States; this forecast is updated every 6
hours. Clearly, this national, regional, and local need for weather forecasts is required to be timely, meaning that
the information on developing severe weather conditions must be available to decision makers well within the 6hour synoptic cycle AND must be available faster than the time scales over which the potentially disastrous event
is unfolding. In other words, if weather forecasts are delayed beyond the forecast window, for whatever reason, OR
the information is outdated because the physical phenomena has a very fast time scale of genesis and evolution (e.g.,
tornado outbreaks), then the information is no longer relevant to decision making eﬀorts. This required timeliness
thus deﬁnes our context for urgent.

Brian Blanton et al. / Procedia Computer Science 9 (2012) 1677 – 1686

1679

Forecasting of tropical cyclones is a particular challenge for urgent computing because of the need for consistency
and reliability. The need for reliability stems from the fact that the supply of highly detailed guidance for these events
motivates end-users to quickly promote them from nice-to-have to must-have with a concomitant increase in demand.
Coupled with the high proﬁle nature of the events and the public statements that are issued (based in part on urgently
computed guidance), the pressure to continuously and consistently produce results on an urgent basis is very high.
During some events, press conferences and/or brieﬁngs with high level oﬃcials have already been scheduled and so
guidance must be available.
Another urgent computing challenge that is particular to the use of high performance computing for tropical
cyclones is the uncertainty about whether and when urgent computing may be required. In other urgent computing
applications, such as oil spills, wild ﬁres, tsunamis, and medical applications, the actual need for results is not in
question. The event either has occurred, or is occurring. However, there is always a question about whether any
particular storm system is really enough of a threat to justify the substantial resources required to generate results on
an urgent basis. This uncertainty injects a human element into the process, as it requires high level decision makers to
go on the record to make formal requests for the provisioning of major resources for a storm that may subsequently
dissipate and degenerate into a much less damaging storm. As a result, there may be a tendency for decision makers
to delay major resource requests as long as possible—or longer.
The ﬁnal challenge for urgent computing of tropical cyclone guidance is accuracy. Reasonably accurate and timely
skill in forecasting of storm surge, waves, and winds from hurricanes and extra-tropical storms requires several key
elements to be available.
1. Suﬃciently high spatial resolution of the region of interest. It is critical to explicitly represent features of the
coastal region that have a fundamental impact on surge and wave propagation, such as levees, roadways, and
sand dunes.
2. Representations of the surface wind and atmospheric pressure ﬁelds that describe the storm.
3. Infrastructure resources available to complete the forecast in a speciﬁed time frame. This includes resources to
compute the forecast solutions, process the output, generate, store, and online publish the end-user products.
4. Use of an interoperability framework to provide and share geospatial information and model results. This
can be achieved by using publicly available and widely accepted interface standards like the Open Geospatial
Consortiums (OGC) speciﬁcations as a way for data access and visualization (Web Mapping (WMS) and Web
Feature Services (WFS)) (Google Earth ﬁles, GeoTIF and shape ﬁles, image ﬁles for custom visualization
applications).
The combination of these elements poses a computational, resource, and coordination challenge that we have approached in several ways. We describe one such way herein, with illustrations of the computational system, output
products, and a speciﬁc forecast example from Hurricane Irene (2011).
2. Methods for Urgent Computing
There are at least several methods for getting urgent computations completed, ranging from outright ownership of
hardware to provisioning of cloud or grid resources. The speciﬁc method chosen clearly depends on the application
resources needed at runtime as well as the time scale on which the computed products are needed by end users (in
our case, emergency managers and decision makers in the time period leading up to and after a potentially disastrous
event). When ownership of dedicated hardware is not an option, the most diﬃcult aspects for urgent computing remain
the establishment of agreements and policies for preemptive access to resources, and assessment of the cost, beneﬁt,
and risk equations to determine these policies appropriately.
2.1. Using Grid Resources for Urgent Computing: The SCOOP Experience
As part of the Southeastern Universities Research Association Coastal Ocean Observing and Prediction (SCOOP)
project that ran from 2004 to 2009, we developed an automated workﬂow for computing storm surge forecasts on
distributed grid resources [3, 4], using the ADCIRC storm surge model [5, 6]. The workﬂow was based on an application coordinator process that dispatched ADCIRC jobs to a pre-conﬁgured set of remote compute clusters using the
Globus [7] middleware system. The workﬂow determined the optimal resource for each model run using an algorithm

1680

Brian Blanton et al. / Procedia Computer Science 9 (2012) 1677 – 1686

that factors in the current workload for each cluster. In theory if enough computational clusters of suﬃcient size are
provisioned, the likelihood is relatively high that the application coordinator can ﬁnd a suitable machine on which an
urgent computation can be deployed without delay.
In our case, however, opportunistic grid computing has not provided a robust approach to urgent computing. One
main reason is the diﬃculty in obtaining a usable estimate of the current work load, and inability to guarantee priority
at a remote cluster. Our workﬂow used the Globus Monitoring and Discovery System (MDS) for this task. MDS can
report how many cores on a cluster are currently free, but because MDS is unaware of reservations in the queueing
system, it can not tell how many CPUs will be available for a job the size and duration of the urgent run. In addition,
there is always a lag time between the MDS report and the queueing of the urgent run, during which other jobs can be
submitted. Either reason can cause the resource selection algorithm to select incorrectly, leaving an urgent job to idle
in a queue for an unknown time amount.
Another diﬃculty for grid computing for our particular case is the resource requirement of the computational runs
involved. Our current forecasting system runs for approximately two hours on 384 cores; this run time is repeated
four times per day for the storm’s duration, which may be a week or more. The urgent nature of the problem precludes
using fewer cores and consequently requiring a longer run time. Finding clusters whose owners are willing to make
hundreds of cores available to an external user for 2 hours on an urgent basis is a signiﬁcant problem, particularly for
clusters outside the study area, where technology managers may not share the sense of urgency and thus lack much
incentive to participate. The XSEDE project does manage many national class supercomputers, but those resources are
intended for research rather than urgent computing applications. Although urgent computing has been demonstrated
on TeraGrid/XSEDE, using the Spruce [8] software stack, none of the sites are currently supporting preemption,
meaning that there is still no guarantee of timely access to the resources.
2.2. Using Cloud Resources for Urgent Computing
At ﬁrst glance, it may seem that urgent computing is an ideal application for cloud environments. These Computing as a Service (CaaS) environments promise scalability and availability without the requirement and expense of
maintaining a computing resource whose peak capabilities may only be truly reached a few times per year. Unfortunately, current CaaS environments do not support large scale uses of the Message Passing Interface (MPI). While the
Open Science Grid [8] project does support single node parallel jobs, most nodes are currently limited to 8 cores, well
short of the hundreds needed for the types of models we use. Since our numerical model requires MPI, we can not
use the current CaaS environments.
2.3. Using Dedicated Resources
This is the most reliable strategy for Urgent Computing. Because the resources are dedicated there are no scheduling or pre-emption issues. Note that the resources do not have to comprise an entirely separate machine to be dedicated: either a restricted queue for a deﬁned subset of a larger machine or a standing reservation for an adequate
number of cores for the required time will suﬃce. The Urgent compute jobs are introduced to the job scheduler as
soon as all the required inputs are available, and since the resources are dedicated, the jobs run immediately. The
cost of this paradigm is a lower utilization rate for the dedicated resources, but this is justiﬁed by the importance
of the timely execution of the system. Dedicated computing resources are a fairly common feature of national class
environmental workﬂows. For example, the National Center for Environmental Prediction 3.5 day weather forecast
described above runs on a dedicated resource.
The dedicated computing environment for the North Carolina Forecast System at RENCI consists of 32 Dell
PowerEdge m610 blades. Each blade has a pair of 2.66 Ghz Intel Westmere 5650 (hexa core) processers, yielding
a total of 384 cores. Each blade also has 24 GigaBytes of physical memory and 146 GigaBytes of local hard disk
space. Global hard disk space is provided through a Force 10 core data center switch and a BlueArc network attached
storage device. The MPI fabric is quad data rate (40 Gigabit per second) non blocking inﬁniband. These dedicated
cores share head nodes and management infrastructure with another 1024 cores of generally available compute nodes,
but the dedicated cores are available only through a restricted queue.

Brian Blanton et al. / Procedia Computer Science 9 (2012) 1677 – 1686

1681

Figure 2: Model components used in the North Carolina Forecast System and ADCIRC Surge Guidance System (ASGS). Precipitation forecasts
are generated and are input into the river model (HL-RDHM), which provides river discharge conditions to the rivers in the surge model. An
atmospheric model provides surface forcing for the surge and wave model.

3. The North Carolina Forecast System
Given the above need for urgent forecasting of surge and waves for North Carolina’s coast, and to address problems
encountered with a more distributed and opportunistic computing approach, our group has constructed the North
Carolina Forecasting System (NCFS) using state-of-the-art numerical models for rainfall/runoﬀ, winds, waves, and
surge, and using the dedicated computer resources described above. This is a collaborative eﬀort between several
academic, federal, and industry partners that includes NOAAs National Severe Storms Laboratory through the CIFLOW project [9].
The overall modeling system links together several models, shown in Figure 2. We use the storm surge and
astronomical tide model ADCIRC [5, 6] to compute the regional tides and storm surge. Research and applications
with ADCIRC cover a range of coastal oceanographic and engineering problems, including regional and local tidal
phenomena [10, 11] and coupled storm surge and wave hindcasts [12, 13]. ADCIRC is approved by the Federal
Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) for computing storm surge ﬂood hazard simulations and has been/is being
used for the development of Digital Flood Insurance Rate Maps (DFIRMs) in Texas, Louisiana, Mississippi, Alabama,
Delaware, Virginia, North Carolina, South Carolina, Georgia, and Florida (e.g., [14, 15]).
ADCIRC is formulated in triangular ﬁnite elements, which allows for simultaneous coarse spatial resolution
(model nodes) in areas of deep water and relatively much higher resolution near the coast. This is critical since
storm surge is a response to the wind driving water mass toward the coast where it rises as the water depth decreases
(becomes shallower); capturing important details of the storm surge and wave propagation generally requires high
resolution of the coastal area. The wave ﬁeld is also driven directly by the wind ﬁeld, and its near-coast characteristics are dependent on accurate description of the underwater bathymetric features. Recently, the ADCIRC model

1682

Brian Blanton et al. / Procedia Computer Science 9 (2012) 1677 – 1686

Figure 3: Finite element triangular numerical grid for the North Carolina coast. Resolution increases toward the coast as shown with the increased
triangle density. The coast line is shown, as well as the 100, 1000, and 3000 m depth contours. The red dots are locations of two National Oceanic
and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) tide gauges in the area.

has been formally coupled to the ﬁnite element version of Simulating WAves Nearshore (SWAN) wind wave model
[16, 13, 17]. This allows both the surge and wave models to use the same ﬁnite element representation of the region
and simpliﬁes substantially the modeling of the interactions between the surge and wave ﬁeld.
Figure 3 shows the ADCIRC model ﬁnite element grid for the NCFS. The variable resolution, much higher near
the coast and over land, can be seen by the increased density of triangles. North Carolina also has several large rivers
that transport accumulated inland precipitation toward the coast. These rivers are included in the forecast system
by specifying discharge conditions on the upstream river boundaries. River discharges are simulated using NOAAs
Research Distributed Hydrologic Model (HL-RDHM, [18]).
In order to run the numerical models in a real-time and urgent capacity, the models are encapsulated in the ADCIRC Surge Guidance System (ASGS, [19]) This system is used for forecasting surge and wave heights for several
regions along the US east coast and Gulf of Mexico. In our NCFS, the system runs on dedicated resources on the
Renaissance Computing Institute’s (RENCI) Blueridge cluster. The output of the system includes storm surge levels
and signiﬁcant wave heights, and is post-processed to generate graphics for delivery to end users, a system website called the Coastal Emergency Risk Assessment (CERA, nc-cera.renci.org). A ﬂowchart of ASGS and CERA is
shown in Figure 4. The initial trigger to the ASGS forecast system is the issuance of a hurricane forecast advisory
from the National Hurricane Center (NHC). This starts the storm surge/wave computation, which takes approximately
2 hours on 384 Westmere cores. After completion, ASGS stores the generated result ﬁles for distribution through an
OPeNDAP server. It emails the CERA system to start production of the visualization products. This process takes
about 2 hours as well, due to the resolution and number of images produced. Thus the total time between arrival of a
hurricane forecast track and the publication of the results to the CERA website for the high resolution grid covering
coastal North Carolina and using the available RENCI resources is about 4 hours.
The ASGS is a fully automatic system managing the execution of the coupled ADCIRC/SWAN model runs. This

Brian Blanton et al. / Procedia Computer Science 9 (2012) 1677 – 1686

1683

Figure 4: Workﬂow for the NCFS. The system is triggered by arrival of a National Hurricane Center (NHC) advisory. ASGS computes the forecast
solutions, places the data ﬁles on an OPeNDAP server, and notiﬁes the CERA system ASGS is complete. CERA then produces graphics products
for the Google Maps website as well as shapeﬁles for GIS applications. During an active hurricane, NHC issues an advisory update every 6 hours.

includes the download of all required input data ﬁles, such as global climate data, the NHC advisory, and the river ﬂow
data. It generates result data ﬁles, such as the predicted storm surge height, predicted water inundation (depth of water
over land), wind speed and velocities, and the predicted signiﬁcant wave heights and wave periods. All data is stored
using the netCDF ﬁle format which ensures self-describing data ﬁles, minimal ﬁle sizes, and ﬂexible data access.
ASGS also generates a meta-data ﬁle containing the various attributes needed for the description and identiﬁcation
of the generated ﬁles, such as storm number, advisory number and time, and model run related information like start
time, and available output layers. These result ﬁles are made available for download through an OPeNDAP web portal,
decoupling the ASGS and CERA processing steps. Once all data is available, the CERA system is notiﬁed using a
generated email. This email contains the URL of the meta-data ﬁle, the content of which is suﬃcient to discover and
download all related data ﬁles needed for the post-processing.
The CERA system is fully automated as well. It polls for incoming emails every 5 minutes with the goal of
publishing the ASGS results on an interactive website. Publishing the results online not only ensures their timely
availability to emergency managers but is also a convenient medium enabling high usability and transparency without
the need for extensive introductions to the managers into specialized GIS tools. After receiving a notiﬁcation email
from ASGS, the CERA system downloads the ASGS result ﬁles from the OPeNDAP server and starts the postprocessing steps, generating raster and vector data (imagery and shape ﬁles) for overlaying on an interactive solution
based on Google maps. The system creates a thematic layer for each of the data ﬁles produced by ASGS. The
interactive web page allows the user to select the thematic layer to be overlaid with the topographic background maps
as provided by Google maps. This includes the projected hurricane path and cone of uncertainty, predicted storm
search elevation and predicted water inundation, etc. After the post-processing is ﬁnished, the CERA system sends
out an automated email notiﬁcation to a special email list. Interested emergency managers can subscribe to this list
in order to receive the notiﬁcations. The generated emails contain the URL of the web page where the newest results
can be viewed. The CERA system not only presents the results of the latest NHC advisory, but provides a means to
compare those with any of the previous advisories for the current storm or with any of the available previous storms.
The fact that the whole ASGS/CERA system is fully automated is a signiﬁcant part of our solution ensuring near-

1684

Brian Blanton et al. / Procedia Computer Science 9 (2012) 1677 – 1686

Figure 5: Top) Forecast maximum storm surge (in meters above mean sea level) for coastal North Carolina for NHC forecast advisory number 25.
The solid line is the forecast track of the cyclone minimum central pressure with positions at every 6 hours. Higher storm surge is indicated with
redder color. This forecast indicates 10-11 ft water levels in the Neuse and Tar Rivers, and 6-7 ft water levels along the soundside of the Outer
Banks and in the western part of Albemarle River. Bottom) Forecast maximum signiﬁcant wave height (in meters) for advisory 25. Signiﬁcant
wave heights are 6-8 ft in Pamlico and Albemarle Sounds, with open-coast wave heights of 10-15 ft.

real-time 24/7 availability of our results to emergency managers and ﬁrst responders during hurricane events. Without
this full automation of all of the processing steps it would have been almost impossible to ensure a similar level of
availability and consistency as the number of steps necessary is too large for any manual workﬂow to produce reliable
results.
4. The 2011 Hurricane Irene Experience
The NCFS/ASGS system became fully operational just prior to the 2010 Atlantic hurricane season. After critical evaluation of the coupled model and graphics system, adjustments and reﬁnements were made prior to the
2011 season. 2011 was not a particularly big season in terms of aggregate economic losses, but the 9th named
storm (Irene) caused a substantial amount of damage from North Carolina through the upper New England region
(http://www.nhc.noaa.gov/data/tcr/AL092011 Irene.pdf). The ﬁrst hurricane advisory was issued at 2300 UTC on
Saturday, August, 20 2011. However, the storm was still suﬃciently far away from North Carolina, and with considerable uncertainty in the forecast track, that the ASGS was not activated. Advisory number 6 was the ﬁrst forecast
storm track that indicated some signiﬁcant threat to the North Carolina area, and for each advisory 6 through 35 (when
the storm was ﬁnally downgraded to a tropical depression), NCFS was triggered. Figure 5 shows two snapshots from
the advisory 25 output. The left panel shows the maximum water level in the North Carolina region, with the path of
the storms central pressure minimum indicated at six hour intervals. The forecast water levels were highest at the coast
along the Outer Banks just east of Cape Lookout on the right side of the storm. In the shallow and nearly enclosed
sounds, high water levels were also forecast in the western Pamlico Sound and on the sound-side of the middle Outer
Banks (both noted with the ovals). The lower panel of Figure 5 shows the forecast maximum signiﬁcant wave height
for advisory 25. 30-40 ft wave heights oﬀ shore decrease to about 10-15 ft at the coast, shoaling as they encounter
shallower water toward the coast. Waves within the Pamlico/Albemarle Sound system are generated almost entirely
within the sounds (since the few and narrow tidal inlets that perforate the Outer Banks inhibit substantial wave and
surge transmission from the open coast to the sounds) and are relatively limited in height due to the shallow depths of
the sounds. They reach 6-8 ft in the deepest parts of the sounds.
Figure 6 indicates the spread in the surge elevations as the consensus hurricane forecast changed with each advisory. The results also show that the surge forecasts were in reasonable agreement with the NOAA gauges as the storm
approached North Carolina. Comprehensive skill assessment of the 2011 Irene forecast simulations is still ongoing.
The availability of the nc-cera.renci.org website and the information it displays were provided to a number of state
and federal agencies including the three National Weather Service Weather Forecast Oﬃces that have marine forecast

Brian Blanton et al. / Procedia Computer Science 9 (2012) 1677 – 1686

1685

Figure 6: Results for the total water levels (river runoﬀ+tide+surge+wave) from the NCFS system for Hurricane Irene as compared to the preliminary observations from NOAA tide gauge locations. Two stations along the coastal region of North Carolina are shown; Beaufort Inlet on the left,
and Oregon Inlet on the right. These locations are also indicated in Figure 3. The diﬀerent lines are results from diﬀerent advisories: red - Advisory
25, blue - Advisory 26, green - Advisory 27, brown - Advisory 28, purple - Advisory 29, cyan - Advisory 30. The gray dots show the preliminary
observations from the NOS buoy stations.

responsibilities for North Carolina, the National Hurricane Center and the North Carolina Division of Emergency
Management. In addition the US Coast Guard Atlantic Command in Portsmouth, VA, identiﬁed the nc-cera website
and used the forecast water levels to assist with their decision to relocate their command to St. Louis, Mo, during the
storm. This decision was fortuitous because their headquarters in Portsmouth was ﬂooded by the storm surge resulting
in the loss of all power and communications to the building. By relocating their command operations they were able
to maintain operations control throughout the storm.
5. Conclusions
Our experience with urgent computing of the storm surge and waves associated with tropical cyclones has grown
substantially over the past 5 years. To date, opportunistic grid computing or cloud computing has not been eﬀective
for this use case, thus we have fallen back to dedicated resources within our own organization. We have found that
partnerships with other universities (e.g., along the US Gulf Coast) can be readily developed and quite helpful due
to a shared interest in, and need for preparation when, storms are threatening to impact the coastline. However,
we have not been successful in realizing the potential of shared distributed resources for urgent computing, in part
due to the complexity of policy development and understanding, and the mechanics of implementing pre-emptive
or an advanced reservation based fabric in a heterogeneous multi-campus environment, especially when the urgent
computing needs are highly time sensitive yet represent a very small portion of the overall work accomplished by the
resources throughout the year, and the resources are not generally shared outside of an urgent situation.
References
[1] R. A. Muller, G. W. Stone, A climatology of tropical storm and hurricane strikes to enhance vulnerability prediction for the Southeast U.S.
coast, Journal of Coastal Research 17 (4) (2001) 949–956.
URL http://www.jstor.org/stable/4300254
[2] J. C. Whitehead, One million dollars per mile? The opportunity costs of hurricane evacuation, Ocean and Coastal Management 46 (11–12)
(2003) 1069 – 1083. doi:10.1016/j.ocecoaman.2003.11.001.
URL http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0964569104000043
[3] L. Ramakrishnan, B. Blanton, H. Lander, R. Luettich, D. Reed, S. Thorpe, Real-time storm surge ensemble modeling in a grid environment, in:
Second International Workshop on Grid Computing Environments (GCE), Held in conjunction ACM/IEEE Conference for High Performance
Computing, Networking, Storage and Analysis, 2006.
[4] G. Allen, P. Bogden, G. Creager, C. Dekate, C. Jesch, H. Kaiser, J. McLaren, W. Perrie, G. W. Stone, X. Zhang, Towards an integrated GISbased coastal forecast workﬂow, Concurrency and Computation: Practice and Experience 20 (14) (2008) 1637–1651. doi:10.1002/cpe.1293.
URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/cpe.1293

1686

Brian Blanton et al. / Procedia Computer Science 9 (2012) 1677 – 1686

[5] R. Luettich, J. Westerink, N. Scheﬀner, ADCIRC: an ADvanced three-dimensional CIRCulation model for shelves, coasts, and estuaries,
Report 1: Theory and Methodology of ADCIRC-2DDI and ADCIRC-3DL, Dredging Research Program Technical Report DRP-92-6, U.S.
Army Corps of Engineers, Waterways Experiment Station, Vicksburg, MS (1992).
[6] J. Westerink, R. Luettich, J. Feyen, J. Atkinson, C. Dawson, H. Roberts, M. Powell, J. Dunion, E. Kubatko, H. Pourtaheri, A basin- to
channel-scale unstructured grid hurricane storm surge model applied to Southern Louisiana, Mon. Weather Rev. 136 (2008) 833–864.
[7] I. T. Foster, Globus Toolkit Version 4: Software for service-oriented systems., in: Network and Parallel Computing, IFIP International
Conference, 2005, pp. 2–13.
[8] M. Altunay, P. Avery, K. Blackburn, B. Bockelman, M. Ernst, D. Fraser, R. Quick, R. Gardner, S. Goasguen, T. Levshina, et al., A science
driven production cyberinfrastructure—the Open Science Grid, Journal of Grid Computing 9 (2) (2011) 201–218.
URL http://www.springerlink.com/content/pn717187290q658p
[9] S. Van Cooten, K. E. Kelleher, K. Howard, J. Zhang, J. J. Gourley, J. S. Kain, K. Nemunaitis-Monroe, Z. Flamig, H. Moser, A. Arthur,
C. Langston, R. Kolar, Y. Hong, K. Dresback, E. Tromble, H. Vergara, R. A. Luettich, B. Blanton, H. Lander, K. Galluppi, J. P. Losego,
C. A. Blain, J. Thigpen, K. Mosher, D. Figurskey, M. Moneypenny, J. Blaes, J. Orrock, R. Bandy, C. Goodall, J. G. W. Kelley, J. Greenlaw,
M. Wengren, D. Eslinger, J. Payne, G. Olmi, J. Feldt, J. Schmidt, T. Hamill, R. Bacon, R. Stickney, L. Spence, The CI-FLOW Project: A
system for total water level prediction from the summit to the sea, Bulletin of the American Meteorological Society 92 (11) (2011) 1427–
1442. doi:10.1175/2011BAMS3150.1.
URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1175/2011BAMS3150.1
[10] J. Westerink, R. Luettich, J. Muccino, Modeling tides in the western North Atlantic using unstructured graded grids, Tellus 46a (1994)
125–152.
[11] B. Blanton, H. Seim, R. Luettich, D. Lynch, F. Werner, K. Smith, G. Voulgaris, F. Bingham, F. Way, Barotropic tides in the South Atlantic
Bight, J. Geophys. Res. 109 (C12024). doi:10.1029/2004JC002455.
[12] J. Atkinson, T. Wamsley, J. Westerink, M. Cialone, C. Dietrich, K. Dresback, R. Kolar, D. Resio, C. Bender, B. Blanton, et al., Hurricane
storm surge and wave modeling in southern Louisiana: A brief overview, in: M. Spaulding (Ed.), Estuarine and Coastal Modeling X, ASCE,
2008.
[13] J. Dietrich, M. Zijlema, J. Westerink, L. Holthuijsen, C. Dawson, R. L. Jr., R. Jensen, J. Smith, G. Stelling, G. Stone, Modeling hurricane waves and storm surge using integrally-coupled, scalable computations, Coastal Engineering 58 (1) (2011) 45 – 65.
doi:10.1016/j.coastaleng.2010.08.001.
[14] B. Blanton, North Carolina Coastal Flood Analysis System: Computational System, Technical Report TR-08-04, Renaissance Computing
Institute, The University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill (2008).
[15] A. Niedoroda, D. Resio, G. Toro, D. Divoky, H. Das, C. Reed, Analysis of the coastal Mississippi storm surge hazard, Ocean Eng. 37 (1)
(2010) 82–90.
[16] J. C. Dietrich, S. Bunya, J. J. Westerink, B. A. Ebersole, J. M. Smith, J. H. Atkinson, R. Jensen, D. T. Resio, R. A. Luettich, C. Dawson,
V. J. Cardone, A. T. Cox, M. D. Powell, H. J. Westerink, H. J. Roberts, A high-resolution coupled riverine ﬂow, tide, wind, wind wave, and
storm surge model for southern Louisiana and Mississippi. Part II: Synoptic description and analysis of hurricanes Katrina and Rita, Monthly
Weather Review 138 (2) (2010) 378–404. doi:10.1175/2009MWR2907.1.
[17] M. Zijlema, Computation of wind-wave spectra in coastal waters with SWAN on unstructured grids, Coastal Engineering 57 (3) (2010)
267–277.
[18] V. Koren, S. Reed, M. Smith, Z. Zhang, D. Seo, Hydrology Laboratory Research Modeling System (HL-RMS) of the U.S. National Weather
Service, Journal of Hydrology 291 (2004) 297–318.
[19] J. Fleming, C. Fulcher, R. Luettich, B. Estrade, G. Allen, H. Winer, A real time storm surge forecasting system using ADCIRC, in: M. Spaulding (Ed.), Estuarine and Coastal Modeling X, ASCE, 2008.

