Procedia Computer Science
Volume 29, 2014, Pages 1236–1245
ICCS 2014. 14th International Conference on Computational Science

A Dynamic Data-driven Decision Support for Aquaculture
Farm Closure
Md. Sumon Shahriar and John McCulluch
Computational intelligence, Autonomous systems,
CSIRO Computational Informatics (CCI), CSIRO, Castray Esplanade, Hobart, 7001, Australia
mdsumon.shahriar@csiro.au,john.mcculloch@csiro.au

Abstract
We present a dynamic data-driven decision support for aquaculture farm closure. In decision
support, we use machine learning techniques in predicting closures of a shellﬁsh farm. As
environmental time series are used in closure, we propose two approaches using time series and
machine learning for closure prediction. In one approach, we consider time series prediction and
then using expert rules to predict closure. In other approach, we use time series classiﬁcation for
closure prediction. Both approaches exploit a dynamic data-driven technique where prediction
models are updated with the update of new data to predict closure decisions. Experimental
results at a case study shellﬁsh farm validate the applicability of the proposed method in
aquaculture decision support.
Keywords: Aquaculture decision support, Machine learning, Dynamic data-driven decision support

1

Introduction

Data-driven approaches are widely used in many decision support systems [1]. Most of the
decision support systems consider historical data for analysis and decision making. Decisions
are usually made in a static way meaning that there is not much update in data and hence in
the data-driven models used in the decision support systems. On the contrary, in dynamic datadriven approaches for decision support systems [2], data and associated models are updated to
provide decisions.
Although, there exist decision support systems in aquaculture domain [3], the use of dynamic
approach where models are updated and decisions are predicted based on the updated data ﬁtted
to the models is limited to the best of our knowledge. The current decision support system for
Tasmanian Shellﬁsh Quality Assurance Program (TSQAP) provides status of the closure based
on the expert rules applied to the observed environmental sensor data such as rainfall, river ﬂow
and salinity. These environmental sensor data provide proxy for contaminants in the water. A
snapshot of the current system is shown in Figure 1. In the system, the current closure status
or decisions of the shellﬁsh farms which are made manually by relevant authorities are shown.
1236

Selection and peer-review under responsibility of the Scientiﬁc Programme Committee of ICCS 2014
c The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V.
doi:10.1016/j.procs.2014.05.111

A Dynamic Data-driven Decision Support for Aquaculture Farm Closure

Shahriar and McCulluch



Figure 1: A snapshot of current decision support of TSQAP

In aquaculture decision support, we want to add the capability of predicting closure decision
at least one day ahead using dynamic data-driven approaches. This predictive capability will
beneﬁt shellﬁsh farms and relevant authorities to take decisions early related to the closure or
opening status. We explain our proposed approach in Figures 2 and 3. First, we show the datadriven model learning in Figure 2. Historical data of related environmental variables for closure
of shellﬁsh farms are transformed and fused together as time series. Closure information for
shellﬁsh farms are also integrated. Then we consider two alternative ways in predicting closure
decisions. One way is to predict the variable causing the farm closure. In this paper, we consider
salinity. To predict salinity one day ahead, we consider salinity, water temperature, rainfall and
river ﬂow as input variables. After predicting salinity, we apply expert rules (thresholds) on
the predicted salinity whether farm may be closed one day ahead. The other way is to predict
closure using time series classiﬁcation. In this technique, rather predicting salinity one day
ahead and using rules on the predicted salinity, we use time series features of salinity, water
temperature, river ﬂow and rainfall to predict the closure.
When the models are learned and recommended from Figure 2, we use the dynamic approach where prediction is made using time series data. In the dynamic approach, we feed the
input parameters to the learned model and a decision is recommended. The learned models are
also updated in the module. This is shown in Figure 3.
We consider the following contributions in this paper.

• We propose and develop a dynamic data-driven decision support for aquaculture. In
dynamic data-driven approach, we use time series prediction and classiﬁcation models.
1237

A Dynamic Data-driven Decision Support for Aquaculture Farm Closure



ZĂŝŶĨĂůů

ZŝǀĞƌĨůŽǁ

^ĂůŝŶŝƚǇ

tĂƚĞƌƚĞŵƉĞƌĂƚƵƌĞ

Shahriar and McCulluch

ĂŝůǇĐůŽƐƵƌĞ

dŝŵĞƐĞƌŝĞƐĚĂƚĂƚƌĂŶƐĨŽƌŵĂƚŝŽŶĂŶĚĨƵƐŝŽŶ

ůŽƐƵƌĞƌĞůĂƚĞĚƚŝŵĞ
ƐĞƌŝĞƐƉƌĞĚŝĐƚŝŽŶ

ůŽƐƵƌĞƉƌĞĚŝĐƚŝŽŶ
ƵƐŝŶŐƉƌĞĚŝĐƚĞĚƚŝŵĞ
ƐĞƌŝĞƐĂŶĚĞǆƉĞƌƚƌƵůĞƐ

dŝŵĞƐĞƌŝĞƐĐůĂƐƐŝĨŝĐĂƚŝŽŶͲ
ďĂƐĞĚĐůŽƐƵƌĞƉƌĞĚŝĐƚŝŽŶ

ŽŵƉĂƌŝƐŽŶŽĨĐůŽƐƵƌĞƉƌĞĚŝĐƚŝŽŶ͕ŵŽĚĞůƐĞůĞĐƚŝŽŶ
ĂŶĚŵŽĚĞůƵƉĚĂƚĞ

Figure 2: Data-driven predictive model learning (oﬀ-line)


tŝŶĚŽǁŽĨƌĞĐĞŶƚ
ƵƉĚĂƚĞĚƚŝŵĞƐĞƌŝĞƐ

>ĞĂƌŶĞĚĂŶĚƌĞĐŽŵŵĞŶĚĞĚ
ŵŽĚĞů;ƐͿĨŽƌĐůŽƐƵƌĞƉƌĞĚŝĐƚŝŽŶ

WƌĞĚŝĐƚĞĚ
ĐůŽƐƵƌĞ
ĚĞĐŝƐŝŽŶ

Figure 3: Predicting closure based on learned model and recent data arrival(on-line)

• We exploit two ways in predicting closure decisions. One way is to predict environmental time series that is considered proxy for closure and then to use expert rules on the
predicted data. Other way is to use time series classiﬁcation for predicting closures.
1238

A Dynamic Data-driven Decision Support for Aquaculture Farm Closure

Shahriar and McCulluch

This paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we brieﬂy present related research. Methods
are discussed in Section 3. We present experimental results for a shellﬁsh farm in Section 4.
Finally we conclude in Section 5.

2

Related research

Decision support systems can be data-driven where decisions are usually made based on the
intelligent data analysis. Most of these data-driven decision support systems are also static
meaning that decisions are made based on the models derived from existing historical data.
The applications of data-driven decision support systems include many domains such as ﬁnance,
supply-chain [1], clinical[4] and environment[5].
Dynamic data-driven application systems (DDDAS) are being developed for many areas
such as environmental monitoring [6], natural disaster [7], hazard analysis [8], transport systems
[9, 10], emergency management [11], healthcare [12] and cyber-physical systems [13]. DDDAS
systems can include decision support systems [2, 14]. In [2], real-time data is assimilated
with simulation model to update the initial parameters for oil spill incidents management and
decision making. For dynamic capabilities of a decision support system, there is a need to
include functionalities that can cope with changes in data [15].
In aquaculture, there exist some data-driven decision support systems [16, 17, 18]. The
decision support system for aquaculture facility management and planning is studied in [16].
In cage aquaculture [17], a decision support system is developed with functionalities of site
classiﬁcation and selection, capacity of the farms and economic appraisal for a speciﬁc site.
For aquaculture licensing, a decision support that can provide environmental impacts on aquaculture for a location is studied in [18]. All these systems exhibit the static properties of a
data-driven decision support for aquaculture.
Time series analysis and prediction are used in decision support systems for business [19]
and agriculture [20]. Diﬀerent soft computing (i.e. fuzzy) and statistical techniques are used
in predicting time series in [19]. In agricultural decision support system for crops, rainfall and
evaporation time series are predicted using fuzzy logic.
Time series classiﬁcation are also used in decision support systems in stock trend prediction
[21] and supply-chain management [22] . In [21], classiﬁcation and clustering techniques are
used in producing a multidimensional decision support indicator for predicting stock trends.
An intelligent system to classify time series data using support vector machine for supply-chain
domain is investigated in [22].

3

Methods

In this section, we discuss the general methods. First, we consider data transformation and
fusion. Then we consider two approaches in predicting closure status. First approach is to
predict environmental variable related to closure and to apply expert rules as classiﬁer on the
predicted value. The other approach is to use time series classiﬁcation-based prediction where
multiple classiﬁers are used in predicting closure. Finally, prediction models are updated when
new data arrive in the system.
1239

A Dynamic Data-driven Decision Support for Aquaculture Farm Closure

3.1

Shahriar and McCulluch

Time series data transformation and fusion

In this method, time series data are extracted, transformed and integrated. As time series data
are collected from heterogeneous sources, sampling rates can be diﬀerent. We transform salinity
and water temperature data from minutes to daily resolution. River ﬂow data is transformed
from minutes to daily resolution. Rainfall and closure data are already at daily resolution.

3.2

Prediction models

We consider the following two approaches in prediction.
3.2.1

Closure prediction using time series prediction and expert rules

In this approach we ﬁrst predict the environmental variable that is considered as proxy (reason)
for closure. Then we apply the expert rules on the predicted value to predict closure decisions.
For example, if salinity is the main variable for closure decision, we consider the following steps:
Step 1: We deﬁne the prediction as salt+1 = f (salt , salt−1 , · · · , salt−p , rft , rft−1 , · · · , rft−q ,
raint , raint−1 , · · · , raint−r , wtt , wtt−1 , · · · , wtt−s ) where sal is salinity, rf is river ﬂow, wt is
water temperature, rain is rainfall and t is the current day. The lag values p, q, r, s can be
diﬀerent in the model. f is the regression model used in prediction.
Step 2: If salt+1 op threshold, then decision1t+1 else decision2t+1 where op is the operator
such as greater than or less than and threshold is the value decided by the domain expert.
decision can be either open or close status of the farm.
We exploit machine learning techniques in predicting time series [23]. We use regression
techniques such as M5P [24], support vector regression (SMOReg) [25], linear regression (LR)
and artiﬁcial neural network (NN) [26]. In NN, we use multilayer perceptron (MLP) with
diﬀerent hidden layers. As input to the regression methods, we provide combination of time
lags with a maximum of 5 days and a minimum of 1 day for one day ahead prediction. A model
with minimum mean squared error (MSE) is recommended for prediction of a time series.
3.2.2

Closure prediction using time series classiﬁcation

In this approach, we also exploit machine learning on time series data to classify (i.e. predict)
closure [27]. This approach is diﬀerent from the previous approach where we predict time series
to apply expert rules for closure prediction. We use time series features to predict a closure
decision.
We deﬁne this method in the following.
decisionit+1 = f (salt , salt−1 , · · · , salt−p , rft , rft−1 , · · · , rft−q , raint , raint−1 , · · · , raint−r ,
wtt , wtt−1 , · · · , wtt−s ) where f is the classiﬁer. decisionit+1 is the closure decision predicted
for one day ahead.
In time series classiﬁcation, lagged window of time series is used as feature in classiﬁer
model to predict the decision (output label). We use support vector regression (SMO) and NN
as classiﬁer for predicting closure one day ahead.

3.3

On-line prediction based on learned models

When we have learned models, we use those models to predict closure using recent values of
the environmental time series. The models can be either time series prediction and expert rulebased approach or time series classiﬁcation-based approach. The initial models are learned from
the existing historical data. As the data arrive in the system, the new data can be added to the
1240

A Dynamic Data-driven Decision Support for Aquaculture Farm Closure

Shahriar and McCulluch

historical data to reﬁne the model. In this method, learned models are updated periodically with
the arrival of new data in the system. This provides the dynamic and incremental capability of
learning models in predicting closure decisions.

4

Experimental results

We use data set for a shellﬁsh farm at Moulting Bay Zone 1 at Tasmania, Australia as a case
study. The shellﬁsh farm at this location use salinity as primary trigger for closure of the farm.
We consider data from 1/07/2012 to 31/08/2013. Last two month data is considered for testing
and the remaining data is considered for training regression and classiﬁcation models.
We transform environmental data as daily time series data and integrate with closure data
from multiple sources. Salinity, water temperature and closure data are collected from Tasmanian Shellﬁsh Quality Assurance Program (TSQAP)[28]. River ﬂow data is collected from
Department of Primary Industries Parks, Water and Environment (DPIPWE) [29]. Rainfall
data is collected from Bureau of Meteorology (BOM) [30].
Technique
M5P
SMOReg
LR
NN (Hidden layer=3)

Lag days(River ﬂow-Rainfall-Water temperature-Salinity)
1-1-1-3
1-1-3-1
1-2-2-1
2-1-1-1

MSE
0.361
0.365
0.375
0.395

Table 1: Models ordered on MSE

4.1

Time series prediction-based closure prediction

In Table 1, we present diﬀerent regression models and lag days used in building prediction model
for salinity time series data. The models are ordered according to the lowest mean squared error
(MSE) on the training data.
We show the actual and predicted time series in Figure 4 using trained models shown in
Table 1. We ﬁnd that the model M5P using river ﬂow, rainfall and water temperature with 1
day lag and salinity with 3 days lag performs best. We now apply the TSQAP rules (if Salinity
≤ 30 PSU, then close) on the predicted salinity using M5P model for closure prediction. The
accuracy of closure prediction on the testing data is shown in the Table 2. The overall accuracy
of prediction is 83%. The accuracy of the opening prediction is 92% and the accuracy of the
closure prediction is 66%.

Closed
Opened

Closed
14
3

Opened
7
36

Table 2: Closure prediction using time series prediction with expert rules

1241

A Dynamic Data-driven Decision Support for Aquaculture Farm Closure

Shahriar and McCulluch

ϰϬ
ϯϴ
ϯϲ
ϯϰ
ϯϮ
^ĂůŝŶŝƚǇ;W^hͿ

ϯϬ
Ϯϴ
Ϯϲ
Ϯϰ
ϮϮ
ϮϬ
ϭϴ
ϭϲ
ϭϰ
ϭϮ
ϭϬ
ϭ ϯ ϱ ϳ ϵ ϭϭ ϭϯ ϭϱ ϭϳ ϭϵ Ϯϭ Ϯϯ Ϯϱ Ϯϳ Ϯϵ ϯϭ ϯϯ ϯϱ ϯϳ ϯϵ ϰϭ ϰϯ ϰϱ ϰϳ ϰϵ ϱϭ ϱϯ ϱϱ ϱϳ ϱϵ ϲϭ
ĂǇƐ;ϬϭͬϬϳͬϮϬϭϯͲϯϭͬϬϴͬϮϬϭϯͿ
ĐƚƵĂů

DϱW

^DK

>Z

EE;,сϯͿ



Figure 4: Prediction results of salinity

4.2

Time series classiﬁcation-based closure prediction

We now present the prediction of closures using time series classiﬁcation. In this case, we use
a window of lagged time series as input and the closure information (open/close) as output
(labels) for classiﬁers.
The prediction accuracy using support vector machine (SMO) and neural network with
single hidden layer are shown in Tables 3 and 4 respectively. We ﬁnd that the accuracy of
SMO in Table 3 is similar to the expert rule-based prediction shown in Table 2. However, the
accuracy of predicting close using NN (81%) is higher than the accuracy of predicting close
using SMO (66%).

Closed
Opened

Closed
14
3

Opened
7
36

Table 3: Closure prediction using time series classiﬁcation with SMO

Closed
Opened

Closed
17
8

Opened
4
31

Table 4: Closure prediction using time series classiﬁcation with NN(H=1)

1242

A Dynamic Data-driven Decision Support for Aquaculture Farm Closure

5

Shahriar and McCulluch

Conclusions

We presented a dynamic data-driven decision support for shellﬁsh farm closure. Machine learning techniques on time series data are used in predicting closure of a farm. In building prediction
models, we used a dynamic data-driven technique where learned models are updated to predict
decisions. We plan to include capabilities to adapt missing values in prediction models. We
also plan to evaluate the performance of the prediction capabilities of the system.

6

Acknowledgement

CSIRO Computational Informatics CCI, Hobart(formerly known as The Intelligent Sensing
and Systems Laboratory) and the Tasmanian node of the Australian Centre for Broadband
Innovation is assisted by a grant from the Tasmanian Government which is administered by the
Tasmanian Department of Economic Development, Tourism and the Arts. This research is also
supported with Aquaculture Decision Support (AquaDS) project under CSIRO Food Futures
Flagship. We also acknowledge Claire D’Este, Ashfaqur Rahman, Daniel Hugo, Greg Smith
and Chris Sharman for their comments and support.

References
[1] A. Gunasekaran and E.W.T. Ngai. Decision support systems for logistics and supply chain management. Decision Support Systems, 52(4), 2012.
[2] Q. Zeng, Q. Zhang, and Z. Yang. A dynamic data driven application simulation model for oil spill
emergency decision in port water area. Transport, pages 1–5, 2013.
[3] J.G. Ferreira, J. Aguilar-Manjarrez, C. Bacher, K. Black, S.L. Dong, J. Grant, E. Hofmann,
J. Kapetsky, P.S. Leung, R. Pastres , . Strand, and C.B. Zhu. Progressing aquaculture through
virtual technology and decision-support tools for novel management, farming the waters for people
and food. In Proceedings of the Global Conference on Aquaculture, pages 643–704, 2010.
[4] T. J. Bright, A. Wong, R. Dhurjati, E. Bristow, L. Bastian, R.R. Coeytaux, G. Samsa, V. Hasselblad, J.W. Williams, M.D. Musty, L. Wing, A. S. Kendrick, G.D. Sanders, and D.Lobach. Eﬀect of
clinical decision-support systems a systematic review. Annals of Internal Medicine, 157(1):29–43,
2012.
[5] T. Sullivan, J. Zhang, E. O’Connor, B.B. Ciprian Constantin, B. Heery, G. Leonardo, A. F.
Smeaton, N. E. O’Connor, and F. Regan. Improving data driven decision making through integration of environmental sensing technologies. In Ocean 13, pages 10–13, 2013.
[6] L. Peng, D. Lipinski, and K. Mohseni. Dynamic data driven application system for plume estimation using uavs. Journal of Intelligent & Robotic Systems, 72(1):421–436, 2014.
[7] Jan Mandel, LynnS. Bennethum, Mingshi Chen, JaniceL. Coen, CraigC. Douglas, LeopoldoP.
Franca, CraigJ. Johns, Minjeong Kim, AndrewV. Knyazev, Robert Kremens, Vaibhav Kulkarni,
Guan Qin, Anthony Vodacek, Jianjia Wu, Wei Zhao, and Adam Zornes. Towards a dynamic data
driven application system for wildﬁre simulation. In International conference on computational
science, volume 3515 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages 632–639, 2005.
[8] A.K. Patra, M. Bursik, J. Dehn, M.D. Jones, M. Pavolonis, E.B. Pitman, T. Singh, P. Singla, and
O. Webley. A dddas framework for volcanic ash propagation and hazard analysis. In International
Conference on Computational Science, pages 1090–1099, 2012.
[9] Szu-Yin Lin, Kuo-Ming Chao, and Chi-Chun Lo. Service-oriented dynamic data driven application
systems to urban traﬃc management in resource-bounded environment. SIGAPP Appl. Comput.
Rev., 12(1):35–49, 2012.

1243

A Dynamic Data-driven Decision Support for Aquaculture Farm Closure

Shahriar and McCulluch

[10] Szu-Yin Lin, Kuo-Ming Chao, and Chi-Chun Lo. Service-oriented dynamic data driven application
systems to traﬃc signal control. In Systems Man and Cybernetics (SMC), 2010 IEEE International
Conference on, pages 3463–3470, 2010.
[11] Mark Gaynor, Margo Seltzer, Steve Moulton, and Jim Freedman. A dynamic, data-driven, decision
support system for emergency medical services. In International conference on computational
science, volume 3515 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages 703–711, 2005.
[12] J.T. Oden, D. Fuentes, J. Bass, and Y. Feng. Dynamic-data-driven systems aid patient-speciﬁc
cancer therapy. SPIE, pages 1–3, 2008.
[13] Glynis Dsouza, Salim Hariri, Youssif Al-Nashif, and Gabriel Rodriguez. Resilient dynamic data
driven application systems (rdddas). In International Conference on Computational Science, volume 18, pages 1929–1938, 2013.
[14] Tahsin Kurc, Xi Zhang, Manish Parashar, Hector Klie, MaryF. Wheeler, Umit Catalyurek, and
Joel Saltz. Dynamic data-driven systems approach for simulation based optimizations. In International Conference on Computational Science, volume 4487, pages 1213–1221, 2007.
[15] Frederica Darema. Dynamic data driven applications systems: New capabilities for application
simulations and measurements. In International Conference on Computational Science, volume
3515, pages 610–615, 2005.
[16] Douglas H Ernst, John P Bolte, and Shree S Nath. Aquafarm: simulation and decision support for
aquaculture facility design and management planning. Aquacultural Engineering, 23(1):121–179,
2000.
[17] Halmar Halide, A. Stigebrandt, M. Rehbein, and A.D. McKinnon. Developing a decision support
system for sustainable cage aquaculture. Environmental Modelling & Software, 24(6):694–702,
2009.
[18] W. Silvert. Decision support systems for aquaculture licensing. Journal of Applied Ichthyology,
10(4):307–311, 1994.
[19] J. D. Berm´
udez, J. V. Segura, and E. Vercher. A decision support system methodology for
forecasting of time series based on soft computing. Comput. Stat. Data Anal., 51(1):177–191,
2006.
[20] M.I. Animas, B.D. Gerardo, Yung-Cheol Byun, and M.B. Concepcion. Decision support system
for agricultural management using prediction algorithm. In Computer and Information Science
(ICIS), 2013 IEEE/ACIS 12th International Conference on, pages 191–194, 2013.
[21] Kuralmani Vellaisamy and Jinyan Li. Multidimensional decision support indicator (mdsi) for time
series stock trend prediction. In Advances in Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining, volume 4426,
pages 841–848, 2007.
[22] Fernando Turrado Garc´ıa, Luis Javier Garc´ıa Villalba, and Javier Portela. Intelligent system for
time series classiﬁcation using support vector machines applied to supply-chain. Expert Syst. Appl.,
39(12):10590–10599, 2012.
[23] Gianluca Bontempi, Souhaib Ben Taieb, and Yann-Al Le Borgne. Machine learning strategies
for time series forecasting. In Business Intelligence, volume 138 of Lecture Notes in Business
Information Processing, pages 62–77, 2013.
[24] Y. Wang and I.H. Witten. Induction of model trees for predicting continuous classes. In 9th
European Conference on Machine Learning, 1997.
[25] S.K. Shevade, S.S. Keerthi, C. Bhattacharyya, and K. R K Murthy. Improvements to the smo
algorithm for svm regression. Neural Networks, IEEE Transactions on, 11(5):1188–1193, Sep 2000.
[26] M. J. Aitkenhead and R. J. Cooper. Neural network time series prediction of environmental
variables in a small upland headwater in ne scotland. Hydrological Processes, 22(16):3091–3101,
2008.
[27] Marcella Corduas. Mining time series data: A selective survey. In Francesco Palumbo, Carlo Natale
Lauro, and Michael J. Greenacre, editors, Data Analysis and Classiﬁcation, Studies in Classiﬁcation, Data Analysis, and Knowledge Organization, pages 355–362. Springer Berlin Heidelberg,

1244

A Dynamic Data-driven Decision Support for Aquaculture Farm Closure

Shahriar and McCulluch

2010.
[28] Tasmanian shellﬁsh quality assurance program (tsqap). http://www.dhhs.tas.gov.au/peh/tsqap.
[29] Department of primary industries, parks, water and environment. http://www.dpiw.tas.gov.au.
[30] Bureau of meteorology. http://www.bom.gov.au.

1245

