Procedia Computer Science
Volume 80, 2016, Pages 565–576
ICCS 2016. The International Conference on Computational
Science

Predictor Discovery for Early-Late Indian
Summer Monsoon Using Stacked Autoencoder
Moumita Saha1 , Pabitra Mitra1 , Ravi S. Nanjundiah2
1
2

Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Kharagpur, India
moumita.saha2012@gmail.com, pabitra@gmail.com
Centre for Atmospheric and Oceanic Sciences; Divecha Centre for Climate Change, Indian Institute
of Science, Bangalore, India
ravi@caos.iisc.ernet.in

Abstract
Indian summer monsoon has distinct behaviors in its early and late phase. The inﬂuencing
climatic factors are also diﬀerent. In this work we aim to predict the national rainfall in these
phases. The predictors used by the forecast models are discovered using a stacked autoencoder
deep neural network. A ﬁtted regression tree is used as the forecast model. A superior accuracy
to state of art method is achieved. We also observe that the late monsoon can be predicted
with higher accuracy than early monsoon rainfall.
Keywords: Feature learning, Monsoon predictors, Stacked autoencoder, Early and Late Indian summer
monsoon

1

Introduction

Monsoon is an important climatic phenomenon which aﬀects the economy of agricultural land
like India. While monsoon is of great importance, its prediction is challenging in climate domain. Most state-of-the-art numerical models which have good skill elsewhere have serious
problems in predicting the Indian monsoon [9]. Variation of monsoon is more pronounced in
tropical region, which causes prediction of Indian monsoon more challenging. It is the primary
source of fresh water for water bodies of the region. In addition, more than half of the farmlands
are rain-fed and thus the agricultural calendar is governed by the monsoon.
We focus on prediction of early and late Indian summer monsoon occurring in month of JuneJuly and August-September, respectively. Prediction of monsoon in two phases at appropriate
lead month for each phase will assists in planning agricultural policies accordingly. India Meteorological Department (IMD) continually reassess diﬀerent variables and update the prediction
models for issuing better forecast of Indian monsoon [2, 10, 11] in an year. Even current numerical models struggle to give prediction of India with good accuracy [9].
Predictors derived from anomaly of climatic variables are good indicator of monsoon. Set of
Selection and peer-review under responsibility of the Scientiﬁc Programme Committee of ICCS 2016
c The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V.

doi:10.1016/j.procs.2016.05.337

565

Predictor Discovery and Prediction of Early-Late Indian Monsoon

Saha et al.

inﬂuencing predictors of monsoon evolve with time. Experts update the predictors of monsoon
with time [10, 11]. Delsole and Shukla [1] selected predictors comparing the error variances of
models with diﬀerent predictor set. Wang et al. [14] speciﬁed that the failure of prediction
models for forecasting Indian monsoon was for their inability to capture new predictability
sources. Thus, it is crucial to revise the predictors of monsoon, which demands discovery of
new predictors inﬂuencing the monsoon phenomenon.
Conventionally, the predictors inﬂuencing are selected by studying the physical processes and
utilizing meteorological experiences. These approaches have certain pitfalls– (i) predictors are
obtained from anomaly of climatic variable of speciﬁc geographical region only, whereas more
inﬂuencing predictors can be gradient between climatic variables of diﬀerent geographical locations (as for example pressure diﬀerence between land and ocean advects the monsoonal
winds toward land), (ii) all grids over the globe are not explored, only certain locations are
examined from the meteorological knowledge, but predictors inﬂuencing an event evolve with
time, so new grids should be explored to include novel inﬂuencing predictors. The motivation
behind our work comprises of solution to the mentioned problems with our proposed approach
of automated predictor discovery using machine learning techniques. We focus on completely
data-driven approach without any dependency on meteorological knowledge or events. We use
stacked autoencoder which assists in discovery of novel predictors by non-linear combination of
climatic variables of diﬀerent geographical locations.
Autoencoders are used in non-linear feature reduction [3]. Li and Yang [6] proposed a hybrid
strategy using auto-encoder and forecasted wind power utilizing sparse Bayesian regression
model. Autoencoder architecture learns highly non-linear function and used in transformation
of complex data into form which is stable and eﬀective [13].
Prediction of monsoon can be improved by introducing novel monsoon predictors and improvising the prediction model. Considering both the issues, the proposed work contributes in two
directions– (i) discovery of new monsoon predictors using stacked autoencoder from climatic
variables, (ii) introducing ensemble of regression tree prediction model with discovered predictors to forecast early and late Indian monsoon. The process involved in early part of monsoon
(i.e June-July) can be diﬀerent from later part of monsoon (i.e August-September), which justify prediction in two temporal phases. Phenomena such as Eurasian snow cover can have an
impact on the early part of monsoon while eﬀects as the Equatorial Indian Ocean Oscillation
and the Indian Ocean Dipole can have higher impact during the later part of monsoon.
The proposed approach initiates with unsupervised learning of features from global climatic
variables using stack autoencoder followed by supervised selection of predictors for both phases
of monsoons by studying learned predictors’ correlation with monsoons. Stacked autoencoder
discovers new predictors at its internal layers as combination of climatic variables from diﬀerent
spatial locations. More deeper are the levels of stacked autoencoder, the more complex and
compressed are the predictors. Ensemble of regression tree prediction model is introduced with
discovered monsoon predictors to forecast the monsoon. Prediction model shows high accuracy
and also establish its superiority in prediction over existing models.

2

Data Used and Preprocessing

Two prime climatic variables important for monsoon are used for predictor discovery for period 1948-2015. First is sea level pressure (SLP ), chosen as its gradient between land and sea
advects monsoon winds causing rainfall [11]. It is acquired from NCEP reanalysis data [4] at
resolution of 2.5◦ × 2.5◦ . Second is sea surface temperature (SST ), which is shown to be highly
566

Predictor Discovery and Prediction of Early-Late Indian Monsoon

Saha et al.

correlated to monsoon [10]. It is collected from NOAA OI SST V2 [12] at resolution of 2◦ × 2◦ .
As preprocessing, climatic variables are converted to monthly anomaly by subtracting monthly
mean over time-period from corresponding values. Monthly mean is calculated considering
rainfall of all the years irrespective of year being normal, drought or excess. Next, the world is
divided into regions of dimension 20◦ longitude ×10◦ latitude, which sum up to 324 regions.
Regions having less than 20 % values as Null are considered further. All the time-series of
variable within a region are averaged to obtain a single time series representing that particular
region. Number of regions for SLP and SST after processing are 324 and 240.
We focus on early and late Indian summer monsoon, occurring in months of June-July
and August-September. They are acquired from India Meteorological Department Pune
(www.imdpune.gov.in) for period 1948-2014. Long period average (LPA) (1948-2014 ) value
of early and late monsoons are 460.1 mm and 441.5 mm.

3

Predictor Discovery using Stacked Autoencoder

Proposed approach to discovery of monsoon predictors using stacked autoencoder and prediction
of early and late Indian monsoon using learned discovered predictors is shown in Figure 1.

Figure 1: Proposed approach of monsoon predictor discovery using stacked autoencoder

567

Predictor Discovery and Prediction of Early-Late Indian Monsoon

3.1

Saha et al.

Stacked Autoencoders

A single-layer autoencoder is an artiﬁcial neural network, used to learn salient features of data.
It sets its output values same as its input. Single-layer autoencoders are stacked to form a deep
network with the output of autoencoder of previous layer as input to the current autoencoder
(shown in Figure 2).
Unsupervised pretraining is performed one layer at a time, where each layer is trained by
minimizing the error in re-constructing output from input (left of Figure 2). The process is
continued until the re-construction error does not reduce further or it get saturated. After
pretraining of all layers, the whole network is ﬁne-tuned using gradient descent to update the
weights of the network (right of Figure 2). It provides a non-linear mapping by iterative training
of architecture and new predictors are learned at the internal layers of the stacked autoencoder.

Figure 2: Stacked autoencoder showing layer-wise pretraining followed by ﬁne-tunning
Stacked autoencoder are built for feature learning and discovering predictors for early and late
monsoons. Separate architectures are framed for sea level pressure, sea surface temperature
and combination of both variables. They are built to a depth of three layers. Input to the ﬁrst
autoencoder of stack consists of nodes corresponding to selected regions (Section 2). Input-tohidden ratio is considered as 15 % for all levels. The nodes corresponding to the hidden layers
represent the composite learned features which are the representative for new predictors. The
hidden layer of the ﬁrst autoencoder acts as input to second autoencoder and same trend is
followed for the third.
The stacked autoencoder for sea level pressure has architecture [324 97 29 9 29 97 324], where
324 is number of input variables (corresponding to the regions), number of nodes in hidden
layer of ﬁrst autoencoder is 97, second is 29 and third is 9 ; and the rest represents the decoder
part. The structure for sea surface temperature is [240 72 21 6 21 72 240] and ﬁnally, combined
variables of SLP and SST has layers as [564 169 50 15 50 169 564], where 564 input nodes
consist of 324 SLP and 240 SST nodes.

3.2

Feature Learning for Identiﬁcation of Predictors of Monsoon

Feature learning using stacked autoencoder followed by supervised selection of discovered predictors are performed to identify predictors for early and late Indian monsoon. It compromises
of the following steps.
• Feature learning by training of stacked autoencoder from global climatic variables to
obtain derived features from combination of variables at diﬀerent geographical regions
568

Predictor Discovery and Prediction of Early-Late Indian Monsoon

Saha et al.

• Threshold of weights from architecture of stacked autoencoder for learned feature extraction that are representative for new predictors
• Supervised predictors ranking and selection by correlation study of predictors’ with two
phases of monsoons to identify set of predictors for each of the two categories
3.2.1

Feature learning

Training of stacked autoencoder leads to feature learning at internal layers of architecture. This
is unsupervised step without any intervention of monsoon values. Layer-wise pretraining of each
autoencoder with objective of minimizing the error in reconstructing its input, followed by ﬁnetuning of the deep stack network is performed. Training period of 1948-2000 is considered
for optimizing the deep network. The nodes in the hidden layers of the trained architecture
represent the composite learned features which are representative for new predictors.
3.2.2

Threshold of weights

Stacked autoencoder are constructed to a depth of three, which results in feature learning at
three internal layers. The weight matrix corresponding to each internal layer is thresholded
to obtain new predictors from learned features. Threshold is imposed by considering weights
greater than twice times the standard deviation over the mean of weight matrix. This threshold is considered empirically, which encapsulates atleast 10% of input nodes participating in
evaluation of hidden node (new predictor). Lastly, new predictors are calculated as weighted
sum of input nodes being selected after thresholding.
Formally, say xi represents input node, i = 1, · · · , n, and hj represents hidden node, j =
1, · · · , m, and Wij represents the weight of input node xi for corresponding hidden node hj . A
particular predictor corresponding to hidden node hj is evaluated as shown in Equation 1.
n

hj =

Wij xi ,

∀i, such that Wij > thresholdj ,

(1)

i=1

where, thresholdj represents the threshold chosen for hidden node hj of speciﬁc internal layer.
3.2.3

Predictor ranking and selection

New predictors are ranked by studying their correlation with early and late Indian monsoon.
This is supervised and helps in selection of separate sets of discovered predictors for both phases
of monsoons. For each of three internal layers of deep network, a ranked set of predictors are
selected according to top correlation with early and late monsoons. Correlation is studied
considering lead of one to twelve months to ﬁnd best correlated month for each discovered
predictors using Pearson correlation (γ) (Equation 2).
γ=

Σni=1 (zi − z) (yi − y)
Σni=1 (zi − z)

2

Σni=1 (yi − y)

2

,

(2)

where, zi and yi represent Indian summer monsoon and identiﬁed predictor at ith year, z and
y are the corresponding mean during the period and n denotes the total number of years.
569

Predictor Discovery and Prediction of Early-Late Indian Monsoon

4

Saha et al.

Prediction Model with Discovered Monsoon Predictors

Predictor sets are built with discovered predictors– (i) considering predictors of SLP and SST,
exclusively, (ii) considering combination of predictors of both climatic variables.
The prediction model used is a ﬁtted ensemble of regression tree with bagging algorithm
(RegTreeB ) [8]. The main principle of this model is melding results from many weak learners into one high-quality ensemble prediction. It combines a set of trained weak regression
tree learner models and data on which these learners are trained [7]. It can predict ensemble
response by aggregating predictions from its weak learners.
We have used bagging algorithms for training the regression tree learners. This algorithm is
chosen owing to reasons– (i) bagging is a bootstrap aggregating technique assists in improving
estimation, (ii) it aids in improving the predictive performance of underlying regression tree,
(iii) tree ensembles deal with non-linear features, and (iv) can handle high dimensional data
and large number of training instances.

5

Experimental Results

The discovered early and late monsoon predictors at diﬀerent layers of stacked autoencoder are
evaluated in terms of their accuracy in predicting respective phases of monsoons. Geographical
locations of discovered predictors, discussion about the predictor sets and their performance in
prediction are discussed in following sections.

5.1

Geographical Locations of Discovered Monsoon Predictors

Spatial coverage of top ﬁve correlated discovered early and late monsoons’ predictors at the
ﬁrst hidden layer of stacked autoencoder for SLP and SST are shown in Figures 3 and 4. It is
noticed that new predictors are combination of variables from distant geographical locations.
Each color represents the geographical regions of variable that are combined to form a predictor.
Diﬀerent colors in same region represent participation of that region in all those predictors.
SLP predictors include regions known to inﬂuence monsoon phenomenon such as the Siberian
High and Mascrene High [15] (Figure 3). Some of the predictors such as SST s over the equatorial
Paciﬁc region can be related to El-Nino eﬀects (a strong inverse association exists between ElNino and Indian monsoon) [5] (Figure 4). This stands for validation of our technique.

Figure 3: Geographical locations of discovered predictors of SLP for early and late monsoon

570

Predictor Discovery and Prediction of Early-Late Indian Monsoon

Saha et al.

Figure 4: Geographical locations of discovered predictors of SST for early and late monsoon

5.2

Predictor Sets with Discovered Monsoon Predictors

Predictor sets are built with discovered predictors of individual variable (SLP and SST, separately) as well as predictors derived from combination of variables (SLP+SST combined).
Separate models with respective discovered predictors are used to predict early and late monsoons. Predictor sets PSet1, PSet2, PSet3, and PSet4 are built with top correlated 4, 5, 6, and
8 discovered predictors for both phases of monsoons distinctly. Lead months of each predictor
set is considered as the least lead month of any predictor in it (eg. say predictor set has three
predictors with lead month as March, January, and May, then the prediction by that set will
be delivered in May) (refer to Section 3.2.3). Predictor set with SLP forecasts early monsoon
at a lead of four months in February, while that with SST forecasts in May and combined
predictors predict at a lead of ﬁve months in January. In case of late monsoon prediction,
predictor set with SLP, SST, or SLP+SST predicts in the month of March.
Four predictor sets are built for every layers except for the discovered predictors at innermost
(third) layer, where three sets are built for SST in accordance to the number of discovered
predictors at this layer (six for SST ; refer to Section 3.1).

5.3

Prediction Accuracy with Individual Monsoon Predictors

Prediction accuracy of discovered predictors of early and late monsoons during test period
(2001-2014 ) with training of models for period 1948-2000 is studied. Standard deviation of
early and late monsoon are 12% and 14% of LPA rainfall. Deviation of these phases are greater
than aggregate Indian summer monsoon (sum of June, July, August, and September rainfalls),
which is 10% of LPA, making these forecasts more challenging.
Prediction model with separate respective predictors are used for prediction of early and late
monsoons. Mean absolute errors by predictor sets of SLP and SST are shown in Table 1.
Monsoon predictors of SLP predict early monsoon with mean absolute error of 6.9% at a lead
of four months (in February) and predict with 6.1% error with SST predictors (in May).
Similarly, for forecasting late monsoon, discovered predictors of SLP and SST predict with
mean absolute errors of 4.9% and 5.0% in March. Further inclusion of data from April-July
for late predictors does not improve the prediction. Prediction with discovered predictors for
late monsoon is superior to that of early monsoon.
It is noted that for discovered predictors of both variables SLP and SST, accuracy in prediction
decreased with more composite predictors at deeper layers. Highest accuracy is observed with
predictors at ﬁrst layer and it reduces with predictors from subsequent deeper layers. It is
because the features are discovered at the ﬁrst layer of stack and the other deeper layers help
in compression of features obtained at the shallower layer.
571

Predictor Discovery and Prediction of Early-Late Indian Monsoon

Saha et al.

Table 1: Mean absolute errors (%) for early and late Indian monsoon prediction with discovered
predictors of SLP and SST at all layers of stacked autoencoder during test period 2001-2014
Prediction of Early Monsoon
Discovered predictors of ﬁrst layer
PSet1 PSet2 PSet3 PSet4
SLP
7.0
6.2
7.4
7.6
SST
6.1
6.7
7.4
7.0
Discovered predictors of second layer
SLP
7.8
8.2
7.8
8.0
SST
7.1
6.4
6.7
6.8
Discovered predictors of third layer
SLP
8.7
9.2
8.6
8.9
SST
8.4
8.4
8.0
-

Prediction of Late Monsoon
Discovered predictors of ﬁrst layer
PSet1 PSet2 PSet3 PSet4
SLP
7.6
6.9
6.2
4.9
SST
7.5
7.7
7.5
6.3
Discovered predictors of second layer
SLP
6.8
7.5
7.0
6.1
SST
5.0
6.7
6.3
6.3
Discovered predictors of third layer
SLP
6.7
6.9
7.0
6.2
SST
8.8
8.5
8.2
-

Correlation between actual and predicted rainfall for early monsoon are 0.80 and 0.84 by SLP
and SST predictors, respectively. Similarly, the correlation for late monsoon prediction are
0.84 and 0.74. The results verify high linearity between actual and predicted rainfalls.
Departure of actual and predicted early monsoon from LPA is shown in Figure 5. Predicted
rainfall follows same sign of anomaly as actual in most of the test years. It is noted that SST
based monsoon predictors forecast all the extremes correctly (extremes refer to either drought
which is rainfall below one standard deviation or excess which refers to rainfall above one
standard deviation), including drought of 2002, 2009, 2012, 2014 and excess in year 2013 during
early monsoon period of June-July. Figure 6 shows scatter plot of actual against predicted by
discovered predictors for late monsoon. It is noted that mostly the points are aligned to 45◦
line from horizontal, which symbolizes closeness of predicted rainfalls to actual.

Figure 5: Performance of forecasts of early
monsoon with predictors of SLP and SST

572

Figure 6: Actual against predicted late
monsoon with predictors of SLP and SST

Predictor Discovery and Prediction of Early-Late Indian Monsoon

5.4

Saha et al.

Prediction Accuracy with Combined Monsoon Predictors

Deploying SLP and SST as input to stacked autoencoder lead to predictors’ discovery, which
are combination of both variables. Prediction by combined predictors is shown in Table 2. Same
trend of decreasing accuracy in prediction with predictors at more deeper layers is observed.
Discovered combined predictors of SLP+SST predict early monsoon with mean absolute error
of 6.5% in January. Combined predictors produce mean absolute error of 4.9% in prediction
of late monsoon in March. These are the best forecasts with discovered predictors. Data
from subsequent months do not improve the forecasts further. Correlation between actual and
predicted rainfalls are 0.83 and 0.70 for early and late monsoons, respectively.
Table 2: Mean absolute errors (%) for early and late Indian monsoon prediction with combined
predictors SLP+SST at all layers of stacked autoencoder during test period 2001-2014
Prediction of Early Monsoon
Discovered predictors of ﬁrst layer
PSet1 PSet2 PSet3 PSet4
SLP+SST 7.1
7.2
6.8
7.5
Discovered predictors of second layer
SLP+SST 8.3
8.1
8.5
8.5
Discovered predictors of third layer
SLP+SST 8.4
8.1
8.4
7.7

Prediction of Late Monsoon
Discovered predictors of ﬁrst layer
PSet1 PSet2 PSet3 PSet4
SLP+SST 5.3
5.0
4.9
5.3
Discovered predictors of second layer
SLP+SST 8.7
8.1
8.3
7.9
Discovered predictors of third layer
SLP+SST 6.8
7.0
7.3
6.5

Figures 7 and 8 show the prediction by combined predictors and individual predictors for early
and late monsoon during test-period 2001-2014, respectively. Figures show that predicted
rainfall follows the same trend as the actual, even predicted rainfall follows the same sign
(positive or negative departure from LPA) as the actual rainfall in most of the test years.
For early monsoon, all the drought years (2002, 2009, 2012 2014 ) are predicted correctly with
negative anomaly from mean by discovered predictors of SST, SLP, and SLP+SST, and excess
year of 2013 is also identiﬁed correctly. Extreme years are well captured by the discovered
predictors of SST. In case of late monsoon, predictions by combined predictors of SLP+SST
are appreciable in following the pattern of actual rainfall in all test years except 2001. Extremes
during test period are two, drought of 2001 and 2009, which are engrossed by SLP predictors.

5.5
5.5.1

Relevance of Discovered Monsoon Predictors
Comparison of discovered predictors against raw climatic variables

We have created predictor sets with initial raw climatic variables by considering top correlated
variables with each phases of monsoons. Same prediction model and number of predictors at
best lead months are considered to compare it with prediction given by discovered predictors by
our proposed approach. It is observed that prediction by the discovered predictors are superior
over best correlated initial variables (Figures 9 and 10).
5.5.2

Comparison of discovered predictors against existing model

Prediction by discovered predictors are compared with prediction by India Meteorological Department (IMD) [11]. Early monsoon is not forecasted, but IMD started predicting late monsoon from 2010 (imd.gov.in). Thus, we can present comparison for ﬁve years (2010-2014 ).
573

Predictor Discovery and Prediction of Early-Late Indian Monsoon

Saha et al.

Figure 7: Prediction of early monsoon by
combined predictors against individual

Figure 8: Prediction of late monsoon by
combined predictors against individual

Figure 9: Error for early monsoon by discovered predictors against initial variables

Figure 10: Error for late monsoon by discovered predictors against initial variables

IMD model has six predictors, namely, NE Paciﬁc to NW Atlantic SST gradient, SE equatorial
Indian Ocean SST, East Asia SLP, Central Paciﬁc SST, North Atlantic SLP and North central
Paciﬁc 850 zonal wind; and they uses ensemble multiple linear regression for prediction model.
IMD model predicts late monsoon in August with mean absolute error of 7.8%. Our proposed
models with discovered predictors of SLP, SST, and SLP+SST predict in March with mean
absolute errors of 3.7%, 3.4%, and 2.4%, respectively. Superiority of our proposed model with
discovered predictors is prominent over IMD predictors and model, both in term of accuracy
and lead month of prediction.
Predictions by IMD model and identiﬁed predictors of SLP, SST, and SLP+SST for all years
from 2010 to 2014 against actual rainfall is shown in Figure 11. It is noted that prediction by
identiﬁed predictors are nearer to the actual rainfall as compared to the prediction made by the
IMD models. Even in years 2011 and 2012, prediction by IMD model shows negative anomaly
from long period average value, whereas the actual rainfall anomaly was positive.
574

Predictor Discovery and Prediction of Early-Late Indian Monsoon

Saha et al.

Figure 11: Comparison of predictions by identiﬁed combined predictors of SLP, SST, SLP+SST
and IMD current model [11] against actual rainfall for period 2010-2014

6

Conclusions

Feature learning is adopted using stacked autoencoder followed by supervised selection of composite features for discovery of predictors of early and late monsoons of India. Diﬀerent monsoon
predictors are obtained from layers of stacked autoencoder. Predictors extracted from the ﬁrst
layer are found to be superior in terms of prediction skills. Ensemble of regression tree model
with discovered predictors shows appreciable performance in forecasting.
Mean absolute errors of 6.2% and 4.9% are attained for two phases of monsoons. In addition,
in comparison to IMD prediction for later part of monsoon with 7.8% error, prediction by our
proposed predictors are as low as 2.4%. Late monsoon is forecasted with better accuracy than
early monsoon. Proposed model with identiﬁed predictors also captures the extremes.
The future directions of our work includes implementing diﬀerent models for diﬀerent subregions of India, which will assist in engrossing monsoon process at ﬁner scale. We will also
focus on considering local factors like humidity, wind velocity and direction to built better
model for monsoon. We will concentrate on other deep neural architecture like convolutional
network to extract non-linear predictors, from combination of diﬀerent variables from multiple
layers of neural collections of network. The signiﬁcance of discovered predictors in climate
domain from background of physical climatic process and their inﬂuence in diﬀerent climatic
phenomenon can also be explored. We will also like to look at predicting variations of monsoon
at sub-seasonal scale especially the active-break cycles during season of monsoon.

References
[1] T. DelSole and J. Shukla. Linear prediction of Indian monsoon rainfall. Journal of Climate,
15:3645–3658, 2002.
[2] V. Gowariker, V. Thapliyal, S. M. Kulshrestha, G. S. Mandal, N. Sen Roy, and D. R. Sikka. A
power regression model for long range forecast of southwest monsoon rainfall over India. Mausam,
42(2):125–130, 1991.
[3] G. E. Hinton and R. R. Salakhutdinov. Reducing the dimensionality of data with neural networks.
Science, 313(5786):504–507, 2006.

575

Predictor Discovery and Prediction of Early-Late Indian Monsoon

Saha et al.

[4] E. Kalnay, M. Kanamitsu, R. Kistler, W. Collins, D. Deaven, L. Gandin, M. Iredell, S. Saha,
G. White, J. Woollen, Y. Zhu, A. Leetmaa, R. Reynolds, M. Chelliah, W. Ebisuzaki, W. Higgins,
J. Janowiak, K. C. Mo, C. Ropelewski, J. Wang, R. Jenne, and D. Joseph. The NCEP/NCAR
40-Year Reanalysis Project. Bulletin of the American Meteorological Society, 77(3):437–471, 1996.
[5] K. K. Kumar, B. Rajagopalan, M. Hoerling, G. Bates, and M. Cane. Unraveling the mystery of
indian monsoon failure during el nino. Science, 314(5796):115–119, 2006.
[6] Y. Li and R. Yang. A hybrid algorithm combining auto-encoder network with Sparse Bayesian
Regression optimized by Artiﬁcial Bee Colony for short-term Wind Power Forecasting. Przeglkad
Elektrotechniczny, 89, 2013.
[7] W. Y. Loh. Classiﬁcation and regression tree methods. Encyclopedia of statistics in quality and
reliability, 2008.
[8] MATLAB. Statistics and Machine Learning Toolbox. MATLAB version 2012b, The MathWorks
Inc., Natick, Massachusetts, United States, 2012.
[9] R. Nanjundiah, P. Francis, M. Ved, and S. Gadgil. Predicting extremes of Indian summer monsoon
rainfall with coupled ocean-atmosphere models. Current Science, 104(10):1380–1393, 2013.
[10] M. Rajeevan, D. S. Pai, S. K. Dikshit, and R. R. Kelkar. IMD’s new operational models for longrange forecast of southwest monsoon rainfall over India and their veriﬁcation for 2003. Current
Science, 86(3):422–431, 2004.
[11] M. Rajeevan, D. S. Pai, R. A. Kumar, and B. Lal. New statistical models for long-range forecasting
of southwest monsoon rainfall over India. Climate Dynamics, 28(7-8):813–828, 2007.
[12] R. W. Reynolds, N. A. Rayner, T. M. Smith, D. C. Stokes, and W. Wang. An improved in situ
and satellite SST analysis for climate. Journal of Climate, 15:1609–1625, 2002.
[13] C. Song, F. Liu, Y. Huang, L. Wang, and T. Tan. Auto-encoder based data clustering. In
Progress in Pattern Recognition, Image Analysis, Computer Vision, and Applications, pages 117–
124. Springer, 2013.
[14] B. Wang, B. Xiang, J. Li, P. Webster, M. Rajeevan, J. Liu, and K. Ha. Rethinking Indian monsoon
rainfall prediction in the context of recent global warming. Nature communications, 6, 2015.
[15] A. Zhisheng, S.C. Clemens, J. Shen, X. Qiang, Z. Jin, Y. Sun, W.L. Prell, J. Luo, S. Wang, and
H. Xu. Glacial-interglacial indian summer monsoon dynamics. science, 333(6043):719–723, 2011.

576

