Procedia Computer Science
Volume 80, 2016, Pages 324–334
ICCS 2016. The International Conference on Computational
Science

Optimal Customer Targeting for Sustainable Demand
Response in Smart Grids ∗
Sanmukh R. Kuppannagari, Rajgopal Kannan, Charalampos Chelmis,
Arash S. Tehrani, and Viktor K. Prasanna
Ming Hsieh Department of Electrical Engineering,
University of Southern California, Los Angeles, California
{kuppanna,rajgopak,chelmis,saberteh,prasanna}@usc.edu

Abstract
Demand Response (DR) is a widely used technique to minimize the peak to average consumption ratio during high demand periods. We consider the DR problem of achieving a
given curtailment target for a set of consumers equipped with a set of discrete curtailment
strategies over a given duration. An effective DR scheduling algorithm should minimize
the curtailment error - the difference between the targeted and achieved curtailment values
- to minimize costs to the utility provider and maintain system reliability. The availability of smart meters with ﬁne-grained customer control capability can be leveraged to offer
customers a dynamic range of curtailment strategies that are feasible for small durations
within the overall DR event. Both the availability and achievable curtailment values of
these strategies can vary dynamically through the DR event and thus the problem of achieving a target curtailment over the entire DR interval can be modeled as a dynamic strategy
selection problem over multiple discrete sub-intervals. We argue that DR curtailment error minimizing algorithms should not be oblivious to customer curtailment behavior during
sub-intervals as (expensive) demand peaks can be concentrated in a few sub-intervals while
consumption is heavily curtailed during others in order to achieve the given target, which
makes such solutions expensive for the utility. Thus in this paper, we formally develop the
notion of Sustainable DR (SDR) as a solution that attempts to distribute the curtailment
evenly across sub-intervals in the DR event.√We formulate the SDR problem as an Integer Linear Program and provide a very fast 2-factor approximation algorithm. We then
propose a Polynomial Time Approximation Scheme (PTAS) for approximating the SDR
curtailment error to within an arbitrarily small factor of the optimal. We then develop a
novel ILP formulation that solves the SDR problem while explicitly accounting for customer strategy switching overhead as a constraint. We perform experiments using real data
acquired from the University of Southern Californias smart grid and show that our sustainable DR model achieves results with a very low absolute error of 0.001-0.05 kWh range.
∗ This work has been funded by the U. S. Department of Energy under Award Number DE-OE0000192, the Los Angeles
Department of Water and Power (LADWP) and the U.S. National Science Foundation under grant number ACI 1339756.

324

Selection and peer-review under responsibility of the Scientiﬁc Programme Committee of ICCS 2016
c The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V.

doi:10.1016/j.procs.2016.05.324

Optimal Customer Targeting for Sustainable . . . Kuppannagari, Kannan, Chelmis, Tehrani, Prasanna
Keywords: Demand Response, Smart Grids, ILP, Customer Selection

1

Introduction

Recent technological advances have transformed traditional power grids into complex cyber-physical
systems [7]. Widespread use of bi-directional smart meters, in addition to reporting energy consumption,
allows remote monitoring and intelligent grid control. Utility providers now have several tools at their
disposal to dynamically meet energy demand while ensuring reliability of their power grids.
Reliable operation of a power grid requires the utilities to constantly match (ﬂuctuating) energy
supply with (ﬂuctuating) load. If demand exceeds the generation capacity of the utility, it becomes
imperative for the utility to buy extra power from the spot market at higher rates thereby increasing its
expenditure. Typically, peak power consumptions of several customers overlap during certain periods of
a day. We refer to such periods as peak demand periods. During peak demand periods, the cumulative
demand from customers in the grid might exceed the generation capacity of the utility. Therefore,
utilities require sophisticated techniques to shift the consumption away from the peak demand period in
order to avoid or minimize the expenditure of buying extra power.
Demand Response (DR) is a technique widely used by the utilities to curtail consumption during
peak periods. Utilities enroll customers into DR programs. Enrollment in the DR can be voluntary:
customers can be incentivised to curtail their demands, or it can be involuntary: customers can be
penalized by increasing the tariffs. By reducing the consumption during peak periods, expenditure of
the utility is minimized without compromising the system reliability.
A customer can adopt one of the several available strategies to curtail consumption. Strategies are
actions such as turning down the air conditioner, dimming the lights which lead to reduction in power
consumption. Using the data available from smart meters for each customer and using the state-of-theart prediction techniques [3], utility can accurately predict the consumption of the customers during the
peak periods. It can also predict the curtailment in consumption for each strategy a customer can adopt.
Selecting the right set of customer-strategy pairs to achieve a targeted curtailment value is critical for
the success of a DR Event. The availability of smart controllers and meters with ﬁne-grained customer
control capability can be leveraged to offer customers a dynamic range of curtailment strategies that
are feasible for small durations within the overall DR event. The objective function is deﬁned such
that it minimizes the aggregate deviation from the target as well as the maximum deviation from the
smoothed average target. We refer to such a Demand Response event as Sustainable Demand Response.
Sustainable Demand Response ensures that the DR-event is sustainable over the entire period.
The notion of Sustainable Demand Response is different from the existing works such as [11] which
target the entire period to achieve the curtailment target. The limitation of such a Demand Response
is that it tries to achieve an aggregate curtailment target over a period of time which may lead to aggressively curtailing demands in some intervals while accumulating demands in other intervals of the
DR event. This could be unsustainable to the utility as certain intervals in which demands accumulate
might exhibit a demand value which exceeds the generation capacity. We had previously formulated an
Integer Linear Program(ILP) [10] for the problem of Demand Response targeting the entire DR period
to bound the curtailment error: the difference between the achieved curtailment value and the targeted
curtailment value which in some cases can be as high as 70% in the existing heuristics [12].
The contributions of this work are as follows:
• Formally deﬁne the notion of Sustainable Demand Response and empirically evaluate its advantages over the Demand Response which targets the entire period.
• Develop Integer Linear Programming formulation for Sustainable Demand Response to achieve
325

Optimal Customer Targeting for Sustainable . . . Kuppannagari, Kannan, Chelmis, Tehrani, Prasanna

optimal minimum curtailment error: the difference between the achieved curtailment value and
the targeted curtailment value.
√
• A Fast 2-factor approximation algorithm and a PTAS for the ILP formulations.
• Develop the notion of strategy overheads and formulate a novel ILP for Sustainable Demand Response with strategy overheads. This formulation takes into account that it may be uneconomical
to rapidly switch strategies between intervals and thus limits the number of strategy switches by
a customer during the DR event.

2

Related Work

Signiﬁcant literature exists addressing the challenges, solutions, implementations and estimation
methodology for calculating the energy savings for Demand Response (DR) [2, 16]. Early works
focused on DR scheduling for individual residential cases [14] or household appliances [8]. These
approaches are not scalable to smart grids.
Traditionally, DR algorithms have focused on targeting customers based on aggregate consumption
data, relying on customer selection using billing data or surveys [13, 15], employing dynamic programming techniques for load management and minimizing peak load over a period [6], particle swarm
optimization based techniques [17] and game theoretical solutions constrained by real time pricing [5]
and customer comfort levels [4]. However, with data available from smart meters, work such as [18]
show that such approaches are very inaccurate. The actual consumption data over a period differs significantly from the data obtained from surveys or billing cycles. Moreover, the selection is done oblivious
to the distribution of load throughout the day. Therefore such approaches contribute little to reducing
the peak energy consumption and distributing it over other periods.
The authors in [19] develop a quadratic programming formulation for Demand Response which is
then reduced into a distributed algorithm. The paper assumes the availability of continuous curtailment
values. However, the practical DR implementation in USC’s smartgrid allows only discrete curtailment
values which forms the basis of modeling them as such in our work. This constraint makes the problem more complicated as the linear/quadratic program gets converted into an integer linear/quadratic
program.
The authors in [11] propose a stochastic knapsack based algorithm for selecting customers to maximize the probability the desired curtailment value is achieved over the period of the entire DR event
while limiting the utility’s cost. The algorithm relies on the central limit theorem to assume the joint
customer response is normally distributed and thus is conditioned on the assumption that there are a
large number of customers from whom a subset can be selected.
The notion of achieving sustainable DR over a peak period divided into subintervals was proposed
in [20] using a change making heuristic to evenly distribute curtailment over intervals. However, a detailed analysis (omitted due to space constraints) shows that it achieves consistency between intervals
without reference to the target leading to unbounded errors which is also demonstrated by our experimental results.

3

Demand Response Formulation

We have discussed the problem of optimal customer selection for minimizing the curtailment error during the entire period of Demand Response extensively in one of our previous works [10]. We summarize
the discussion for completeness.
326

Optimal Customer Targeting for Sustainable . . . Kuppannagari, Kannan, Chelmis, Tehrani, Prasanna

We are given a set S of M customers, N strategies and a C ∈ RM ×N curtailment matrix with
element cij denoting the curtailment value of customer i adopting strategy j. Let xij denote the corresponding decision variable. Let the achievable curtailment value across the entire DR event be γ. The
problem can be formulated as an ILP as follows:
M

M inimize :

N

cij xij − γ |

|

(1)

i=1 j=1
N

Subject to :

xij = 1

∀i {1, . . . , M }

xij ∈ {0, 1},

∀i, j

(2)

j=1

Equation 2 ensures that a customer adopts exactly one strategy in the DR event. This includes the
default strategy with a curtailment value of 0. Experimental results are provided in [10].

4
4.1

Sustainable Demand Response
Motivation

The algorithm mentioned in the previous section might aggressively curtail the demand in some intervals
while accumulating demands in other intervals. Such assignments have peaks in certain intervals, which
can possibly exceed the generation capacity forcing the utility to pay for additional procurement of
energy.
We deﬁne the notion of Sustainable Demand Response (SDR) to address such cases. SDR attempts
to evenly smooth the curtailment over the entire period of the DR event. Hence we deﬁne SDR as the
customer-strategy assignment which minimizes the l 1 distance between achieved curtailment values
and a smoothed target value per interval.
As before we are given a set S of M customers, N strategies. The entire DR period is divided into
discrete time intervals. Dynamic customer strategies are represented by a time varying curtailment matrix C(t) ∈ RM ×N with element cij (t) denoting the discrete curtailment value of customer i adopting
strategy j at time interval t where t ∈ {1, . . . , T }. Let X(t) be the decision matrix with element xij (t)
denoting the corresponding decision variable at time t with γ denoting the achievable curtailment value
across the entire DR event.

4.2

ILP Formulation for Sustainable DR

We use the following ILP to model a Sustainable DR event.
T

M inimize :

(3)

t
t=1
M

N

Subject to : |

cij (t)xij (t) −
i=1 j=1

γ
|≤
T

t

∀t (4)

N

xij (t) = 1

∀i, t (5)

j=1

∀xij (t) ∈ {0, 1}

∀i, j, t
327

Optimal Customer Targeting for Sustainable . . . Kuppannagari, Kannan, Chelmis, Tehrani, Prasanna

The objective is the minimize the L 1 norm (Equation 3). As before, Equation 5 ensures that at
any given interval, each customer adopts exactly one strategy. The various intervals in the ILP above
are independent. This makes it trivial to parallelize by solving each interval as a separate optimization
problem on a single node in a high performance cluster.
Algorithm 1: Fast

1
2
3

4
5

6
7
8
9

10
11
12
13
14

√

2-factor Sustainable DR Approximation

Preprocessing: Non-decreasing sorted lists {C (i) (t)} of customer-strategies for each customer
i ∈ S and each interval t
for intervals t = 1 to T do
√
γ
if ∃(k ∈ S) ∧ (j ∈ C (i) (t)) : Ckj (t) ∈ [ T √
, T2γ ] then
2
Xkj (t) ← 1 ;
// Select customer k and curtailment strategy Ckj (t)
else
√
(p, qp ) ← argmini∈S,j∈C (i) (t) {Cij (t)|Cij (t) ≥ γ 2/T } ;
// p and qp represent the customer and strategy indices of
√
the customer with the smallest curtailment value ≥ γ 2/T
Yp ← Cpqp (t) ;
√
For each customer i ∈ S : ki ← argmaxk {Cik (t) ≤ γ/(T 2)} ;
√
r
Let r denote the smallest index such that Yr ← i=1 Ciki (t); Yr ≥ γ/(T 2) ;
√
M
r ← M if i=1 Ciki (t) < γ/(T 2) ;
// Select Strategies for Activation as follows
√
√
if Yp − γ 2/T ≤ γ/(T 2) − Yr then
Set Xpqp (t) = 1 ;
else
for i ← 1 to r do
Set Xiki (t) = 1 ;
Output: Matrix {X(t)}
∀t. Bounded curtailment values
√ of selected customer-strategies
˜t
∗
∗
√
∈
[
,
2˜
],
where
˜
=
max(
,
γ/T
),
t
t
t
t
t is the optimal solution to ILP.
2

4.3

Fast

√

2-factor Approximation for Sustainable DR

We now describe a fast
√ algorithm for computing approximately optimal sustainable DR strategies. Our
algorithm provides a 2-factor approximation to the optimal target during each curtailment period and
therefore for the entire DR event.
√
Theorem 1. Algorithm 1 is a 2-factor approximation to the optimal sustainable DR solution.
The following result follows from a straightforward analysis of the algorithm.
√
Theorem 2. Algorithm 1 can be used to compute 2-approximate sustainable DR solutions in
O(T M log N ) time when strategies are preprocessed in advance for a given curtailment target. The
one-time preprocessing cost assuming apriori knowledge of curtailment strategies is O(T M N log N ).
By precomputing and storing results for a range of target values, we can speed up the retrieval of
approximately optimal strategies even further to O(1) time.
328

Optimal Customer Targeting for Sustainable . . . Kuppannagari, Kannan, Chelmis, Tehrani, Prasanna

4.4

A PTAS for Sustainable DR

While the approximation
algorithm above can be used to very quickly compute sustainable DR solutions,
√
the error due to the 2-factor approximation may be unacceptably large in some cases. Therefore, using
ideas from the subset sum problem [9] we develop a Polynomial Time Approximation Scheme (PTAS)
that approximates the optimal solution provided by the ILP in Equation 3 to within an arbitrarily small
-factor in time polynomial in M N/ .
Theorem 3. Algorithm 2 is a PTAS for the ILP in Equation 3.
The proofs for the theorems have been omitted due to space constraints.

5
5.1

Sustainable DR with Strategy Overheads
Motivation

Driven by our experience with existing DR implementations on the USC smartgrid, we observe that it
is impractical for customers to switch between too many strategies during the DR event as this leads
to additonal overhead costs. We model this as an additional constraint in the ILP by using a new state
transition variable that bounds τ , the number of times a customer can switch strategies between intervals.
Note that under this formulation, a customer is likely to have contiguous strategies across intervals. In
our experimental work section, we solve this ILP exactly for reasonable problem sizes (representing the
USC microgrid) using the IBM CPLEX Solver. For very large problem sizes, the time required for an
exact solution might be large. In such cases, one can use randomized rounding heuristics based on the
LP-relaxation of the ILP to obtain approximate solution

5.2

ILP formulation for Sustainable DR with Strategy Overheads

We use the following ILP to model a Sustainable DR event with strategy overheads.
T

M inimize :

(6)

t
t=1
M

N

Subject to : |

cij (t)xij (t) −
i=1 j=1

γ
|≤
T

t

∀t

(7)

N

xij (t) = 1

∀i, t (8)

j=1

xij (t) ∈ {0, 1}
Sij (t) = | xij (t) − xij (t − 1) |
T

∀i, j
∀i, j, t ∈ {2, . . . , T }

(9)

N

Sij (t) ≤ 2τ

∀i (10)

t=2 j=1

The new constraints to limit the strategy switching are introduced using 9 and 10 where 9 calculates
the number of times customer i switches a particular strategy. Equation 10 bounds the total number of
times a customer can switch strategies. Since the state variable Sij (t) counts both switching into and
switching out from strategy j, equation 10 uses 2τ as the bound. In our experiments, we ﬁx the value of
τ = 2.
329

Optimal Customer Targeting for Sustainable . . . Kuppannagari, Kannan, Chelmis, Tehrani, Prasanna

Algorithm 2: PTAS for Sustainable DR during each interval t
1
2
3

V0 ← mini,j Cij (t); X ← mini,j Cij (t) ≥ γ/T ;
Divide [V0 , X] into l intervals {[Vi , Vi+1 ]}, Vi+1 = (1 + )Vi , 0 ≤ i ≤ l − 2, Vl = X ;
∀k ∈ S : Ykj ← Vi if Ckj ∈ [Vi , Vi+1 ] ;
(0)

(0)

4

Bi (t) ← ∅; Qi (t) ← 0; i = 0, 1, . . . , n − 1 ;

5

// Bi (t) is a subset of the first k customers, each with a
non-zero strategy selection, that add up to a total
curtailment value ∈ [Vi , Vi+1 ].
for Customers k = 1 to M do
for all intervals i, all strategies r do
(k−1)
Xir ← Qi
(t) + Ykr ;
Let Xir ∈ [Vs , Vs+1 ] ;

(k)

6
7
8
9
10
11

(k−1)

if ¬Qs
(t) then
(k)
(k)
Qs (t) ← Vs // Making Qs (t) a feasible curtailment value
(k)

(k−1)

Bs (t) ← Bi
(t) Ckr (t) ;
// Adding customer k strategy r pair to the feasible
strategy set
(M )

Output: Bj

(t): Selection of customer-strategy pairs, where j is the closest interval to DR
(M )

target γ/T with Qj

6
6.1

(t) > 0

Experiments and Results
Evaluation Methodology

The objective of the ILPs formulated in this work is to minimize the curtailment error: difference between the targeted and achieved curtailment value. Since the ILPs are solved exactly, the respective
errors are optimal. We compare the optimal minimal errors with the actual errors achieved by the stateof-the-art heuristic [20].

6.2

Experimental Setup

The model used for experimental setup is based on an existing DR implementation on the University
of Southern California’s (USC) smartgrid. The USC’s smartgrid has over 50,000 smart meters which
provide power consumption data for every 15 minute interval. 27 buildings are enrolled in the DR
program and each building can adopt 1 out of 7 strategies. Demand Response events occur for 4 hours
on weekdays from 1 pm to 5 pm. Using state-of-the-art prediction algorithms, the power consumption
is predicted for each of the 27 buildings for the 4 hour horizon with very high accuracy. Moreover,
the demand curtailment value for each customer-strategy pair is predicted for each time interval of
the DR event. We use the Optimization Programming Language (OPL) to deﬁne the ILP formulations
developed in this work in the IBM ILOG CPLEX software [1]. CPLEX produces the optimal assignment
and reports the value of the objective function.
330

Optimal Customer Targeting for Sustainable . . . Kuppannagari, Kannan, Chelmis, Tehrani, Prasanna

(a) Absolute errors in kWh incurred for DR event on Mon- (b) Absolute errors in kWh incurred for DR event on
Tuesday 1-5 pm
day 1-5 pm

(c) Absolute errors in kWh incurred for DR event on (d) Absolute errors in kWh incurred for DR event on
Wednesday 1-5 pm
Thursday 1-5 pm

(e) Absolute errors in kWh incurred for DR event on Friday 1-5 pm

Figure 1: Absolute Error (kWh) incurred for Target values 50-1000 kWh in DR Events

331

Optimal Customer Targeting for Sustainable . . . Kuppannagari, Kannan, Chelmis, Tehrani, Prasanna

(a) Comparison of demand curtailment values achieved in each interval for SDR and TDR for the targeted curtailment value of 1200 kWh

6.3

Sustainable DR

In Figures 1a-1e, we compare the absolute errors in kWh incurred by the Sustainable Demand Response
(SDR) ILP formulation and the state-of-the-art heuristic for Targeted curtailment values ranging from
50-1000 kWh. The vertical axis is limited to a maximum error of 3.0 kWh to ensure the readability of
the graph. The actual error values are given in the table below the graphs.
Our SDR ILP is more restrictive as it ensures that the curtailment is distributed evenly across the
intervals which is not a constraint in the state-of-the-art heuristic. Despite this restriction, our SDR ILP
perform 4-2000 times better than the heuristic. The only time the heuristic performs better than our ILP
is on Wednesday for a Target of 1000 kWh where the error of our SDR ILP is 0.048 kWh while that of
the heuristic is 0.001 kWh.
To emphasize the signiﬁcance of Sustainable DR over a DR targeting the entire interval, we compare
the demand curtailment values achieved in each interval for the DR event for the targeted curtailment
value of 1200 kWh. The DR ILP targeting the entire interval (TDR) incurs an error of 0.002 kWh
which is far lower that the 0.031 kWh error incurred by the Sustainable DR ILP. However, most of the
curtailment is achieved in intervals 10 and 11 and the rest of the intervals have lower curtailment values.
The Sustainable DR achieves a curtailment value of around 75 kWh in each interval.

6.4

Sustainable DR with Strategy Overheads

The motivation behind using Sustainable DR with strategy overheads is to reduce the number of times
each building switches its strategy in the DR interval. We limit the number of times building i can switch
332

Optimal Customer Targeting for Sustainable . . . Kuppannagari, Kannan, Chelmis, Tehrani, Prasanna

strategies to τ = 2. In Figures 1a-1e, we compare the absolute errors in kWh incurred by the Sustainable
Demand Response with limits on strategy switching (SDR with switch limit) ILP formulation and the
state-of-the-art heuristic for Targeted curtailment values ranging from 50-1000 kWh. The vertical axis
is limited to a maximum error of 3.0 kWh to ensure the readability of the graph. The actual error values
are given in the table below the graphs.
The SDR with strategy overheads is even more restrictive than the SDR ILP. This is reﬂected in the
errors incurred which are an order higher than the SDR ILP. However, SDR with strategy overheads still
performs 2-700 times better than the state-of-the-art heuristic. The only times the heuristic performs
better than our ILP is on Wednesday for a Target of 1000 kWh where the errors 0.083 kWh and 0.001
kWh respectively and on Tuesday for a Target of 400 kWh where the errors are 0.203 kWh and 0.172
kWh respectively for our ILP and the heuristic. The maximum relative error incurred by our ILPs is 1%
whereas for the heuristic we observed relative errors as high as 12 %.
ILP is a computationally intensive process. To converge to the error rates shown in the results, the
IBM CPLEX required 5-10 minutes of processing time. Since DR programs are based on predictive
data [3] which are available in advance, the time required can be perceived as reasonable. For larger
problem sets, accuracy can be traded off with the fast bounded approximate heuristics proposed in this
paper.

7

Conclusion

In this work, we formulated the problem of customer selection for Demand Response as Integer Linear Programs (ILP). We motivated the need for the Sustainable Demand Response by experimentally
showing the cases where the Demand Response which targets the entire period produces peaks in the
consumption potentially exceeding the generation capacity of the utility, and how the problem could be
mitigated using Sustainable Demand Response. We showed that our ILP provides solutions with low
errors
even in the cases where the existing heuristics produce unbounded errors. We also provided a fast
√
2-factor approximation algorithm which returns approximately optimal DR strategies in O(1) time
and a Polynomial Time Approximation Algorithm for approximating the ILP. We developed a novel
ILP formulation that explicitly accounts for switching overhead and solves the sustainable DR problem.
In future work, we will focus on associating cost functions to strategy switching. We will also
incorporate a strategy transition matrix in our formulation which determines what strategy transitions
are possible for a customer at any given interval of time.

333

Optimal Customer Targeting for Sustainable . . . Kuppannagari, Kannan, Chelmis, Tehrani, Prasanna

References
[1] Ilog cplex optimization studio. Online: http://www-01.ibm.com/support/knowledgecenter/SSSA5P/welcome.
[2] Mohamed H Albadi and EF El-Saadany. Demand response in electricity markets: An overview. In IEEE
power engineering society general meeting, volume 2007, pages 1–5, 2007.
[3] Saima Aman, Charalampos Chelmis, and Viktor K Prasanna. Inﬂuence-driven model for time series prediction
from partial observations. In Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence, 2015.
[4] Antimo Barbato, Antonio Capone, Lin Chen, Fabio Martignon, and Stefano Paris. A power scheduling game
for reducing the peak demand of residential users. In Online Conference on Green Communications (GreenCom), 2013 IEEE, pages 137–142. IEEE, 2013.
[5] Jiang Chen, Bo Yang, and Xinping Guan. Optimal demand response scheduling with stackelberg game approach under load uncertainty for smart grid. In Smart Grid Communications (SmartGridComm), 2012 IEEE
Third International Conference on, pages 546–551. IEEE, 2012.
[6] Arthur I Cohen and Connie C Wang. An optimization method for load management scheduling. IEEE Trans.
Power Syst.;(United States), 3(2), 1988.
[7] Ayman Z Faza, Sahra Sedigh, and Bruce M McMillin. Reliability modeling for the advanced electric power
grid. Springer, 2007.
[8] Nikolaos Gatsis and Georgios B Giannakis. Cooperative multi-residence demand response scheduling. In
Information Sciences and Systems (CISS), 2011 45th Annual Conference on, pages 1–6. IEEE, 2011.
[9] Oscar H Ibarra and Chul E Kim. Fast approximation algorithms for the knapsack and sum of subset problems.
Journal of the ACM (JACM), 22(4):463–468, 1975.
[10] Sanmukh R Kuppannagari, Rajgopal Kannan, and Viktor K Prasanna. An ilp based algorithm for optimal customer selection for demand response in smartgrids. In The 2015 International Conference on Computational
Science and Computational Intelligence (CSCI), 2015.
[11] Jungsuk Kwac and Ram Rajagopal. Demand response targeting using big data analytics. In Big Data, 2013
IEEE International Conference on, pages 683–690. IEEE, 2013.
[12] Jungsuk Kwac and Ram Rajagopal. Targeting customers for demand response based on big data. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1409.4119, 2014.
[13] Loren Lutzenhiser, Laura Cesafsky, Heather Chappells, Marcia Gossard, Mithra Moezzi, Dulane Moran, Jane
Peters, Mersiha Spahic, Paul Stern, Elizabeth Simmons, et al. Behavioral assumptions underlying california
residential sector energy efﬁciency programs. Prepared for the California Institute for Energy and Environment Behavior and Energy Program, 2009.
[14] Federica Mangiatordi, Emiliano Pallotti, Paolo Del Vecchio, and Fabio Leccese. Power consumption scheduling for residential buildings. In Environment and Electrical Engineering (EEEIC), 2012 11th International
Conference on, pages 926–930. IEEE, 2012.
[15] Steven J Moss, M Cubed, and Kerry Fleisher. Market segmentation and energy efﬁciency program design.
Berkeley, California Institute for Energy and Environment, 2008.
[16] Farrokh Rahimi and Ali Ipakchi. Demand response as a market resource under the smart grid paradigm. Smart
Grid, IEEE Transactions on, 1(1):82–88, 2010.
[17] Arnaldo Sepulveda, Liam Paull, Walid G Morsi, Howard Li, CP Diduch, and Liuchen Chang. A novel demand
side management program using water heaters and particle swarm optimization. In Electric Power and Energy
Conference (EPEC), 2010 IEEE, pages 1–5. IEEE, 2010.
[18] Brian Artur Smith, Jeffrey Wong, and Ram Rajagopal. A simple way to use interval data to segment residential
customers for energy efﬁciency and demand response program targeting. In ACEEE Summer Study on Energy
Efﬁciency in Buildings, 2012.
[19] Pirathayini Srikantha and Deepa Kundur. Distributed demand curtailment via water-ﬁlling. In IEEE International Conference on Smart Grid Communications, 2015.
[20] Vasileios Zois, Marc Frincu, Charalampos Chelmis, Muhammad Rizwan Saeed, and Viktor Prasanna. Efﬁcient customer selection for sustainable demand response in smart grids. In IGCC, pages 1–6. IEEE, 2014.

334

