Available online at www.sciencedirect.com

Procedia Computer Science 9 (2012) 1571 – 1577

International Conference on Computational Science, ICCS 2012

Contrasting Knowledge Organization Systems for the description of
research products: the case of overlapping in the agricultural domain
Leonardo Lezcanoa*, Elena García-Barriocanala, Miguel-Angel Siciliaa
b
Computer Science Department, University of Alcalá
Polytechnic Building 28871 Alcalá de Henares, Spain
{leonardo.lezcano, elena.garciab, msicilia}@uah.es

Abstract
The use of Knowledge Organization Systems (KOS) as ontologies or terminologies for the description of scholarly contents
requires a careful consideration of the domain and the KOS available. KOS in the same domain may differ in several dimensions
including purpose, level of formality, structure and language. In consequence, curators of scientific data face the problem of
selecting the relevant KOS, developing mappings when appropriate and deciding on their usage for annotating resources. In
domains in which more than a KOS is available, curators need tools to help them in the decision making process. Due to the
available heterogeneity of KOS, exploratory tools are required for an initial assessment of overlapping and differences. This
paper reports on a practical experience using simple mapping analysis and mapping visualizations in the domain of agriculture.
These techniques represent promising directions for the development of decision tools based on the contrast of different KOS
metrics.

Keywords: ontology; scholarly resources; AGROVOC; Plant Ontology

1. Introduction
Knowledge Organization Systems (KOS) are schemes for organizing information. According to Hodge (2000),
KOS include classification and categorization schemes that organize materials at a general level, subject headings
that provide more detailed access, and authority files that control variant versions of key information such as
geographic names. KOS also include highly structured vocabularies, such as thesauri, and less traditional schemes,
such as semantic networks and ontologies. Different kind of KOS are nowadays used for the description of scholarly
resources of diverse kinds (papers, preprints, datasets, etc.), and some KOS are currently exposed in the Web using
some form of URI-based identification scheme for concepts or classifiers and in some cases they are accessed
through Application Programming Interfaces (API) for using them in diverse applications. It is also expected that
many of them progressively move to exposure in the Web of Linked Data (Bizer, Heath and Berners-Lee, 2009),

* Corresponding author. Tel.: +0-000-000-0000 ; fax: +0-000-000-0000 .
E-mail address: leonardo.lezcano@uah.es.

1877-0509 © 2012 Published by Elsevier Ltd. Open access under CC BY-NC-ND license.
doi:10.1016/j.procs.2012.04.172

1572

Leonardo Lezcano et al. / Procedia Computer Science 9 (2012) 1571 – 1577

thus enabling seamless navigation between them via dereferenceable URIs. However, scientific data is often curated
in specialized repositories or systems that foster the use of particular KOS via special aids in user interfaces that
help users select terms or classes to describe research contents.
Institutional repositories (IR) and other similar kinds of specialized digital collections have become an essential
infrastructure for exposing the intellectual inventory of research institutions (Lynch, 2003). In a similar direction,
CRIS (Current Research Information Systems) cover the research activity of an organization, following models that
expand to a detailed account of organizational structures, researchers, projects and grants among other information
entities (Jeffery & Asserson, 2008). Both IR and CRIS typically offer search and browsing functionalities to their
users, some of them mediated by terminologies and/or ontologies. In consequence, the decision of using some
particular KOS has an impact on the organization and functionality of scholarly content curation systems, and thus it
requires a previous analysis of the options available. The problem of deciding which KOS is better fitting a
particular collection involves the study of their degree of overlapping and extent to which the combination of KOS
is adding real value to the solution.
In other cases, an approach considering a single KOS would be a better option, and interoperation can be
achieved through KOS-to-KOS mappings. In any case, curators face the challenge of taking those decisions without
specific tools. Expertise in the history, coverage and other aspects of each KOS is required for the task, and in many
cases these are not available. An option for helping curators would be that of developing analysis tools that could be
used to have a quick impression on the similarities of the different KOS as a point of departure for a more
comprehensive evaluation. The simpler way of contrasting two KOS is by examining their mappings at the lexical
level. As lexical matching is usually covering a large amount of actual conceptual overlapping, it has the merit of
giving a first impression of the degree of complement or overlapping between different KOS. The mappings can
then be used for inspecting particular approaches to modelling, as well as to generate visual representations showing
overlapped areas in KOS hierarchies.
This paper reports on a concrete approach for the task of evaluating KOS overlapping and coverage in the
domain of agriculture. While the results are domain-specific, applied techniques can be further used to develop tools
that ease KOS evaluation by tailoring them to the needs of scientific data curators. The rest of this paper is
structured as follows. Section 2 provides background information on the ontologies and terminologies used in the
presented case. Then, Section 3 describes the mapping and analysis of overlapping between the previously
introduced KOS. Additional analysis using visualizations is provided in section 4. Finally, conclusions and outlook
are provided in Section 5.
2. Background
AGROVOC is a comprehensive multilingual agricultural thesaurus. Organized as a concept scheme, it contains
almost 40,000 concepts in over 20 languages covering subject fields in agriculture, forestry and fisheries, together
with crosscutting themes such as land use, rural livelihoods and food security. Concept schemes are more flexible
than traditional vocabulary models. They are able to handle taxonomies, controlled vocabularies, and subject
headers. AGROVOC standardizes data description to enable a set of core integration goals: interoperability,
reusability and cooperation. It is maintained by a global community of librarians, terminologists, information
managers and software developers.
The AGROVOC concept scheme can be represented by means of the Simple Knowledge Organization System
(SKOSb) formal language, which is commonly used and can be interpreted by a wide variety of existing systems.
There are three levels of representation:
concepts (the abstract meaning), for example “maize” in the sense of a cereal;
terms (language-specific lexical forms), for example “maize”, “maíz” or “corn” in order to provide a
multilingual support;

b

http://www.w3.org/TR/skos-reference/

Leonardo Lezcano et al. / Procedia Computer Science 9 (2012) 1571 – 1577

1573

term variants, for example “organization” or “organisation”, “cow” or “cows”, “Zea mays” or “Z. mays”,
thus providing a range of forms that can occur for each term such as spelling variants, singular, plural,
abbreviations, etc.
The abstract concepts build the actual structure of the concept scheme that is represented by all the terms in all
languages to which the concept scheme is associated. The entire representation of a concept often includes many
terms and both concepts and terms participate in relationships with other concepts and terms. AGROVOC contains
two types of relationships:
Inter-level relationships, which are in turn divided in:
– Concept-to-Term relationships such as has lexicalization that link concepts to their lexical
realizations, e.g., the “rice” concept links to its language-dependent terms such as “rice”, “riz”,
“arroz”, “paddy”, i.e., (concept) rice has lexicalization (English term) rice.
– Term-to-String relationships such as has acronym, has spelling variant and has abbreviation that
link language-dependent terms to their variants, e.g., African Union has acronym AU.
Intra-level relationships, which are in turn divided in:
– Concept-to-Concept relationships such as has subconcept and is used to make that relate two
different ideas, e.g., cereals has subconcept maize, maize is used to make corn flour.
– Term-to-Term relationships such as has synonym and has scientific name that relate two terms that
belong to the same concept, e.g., maize has synonym corn and beetles has scientific name
Coleoptera.
AGROVOC has been recently published as Linked Open Data (LOD) in order to connect the different knowledge
organization systems in the agricultural domain. Now it has 21,000 outlinks and 3,000 inlinks according to FAO’s
AGROVOC website. The new resources to which AGROVOC is linked include: EUROVOC, NALT, GEMET,
RAMEAU, LCSH, STW, TheSoz, DBpedia, Geopolitical Ontology and DDC.
The Plant Ontology (PO) allows users to ascribe attributes of plant structure (anatomy and morphology) and
developmental stages to data types, such as genes and phenotypes, to provide a semantic framework to make
meaningful cross-species and database comparisons (Avraham et al., 2008). The Plant Ontology Consortium (POC)
builds upon previous work by the Gene Ontology Consortium (GOC) by adopting and extending the GOC's
principles, existing software and database structure. PO is currently based on a small subset of concepts and
relations. Relations are specific to the particular domains addressed. The main relations are the following:
is_a: The is_a relation is used to indicate the relationship between a specific class and a more general one.
For example, megasprophyll is_a sporophyll and sporophyll is_a phyllome.
part of: The part_of relation is used to indicate that one class is part of another class. For example,
ectocarp is part_of pericarp, which in turn is part_of fruit.
derives_from: The derives_from relation is used to indicate that one plant structure succeeds another
across a temporal divide in such a way that at least a biologically significant portion of the matter of the
earlier structure is inherited by the later. For example, the fact that leaf-derived cultured plant cell
derives_from leaf indicates that a significant portion of the matter of a leaf-derived cultured plant cell is
inherited from some cell in a leaf.
develops_from: The develops_from relation is used to indicate that a plant structure develops from its
parent term. For example, root hair cell develops_ from trichoblast.
adjacent_to: The adjacent_to relation is used when one plant structure is in permanent contact with
another one. For example, anther wall endothecium adjacent_to anther wall exothecium. In this example,
every instance of anther wall endothecium should be in permanent contact with (adjacent_to) some
instance of anther wall exothecium. This does not imply that every anther wall exothecium is adjacent to
some anther wall endothecium. If the latter were also true, that relation would have to be asserted
separately. The adjacent_to relation is not transitive.
participates_in: The participates_in relation is used to indicate that an anatomical entity only occurs
during a particular plant growth or development stage. For example archegonium participates_in
gametophytic phase and vascular tissue participates_in sporophytic phase.

1574

Leonardo Lezcano et al. / Procedia Computer Science 9 (2012) 1571 – 1577

The Organic.Edunet (OE) ontology is the ontology developed to support the Organic.Edunet portalc. Within this
portal, the Organic.Edunet ontology is mainly used for two purposes:
Resource annotation: each time a content provider insert a resource in the repository, the resource is
annotated with one or more concepts extracted from the ontology.
Resource retrieval: when web users perform queries on the system, the ontology is used in order to perform
advanced searches based on semantic techniques.
The OE ontology is structured in four different sub-ontologies that cover different aspects of the Organic
Agriculture domain. They are:
Issues: they represent all matter of discussion, debate, or public concern in the agricultural domain.
Activities: they represent the list of abstract concepts used to serve as the basis for more specific concepts
in the OE ontology.
Methods and techniques: they represent the list of concepts giving support to most of the methods and
practices used in agriculture.
Products: they represent the result of agricultural activities. These concepts are split into three subconcepts: processed products (they are the results of one or more processes of manipulation, e.g. beer,
cheese, etc.), unprocessed products (all kinds of vegetables, chemical compounds and products of an
animal origin), and fertilizers.
3. Studying overlapping: insights from the VOA3R project
The principal use of ontologies and terminologies, as described above, is that of annotating the resources inside
repositories of scholarly content, and then exploiting those annotations for purposes of information filtering in
general (search, navigation, recommending resources, etc.). The following reports the analysis carried out by lexical
mapping of PO, AGROVOC and the OE ontology. In addition to concepts, the OE ontology also defines a set of
relationships based, and subsequently adapted, on the set of basic relationships described in the FAO AGROVOC
thesaurus, e.g. actsUpon, affects, afflicts, etc.
The OE ontology is targeted to one of the user communities defined in the VOA3R project. In order to define its
usefulness in the new context where AGROVOC was used as a foundation, an inquiry was carried out to identify the
extent to which AGROVOC could be used as a replacement of this ontology. Evidence was found in two issues: (a)
it is difficult to determine the frontiers between terms that are specific to organic agriculture and those that are not,
and (b) the OE ontology contains terms that are not exclusive to organic agriculture and agroecology.
AGROVOC
terms

OE ontology
terms

Exact matches

40,905

289

98 (34%)

Partial matches
(AGROVOC term as
substring)
262

Partial matches
(OEO term as
substring)
1,303

Table 1. OE ontology – AGROVOC lexical mapping results.

A formal approach to studying the overlapping of the OE ontology and AGROVOC was conducted. Table 1
shows the main figures of a process of automated mapping. It should be noted that the OE ontology labels that were
formed by the concatenation of two or more words (e.g. LocalBreeds) were split into a phrase, by inserting a space
between words (i.e. Local Breeds), in order to match the AGROVOC terms, as they already contain spaces. It is
especially relevant that about 34% of the OE ontology terms (classes and instances) have an exact match in
AGROVOC. The inspection of the correct mappings found revealed that they occur at different levels of the

c

http://portal.organic-edunet.eu/

1575

Leonardo Lezcano et al. / Procedia Computer Science 9 (2012) 1571 – 1577

hierarchy of AGROVOC, so they do not appear to be associated to some particular sub-tree(s), indicating that there
is a high degree of overlapping in general terms.
These findings led to the decision of not formally including the OE ontology in the VOA3R service. Further, the
OE ontology is in plans to be moved to a linked data approach based on the Moki toold (explicitly including a formal
mapping to AGROVOC), which will make it homogeneous with the above mentioned approach and consistent with
VOA3R principles. Even though PO has a very specific and narrow focus, evidence of overlapping with
AGROVOC was found. A formal approach to studying the overlapping of the Plant Ontology and AGROVOC was
conducted. Table 2 shows the main figures of a process of automated mapping.
AGROVOC
terms

PO terms

40,905

1,450

Exact matches

49

Partial matches
(from AGROVOC
terms)
400

Partial matches
(from PO terms)
630

Table 2. PO – AGROVOC lexical mapping results

In spite of the fact that matches are not in a significant amount, it is worth analyzing if PO could be considered an
extension of some of AGROVOC sub-trees, in which case mapping could be an option. For doing so, graphical
representations were used as described in Section 4.
4. Visualizing overlapping
For the case of AGROVOC-PO mapping, a graphical visualization was used to illustrate some of the discovered
patterns. From the 40950 terms in AGROVOC, near 400 were mapped to PO, but given that all AGROVOC terms
cannot be rendered in the same image without losing details, Figure 1 only shows 2265 nodes representing the
descendants of the AGROVOC “ENTITIES” term. From the 154300 relations included in AGROVOC (broader,
narrower, related, etc), only broader and narrower are shown for the "ENTITIES" descendants, i.e. 2264 edges.
Mappings to PO are represented in Figure 1 as black nodes. It should be noted that the bigger the black node, the
more PO terms have been mapped to the AGROVOC term represented by that node.
Near 50% of PO terms were mapped to AGROVOC while only 0,9% of AGROVOC terms were mapped to the
PO, proving that the PO covers a narrow and more specialized domain than a comprehensive agricultural resource as
AGROVOC. The fact that the AGROVOC terms that were mapped to PO are organized in small and dense areas
within the AGROVOC radial tree visualization corroborates such idea. In spite of such conclusion, those areas of
high density of terms mapped to PO include a few unmapped AGROVOC terms whose study may lead to one of
two results: either they can be mapped to PO or their inclusion as new PO terms should be considered.
In addition to the high density, AGROVOC terms mapped to PO are, in most cases, vertically organized in thin
columns that cover most the descendants of a given AGROVOC term in the AGROVOC radial tree visualization.
The hierarchy has been built based on the NARROWER and BROADER relations of the AGROVOC ontology
which are semantically similar to the popular IS-A relationship. Such vertical concurrence shows that, in spite of
covering a very small fraction of AGROVOC, the levels of abstraction of PO are similar to the ones of AGROVOC.
The PO comprises terms covering two biological domains: i) terms that describe morphological/anatomical
structures of plants; and ii) terms that describe stages in the growth and development of an entire plant. A result of
the current research is the fact that 77% of the PO terms mapped to AGROVOC belong to the Plant Anatomy
ontology (one of the two PO sub-ontologies) while only 23% of them belong to the Plant Development ontology
(the other PO sub-ontology). Such distribution reveals that the AGROVOC-PO overlapping is much more common
in the structure domain than in the process domain.

d

https://moki.fbk.eu/website/index.php

1576

Leonardo Lezcano et al. / Procedia Computer Science 9 (2012) 1571 – 1577

Figure 1. Simplified visualization of the position of mappings of PO to AGROVOC

Leonardo Lezcano et al. / Procedia Computer Science 9 (2012) 1571 – 1577

1577

5. Conclusions and outlook
Knowledge Organization Systems are nowadays diverse and heterogeneous, and data curators can expect finding
different KOS in the same domain with a degree of overlapping. This calls for tools and techniques that help
curators in assessing the degree of complementarity of several KOS. This paper has reported a case study in the
domain of agriculture showing the benefits of two very simple assessment techniques: lexical mapping and its
visualization. The use of lexical mappings was able to identify large degrees of overlapping in KOS, and
visualization provided useful hints in identifying areas of complementarity.
Future work should be developed in further testing these simple techniques and refining them into tools for
curators, mixing with ontology/terminology metrics and looking for heuristics that are able to inform overlap and
complementarity for particular sub-domains.
Acknowledgements
The work leading to these results has received funding from the European Commission under grant agreement nº
250525 corresponding to project VOA3R (Virtual Open Access Agriculture & Aquaculture Repository: Sharing
Scientific and Scholarly Research related to Agriculture, Food, and Environment), http://voa3r.eu.
References
1. Avraham, S. et al. (2008) The Plant Ontology Database: a community resource for plant structure and developmental stages controlled
vocabulary and annotations Nucl. Acids Res. 36 (suppl 1): D449-D454.
2. Bizer, C., Heath, T. and Berners-Lee, T.: Linked data - the story so far. International Journal on Semantic Web and Information Systems
(IJSWIS), 5(3): 1-22 (2009).
3. Hodge, G. (2000). Systems of Knowledge Organization for Digital Libraries. Beyond traditional authority files. Washington, DC: the Council
on Library and Information Resources
4. Jeffery, K., & Asserson, A. (2008). Institutional Repositories and Current Research Information Systems. New Review of Information
Networking, 14(2), 71-83.
5. Lynch, C. (2003). Institutional Repositories: Essential Infrastructure for Scholarship in the Digital Age. Portal: Libraries & the Academy, 3(2),
pp. 327–336.

