Procedia Computer
Science
Procedia
Computer Science
Science 001(2010)
1–41531–1534
Procedia
Computer
(2012)

www.elsevier.com/locate/procedia

International Conference on Computational Science, ICCS 2010

Position paper on the simulation of high-frequency optical waves
K. Hertela,b,∗, C. Pﬂauma,b
a Department

of Computer Science 10 (System Simulation), University of Erlangen-Nuremberg, Cauerstraße 6, 91058 Erlangen, Germany
b Erlangen Graduate School in Advanced Optical Technologies (SAOT), Paul-Gordan-Str. 6, 91052 Erlangen

Abstract
This paper will provide an insight into the design and software engineering aspects of a simulation software for
time-harmonic electro-magnetic waves with application to the simulation of optical waves in lithography and thinﬁlm solar cells. This design is oriented towards applicability to large systems, as it is driven by the computationally
challenging need to simulate large structures in order to tackle real-world problems. We will present an overview of
the organizational aspects and the interaction of the components involved.
c 2012 Published by Elsevier Ltd. Open access under CC BY-NC-ND license.
⃝
Keywords: Simulation, Optical Waves, Maxwell, FDFD, Expression Templates

1. Some Background
Solving Maxwell’s equations numerically requires at least 20 nodes per wavelength on the discretized mesh in
order to be able to obtain usable results. In the case of solar cells, we’re dealing with visible light for the most part,
resulting in relatively short wavelengths of roughly 300 - 1100nm. On the other hand, dimensions of a solar cell
are orders of magnitude larger, which results in huge computational domains. The discretization scheme used in this
software is based on the ﬁnite diﬀerence frequency domain method, thus resulting in stencil operations which do not
require any system matrices to be stored, but only vector components of the electric and magnetic ﬁelds for every
node of the discretization. For example, Amp`ere’s law
(1)

∂t E = ∇ × H − σE
in its ﬁnite diﬀerence frequency domain notation can be restated as follows:
1+ρ

τσ

E (n+1)τ eiωτ = E nτ +

τ

∇h × H (n+ 2 )τ eiω 2 τ −
1

1

τσ

(1 − ρ) E nτ + τS E ,

(2)

where ∇h × represents the ﬁnite diﬀerence curl operator on a staggered grid (see [1]). Since the number of nodes used
in simulations typically ranges in the 10s of millions, both computational and memory requirements are enormous.
Therefore parallelization, and with it the use of distributed memory, is a key aspect of the implementation.
∗ Corresponding

author
Email addresses: kai.hertel@informatik.uni-erlangen.de (K. Hertel), pflaum@informatik.uni-erlangen.de (C. Pﬂaum)

c 2012 Published by Elsevier Ltd. Open access under CC BY-NC-ND license.
1877-0509 ⃝
doi:10.1016/j.procs.2010.04.171

1532

K. Hertel, C. Pflaum / Procedia Computer Science 1 (2012) 1531–1534
2

K. Hertel, C. Pﬂaum / Procedia Computer Science 00 (2010) 1–4

2. Software Design
Modularization and the use of several layers of abstraction seem appropriate, as the iterative solver logic is largely
independent of the application. For example the speciﬁc equations to be solved on the one hand, and the underlying
geometry of the computational domain on the other hand are not directly related to one another. Therefore, a generic
library provides the structures necessary to describe the computational domain in an orthogonal ﬁnite diﬀerence mesh
and to represent both the variables on the domain and the operators acting thereon. The key technique used for
implementing operators on mesh variables (i.e. vectors) is expression templates. A major beneﬁt is that they allow for
the equations and iterator logic to use natural and simple expressions and hide most of the underlying parallelization
scheme from the application layer.
For parallelization MPI is being used, which is embedded into the library operations directly for the most part.
During initialization of the mesh, partitions are assigned to available compute nodes by the application layer. As the
discretization of solid objects like solar cells is static and adaptivity is not necessarily required, balancing the workload
is a relatively straight-forward task. Synchronization on the partition boundaries on the other hand is necessary after
every step in the iteration due to the stencil operations involved. This is implemented in the expression template
library, so the application layers do not have to be concerned with it.
The main function of the application layers is to act as an interface to the user and to allow for the domain to be
parametrized in such a way, that regions of diﬀerent materials can be set up. Their electromagnetic properties can then
simply be stored in the form of a vector of coeﬃcients on the mesh in much the same way as the primary variables,
the vectors for the electric and magnetic ﬁeld components, are stored. The description of the setting can generally be
more complex than just deﬁning a stack of layers of diﬀerent materials. This is especially true where the geometry
and physical structure of their interfaces is important. Therefore, this part of the code is represented by a separate
module that interfaces with classes describing and representing the speciﬁc problem settings accurately.








	












	


	



Figure 1: Structure Diagram of the Module Layers and their Dependencies

The iterative evolution of the EM ﬁeld is implemented in a rather compact manner. To this end, the iterative
Maxwell solver uses expression template operator logic.
Ey = Ct Ey ∗ Ey + Cs Ey ∗
( T ( Hx ) − B( Hx ) + W( Hz ) − E ( Hz ) ) + S Ey ;

The snippet above describes part of the iteration scheme for one component of the electric ﬁeld and can be interpreted
quite intuitively when compared to the ﬁnite diﬀerence notation (2) above.
3. Testing
For the basic layers, the use of debuggers turns out to be an adequate instrument. Thus, unit and integration testing
of available modules is currently implemented only on the more complex and thus error-prone layers. The library

1533

K. Hertel, C. Pflaum / Procedia Computer Science 1 (2012) 1531–1534
K. Hertel, C. Pﬂaum / Procedia Computer Science 00 (2010) 1–4

3

for example is naturally designed to be tested against various sample applications. This way it is easily ensured that
both data structures and operator logic stay consistent during development. The Maxwell solver can be tested against
settings that consist of a problem statement for which an exact analytical solution can be derived. This analytical
solution is then used as a basis for comparison to the numerical solution of the solver. In this way we measure the
convergence of the iterative method towards the exact solution. This is mostly useful when the simulation code is
extended for new scenarios and physical setups.
4. Expression Templates
Using a library based on expression templates allows for a quick and convenient implementation of the application
logic, as grid iteration operators and the basic tools for diﬀerential operators are all provided by the library layers (see
[2], [3]). The resulting code is relatively fast, since most of the operations can be inlined very eﬃciently by the
compiler’s preprocessor. This in turn yields good optimization characteristics at compile time and results in high
application performance (see [4]). Nevertheless, when compared to manually optimized C++ codes, there may be a
noticable drop in performance with the classical expression template based approach, which we have not investigated
conclusively yet for this application. However, due to the ease of transition we are considering a shift to fast expression
templates which should result in the performance drop to become negligible compared to non-expression-template
based implementations (cf. [2]). The use of expression templates, despite its character as a convenient tool for
modeling application logic on a very high level, also introduces some drawbacks to the implementation with regards
to maintainability though. For once, debugging and proﬁling programs that make extensive use of template classes is
a challenge. That problem is somewhat mitigated, or depending on the vantage point of the user maybe enhanced, by
the fact that debugging parallel applications is not an easy task to begin with. Therefore, tool support is of the essence
when it comes to these kinds of tasks. Luckily spotting the parts of the code responsible for performance bottlenecks is
relatively simple in general for the kind of application presented. This is because the implementation of the evolution
of the equations described is easily identiﬁed and traced through the underlying layers. From a designer’s point of
view the principles employed by template-based programming and the use of expression templates yields a great deal
of beneﬁts to the software engineering process.
5. Current Progress
In order to study the eﬀects of expression templates on optimization in this application setting, we have begun
implementing the stencil operations described above in a small C-based kernel that will work on the same data as
the template-based version. First results seem to indicate, that optimization of decoupled C code may hold slight
advantages in runtime, at least for serial runs, as they do not strain the capabilities of available compiler technology
to the same extent. In a parallel setting, these eﬀects are harder to pinpoint though, as MPI communication and the
latencies and synchronization issues related to it appear to play a rather signiﬁcant part. A more detailed analysis will
need to be conducted in order to support these preliminary ﬁndings more conclusively. One way to resolve possible
performance drawbacks introduced by expression-template based codes may be a shift to fast expression templates as
described in [2].
6. Conclusion
As we have seen in this work, the use of expression templates can greatly aid the design of scientiﬁc simulation
software as it helps in modeling physical and mathematical contexts in an intuitive way as well as encapsulating
the underlying processes in an easy-to-use, self-contained, abstract interface. Using this technique, applications can
easily implement numerical methods even in large-scale parallel settings without losing control over the principle of
separation of concerns.
7. Acknowledgements
The authors gratefully acknowledge funding from the Erlangen Graduate School in Advanced Optical Technologies (SAOT) by the German National Science Foundation (DFG) in the framework of the German Excellence Initiative
and the Bavarian Competence Network for Technical and Scientiﬁc High Performance Computing (KONWIHR).

1534

K. Hertel, C. Pflaum / Procedia Computer Science 1 (2012) 1531–1534
K. Hertel, C. Pﬂaum / Procedia Computer Science 00 (2010) 1–4

4

8. References
[1] A. Taﬂove, S. Hagness, Computational Electrodynamics — The Finite-Diﬀerence Time-Domain Method, Artech House, Boston, London,
2000.
[2] J. H¨ardtlein, C. Pﬂaum, A. Linke, C. H. Wolters, Advanced expression templates programming, Computing and Visualization in Science 12
(2009) 59–68. doi:10.1007/s00791-009-0128-2.
[3] C.Pﬂaum, Z. Rahimi, Automatic parallelization of staggered grid codes with expression templates, International Journal on Computational
Science and Engineering 4 (4) (2009) 306–313. doi:10.1504/IJCSE.2009.029166.
[4] C. Jandl, K. Hertel, W. Dewald, C. Pﬂaum, High performance computing for the simulation of thin-ﬁlm solar cells, High Performance Computing in Science and Engineering, Garching 2009(to appear).

