Procedia Computer Science
Volume 51, 2015, Pages 2307–2316
ICCS 2015 International Conference On Computational Science

An Investigation of the Performance Limits of Small,
Planar Antennas Using Optimisation
Jan Hettenhausen, Andrew Lewis, David Thiel, and Morteza Shahpari
Griﬃth University, Brisbane, Queensland, Australia
{j.hettenhausen;a.lewis;d.thiel;m.shahpari}@griffith.edu.au

Abstract
This paper presents a generalised parametrisation as well as an approach to computational optimisation for small, planar antennas. A history of previous, more limited antenna optimisation
techniques is discussed and a new parametrisation introduced in this context. Validation of
this new approach against previously developed structures is provided and preliminary results
of the optimisation are demonstrated and discussed. For the optimisation, a binary MultiObjective Particle Swarm Optimisation (MOPSO) is used and several methods for generating
a viable initial population are introduced and discussed in the context of practical limitations
computational simulations.
Keywords: Small Planar Antennas, Performance Limits, Optimisation, Binary MOPSO

1

Introduction

The design of antennas has for several decades used methods based on numerical simulation,
since the physics governing their operation and performance is well-understood and ﬁnds mathematical expression in Maxwell’s equations. However, optimisation of their performance is more
diﬃcult as there is no analytical formulation of the impact of structural changes on performance
except for simple types of antennas. Over the past decade, radio frequency (RF) designers have
increasingly turned to the use of computational optimisation approaches to solve this problem.
Initially a matter of “cut-and-try” computation of the results for a handful of competing design
changes, the development of sophisticated metaheuristic optimisation algorithms, especially
those readily adaptable to parallel computation, and the rapidly increasing access to powerful computing resources have enabled more systematic approaches to comprehensive design
optimisation.
This paper will describe how studies using optimisation algorithms in the design of a particular class of small, planar antennas has evolved into an approach to attempt to discover the
performance limits of small, planar antennas in general. In Section 2 the prior work undertaken
over a number of years is described to show the foundations for the current studies, Section
3 shows how the precursor work and methods used were adapted to the general small, planar
Selection and peer-review under responsibility of the Scientiﬁc Programme Committee of ICCS 2015
c The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V.

doi:10.1016/j.procs.2015.05.394

2307

Performance Limits of Small, Planar Antennas

Hettenhausen, Lewis, Thiel and Shahpari

antenna design problem, Section 4 describes computational experiments undertaken and the
preliminary results obtained, and Section 5 discusses the results and outlines directions for
future work.

2

Background and prior work

In 2006, the authors chose to use Ant Colony Optimisation (ACO) [4, 5] to optimise the eﬃciency
of meander line Radio Frequency IDentiﬁcation (RFID) antennas [16]. RFID tags are used in
a wide range of applications, and practical considerations have driven a need for smaller tags
with longer reading range. The read range can be explained as the maximum distance at which
RFID reader can detect the returned signal from the tag [17]. This vital factor can be increased
by designing antennas with higher gain, or eﬃciency, and lower resonant frequency.
Meander line antennas [21] are a subset of particular interest for RFID as, by their nature,
they are compact and tags may be readily manufactured. These antennas normally have a
planar structure and consist of printed conductive tracks on thin plastic substrates [6]. The
approach used for design of the meander line was to progressively link nodes on a Cartesian
grid. This is a combinatorial optimisation problem, for which ACO has been a favoured solution
strategy. The ants are agents that iteratively construct solutions, ideally suited to path planning
problems. Thus ACO provided not only an algorithm for performance optimisation of the
meander line antennas but also, by virtue of its fundamental mechanics, a method for automated
construction of trial solutions.
Following the promising results from the use of ACO on the single objective of improving
antenna eﬃciency, the method was reﬁned to use local search techniques to further improve
eﬃciency [22], and then extended to a multi-objective formulation of the problem, simultaneously optimising eﬃciency and resonant frequency [13, 12]. As previously noted, one of the
crucial performance criteria for RFID tags is their read range, which is directly proportional
to the wavelength used. Lower frequencies, or longer wavelengths, tend to increase the read
range but also generally require larger antennas. The antenna design problem therefore became
one of maximising the antenna eﬃciency, η, and minimising the resonant frequency, f0 . The
multi-objective optimisation approach used determined relative attractiveness of solutions using
Pareto dominance relations.
More recently, the authors and colleagues have explored the use of a number of diﬀerent
metaheuristics for design of RFID antennas. Diﬀerential Evolution (DE) was used on the
meander line antenna design problem [15]. Taking inspiration from the production of self
avoiding walks [1], relative rather than absolute directions were use to deﬁne links between nodes
in the grid, allowing the adaptation of the antenna construction method to a probabilisticallyweighted random walk. Subsequently, Extremal Optimisation (EO) was applied to a modiﬁed
meander line in which the restriction of generating a single continuous line was relaxed [7]. This
allowed the design of antennas with loops, mesh segments and parasitic elements. Instead of
linking numbered nodes, the structure of the antenna was deﬁned by a collection of numbered
links.
A comparison of Pareto-fronts achieved using ACO and DE is shown in Figure 2 and the
aggregated fronts for ACO, DE and EO are shown in Figure 3.
2308

Performance Limits of Small, Planar Antennas

Hettenhausen, Lewis, Thiel and Shahpari

Figure 1: ηf0 attainment surface for the 25 × 56 mm2 antenna.
5×5

100

8×8

100

10×10

100

99

95

98

5×5 area

95
90

5×5 area

97

η 96

85

90

95

8×8 area

80

94

85

DEminL

75

93
92

70

80
550

650

750
f0

850

950

DE

350

550

750

950

350

550

f0
DE

DEminL

ACOq1

750

950

f0
ACOq5

ACOq9

Figure 2: Lower frequency portions of fronts produced by DE and ACO for 5 × 5, 8 × 8 and
10 × 10 grids

3

Generalisation to small, planar antenna design

From the precursor work described in the previous section there arose a more general question
of what the performance limits of electrically-small, planar antennas might be. The successful
approach of using computational optimisation algorithms to discover the performance capabilities of small, planar (RFID) antennas suggested a similar approach might be used to explore
the practical performance limits.
As the parametrisation used in the previous studies was limited to continuous meander line
antennas, a new parametrisation was developed. At present this comprises a ﬁxed feed point
and a grid of n × n potential patches, which are mirrored on both sides of the feed point.
The corners of patches are chamfered to avoid inﬁnitely small contact points which would lead
to incorrect simulation outcomes. As this necessitates ﬁner meshing for the simulation, the
2309

Performance Limits of Small, Planar Antennas

Hettenhausen, Lewis, Thiel and Shahpari

Figure 3: Pareto-fronts for the 7 × 7 bi-objective RFID antenna design problems
authors investigated a more adaptive approach in a separate study [20]. For the purposes
of optimising structures based on this parametrisation, each antenna can be represented as a
binary string of length n2 , allowing standard binary optimisation techniques to be applied. In
future, further relaxations to the parametrisation are planned, allowing arbitrary feed points
and non-symmetric antennas.
In follow-up work, structural changes are planned to extend the search space to a generalised
circular plane in order to explore practical performance limits and their relation to the theoretical limits as theorised by Gustafson [8, 9]. An investigation of these limits for the special case
of meander line antennas was conducted by Shahpari et al [18].
The following section will provide a brief comparison of a representative set of antennas for
validation, and the limits thereof for results from the diﬀerent parametrisations.

3.1

Validation of OpenEMS results

The precursor studies to this work modelled antennas as wires of 1mm thickness using NEC [2].
With the changes to the parametrisation described in the previous section, the area of the
antenna now comprises n × n thin tiles which can either be conductive or empty. In this study,
n = 10 was chosen as a means of limiting compute time. Due to these diﬀerences, an exact
replication of previously investigated antennas is not possible. To overcome limitations of the
previously used NEC software, openEMS [14] was chosen for these simulations.
As a means of establishing a relationship for a broad range of antennas, the antennas
investigated in Shahpari et al. [18] were taken where possible (Figure 1 in [18], antennas a-f,
h and i. Antennas g, j and k were excluded due to a feed point that is currently not possible
in the new parametrisation). These antennas represent a variety of structures with minimum
resonance frequencies ranging from 576 to 1757MHz.
A notable aspect of this comparison is that the eﬃciency will inevitably diﬀer between the
NEC and openEMS based simulations. Apart from the inevitable structural diﬀerences from
the diﬀerent parametrisations, this is largely caused by diﬀerent material properties used for
the simulations. In the NEC simulations copper wires were modelled. On the other hand,
in Shahpari’s openEMS investigation the material was set to be a perfect electric conductor
to simplify the simulation. As a remedy, the material independent Q factor was used as an
alternative secondary objective for this comparison.
2310

Performance Limits of Small, Planar Antennas

Hettenhausen, Lewis, Thiel and Shahpari

Figure 4: Comparison of a representative range of antennas in the NEC-based vs. openEMSbased parametrisation and simulation.

The results of this comparison are presented in Figure 4. There is generally good correspondence between results obtained using NEC and those from openEMS. Antenna C shows a
higher value of Q for the result obtained with openEMS but, given the structural diﬀerences of
the antenna models, the diﬀerences in results can be considered to be relatively minor.

3.2

Construction of antennas

Metaheuristic optimisation methods require some mechanism of generating an initial population
prior to starting the optimisation. In the absence of a priori knowledge of relevant minima,
this population is usually chosen uniformly randomly across the feasible space. The intention
is to avoid prematurely biasing the search towards areas, potentially limiting the algorithm in
its ability to discover arbitrary promising areas.
Using the described openEMS-based approach, calculating large frequency ranges is costly
from a computational point of view. For practical purposes, this necessitated setting an upper
limit for the frequency range. Antennas that resonate outside the simulated range will appear
as infeasible to the algorithm despite not being infeasible in reality. Consequently, a number of
points in the initial population could be ignored, resulting in a loss of diversity.
For the purpose of increasing the number of feasible initial points, the simplifying assumption
can be made that the minimum resonance frequency is inversely proportional to the maximum
length of continuously connected patches on the grid. Several construction methods for an
initial population guided by this assumption were created and tested.

Uniform Random This method represents the baseline for the experiments. Every grid
point is assigned a patch with a probability of 0.5. For practical purposes, the grid point next
to the feed point was always assigned a patch as the antenna would otherwise comprise only
the feed point. An illustration of a small population generated this way is shown in Figure 5.
2311

Performance Limits of Small, Planar Antennas

Hettenhausen, Lewis, Thiel and Shahpari

Figure 5: Sample popular with uniform random antennas. While the structural bias is minimal,
many of the structures will likely be infeasible given the constraints of the simulation.
Random with variable patch probability This method represents a variation of the uniform random antennas where the probably for a patch is varied on a per antenna basis. To
give a bias to denser antennas, the interval for this was chosen to range from 0.4 to 0.8. This
allows biasing towards denser structures while still limiting structural biases in the population,
as illustrated in Figure 6.

Figure 6: Sample population with variable random patch probability. With this approach larger
continuous structures are generated but a strong bias is given towards adding patches.

Gaussian distribution based population This method attempts to more strongly bias
towards feasible antennas by basing the patch generation on the Gaussian distribution with the
mean at the feed point. Contrary to the previous methods, a set number of patches is given
for each antenna. The number of patches is varied withinin a given interval. For a 10x10 grid,
coordinates were generated by randomly generating x and y values using the normal distribution
with σ = 0.0 and μ = 0.5 and applying f loor. The algorithm iteratively adds patches until the
given number of patches is achieved. The number of patches was varied between 30 and 60. A
small sample population from this approach is shown in Figure 7.

Figure 7: Sample population using a Gaussian distribution around the feed point. The approach
produces some continuous structures around the feed point with many disconnected elements
around them. A possible downside will be the lack of patches in the corners far from the feed
point, leading to a potential bias in the search.

2312

Performance Limits of Small, Planar Antennas

Hettenhausen, Lewis, Thiel and Shahpari

Random Walker Lastly, a random walker / jumper was developed that produces antennas
with more ordered structures. The walker always starts at the feed point with a one or two
patch structure. Each step has a length of two patches. The walker determines its next step
using the following algorithm:
• Find legal moves. A legal move is any move that does not lead outside the grid and does
not end on a grid point that is already marked as containing a patch.
1000
• Select next move. A score is calculated as s = 1+(9−n)+p
with n representing the number
of adjacent grid points and p representing the number of adjacent patches. If the move
requires no directional change, the score is increased by a factor of 20 to give preferences
to straight structures. Roulette wheel selection is applied to choose a move.

• If no legal move can be found, a random legal point (based on the same criteria) is chosen
and a jump to this point is performed (i.e. no connection is made to the previous point).
As Figure 8 illustrates, the resulting structures closely resemble conventional meander line
antenna structures. The interval [15, 25] was chosen for the number of patches.

Figure 8: A sample population generated using the random walker method. With a relatively
small number of patches the walker can generate antennas with relatively long continuous
structures. However, it also represents the most strongly structurally biased population.

4

Computational experiments

As described in Section 3, the parametrisation presents itself to the optimiser as a binary string
of length n2 . For this study, a binary MOPSO algorithm was used to perform the optimisation.
MOPSO is the multi-objective adaptation of PSO, ﬁrst proposed by Kennedy and Eberhart [10],
and Shi and Eberhart [19]. The precise variation used in this study is the MOPSO algorithm
developed by Coello Coello and Lechuga [3] modiﬁed to optimise binary problems based on the
single-objective binary PSO by Kennedy and Eberhart [11].
MOPSO iteratively improves a population of particles using a velocity vector. This velocity
comprises a momentum, a global guide and a personal guide as well as static and random
weights. The global guide is chosen from an archive of globally non-dominated points while the
personal guide comes from an archive of non-dominated points for each particle. The size of
the personal archive is frequently chosen to be one. Guides are chosen based on a hypercube
score and roulette wheel selection, prefering areas with fewer known non-dominated points.
The archive size is limited and particles are removed based on crowding distance when its size
is exceeded.
In this binary variation, the algorithm still uses a continuous velocity equation. However,
the resulting velocity is transformed into a probability for a bit ﬂip using the sigmoid function as
2313

Performance Limits of Small, Planar Antennas

Hettenhausen, Lewis, Thiel and Shahpari

Figure 9: Comparison of MOPSO runs with diﬀerent initialiser functions after 325 iterations.

Figure 10: Illustration of four randomly chosen antennas from the results of a MOPSO with
Gaussian distribution-based initialisation.
suggested in [11]. The initialisation of particles was performed using the four methods described
in Section 3.2. Each algorithm was given a population of 20 particles.
As arbitrarily large intervals can lead to numerical inaccuracies in the simulation, an earlier
version of the openEMS based compute kernel was limited to a maximum resonance frequenct of
1200MHz. However, the results were generally poor with only the Gaussian-distribution based
approach producing some results. In response to this, the interval was extended to 2400MHz,
making it feasible for all four methods to produce viable populations.
A representative set of the preliminary results is shown in Figure 9. While these results
should be considered preliminary, the data suggests that the Gaussian distribution-based initialisation proved most successful across the entire front. The walker-based MOPSO appears
to be more limited in terms of the structures it explores and consequently is most successful
on a only a subsection of the approximated Pareto-front. The other two methods still perform
reasonably well but appear to be more slightly less successful in terms of coverage of the front
and convergence. Further analysis of the Gaussian distribution based structures shows that no
obvious bias towards points close to the feed point has persisted in the population. A set of
four randomly selected antennas from a current run can be found in Figure 10.
With the current 10 × 10 grid approximately 150-200 iterations can be achieved per week
on modern hardware with short scheduling delays. In our case, several dedicated machines
are shared between multiple runs. At present the authors have 75 cores across 15 machines
available which process 5 concurrent runs of the optimiser. This represents a compromise
between minimising idle times and limiting queue delays to a minimum. In this setup, each
2314

Performance Limits of Small, Planar Antennas

Hettenhausen, Lewis, Thiel and Shahpari

MOPSO instance can progress up to 150 iterations per week. As an increase in grid size to
20 × 20 results in processing times in excess of one hour per simulation, additional resources
will have to be acquired to further reduce delays. In addition, a global caching strategy will be
added.

5

Conclusion

A new parametrisation for optimising small planar antennas was introduced and demonstrated
using the free, open-source software openEMS. The validity and comparability of the results
was established based on a range of previously published antennas. Preliminary results of an
optimisation study using binary MOPSO were presented and the combination with several novel
methods for generating an initial population were investigated.
The preliminary results highlight the viability of the approach and suggest the extension
to ﬁner grid resolutions, potentially using the Gaussian distribution-based initialisation. In
addition, other metaheuristics will be investigated on this problem with respect to their applicability. Due to the computing time required for the simulations, only a few runs were possible
to generate the results reported. Future work will extend this, in particular by restructuring
the simulations to utilise parallel computing resources and reduce run times.
Given the viability of the approach presented, the work will be further extended as the
basis for investigating the practical limitations of small planar antennas with regards to the
established theoretical limits. To this end, the extension of the model to a circular plane base
structure will be developed.

Acknowledgements
The authors would like to thank Associate Professor Marcus Randall, Dr James Montgomery
and Dr Pedro G´
omez-Meneses for their collaboration and valuable contributions to the prior
work supporting the studies described in this paper.
The work reported in this paper has been supported in part by Australian Research Council
Discovery Project grant DP130102098.

References
[1] D. Ashlock, K. Bryden, S. Corns, and J. Schonfeld. An updated taxonomy of evolutionary computation problems using graph-based evolutionary algorithms. In IEEE Congress on Evolutionary
Computation (CEC06), pages 403–410, 2006.
[2] GJ Burke and AJ Poggio. Numerical electromagnetic code (NEC)—method of moments, 1981.
[3] C.A.C. Coello and M.S. Lechuga. MOPSO: A Proposal for Multiple Objective Particle Swarm
Optimization. In Evolutionary Computation, 2002. CEC’02. Proceedings of the 2002 Congress on,
volume 2. IEEE Computer Society, 2002.
[4] M. Dorigo. Optimization, Learning and Natural Algorithms. PhD thesis, Politecnico di Milano,
1992.
[5] M. Dorigo and L. Gambardella. Ant colony system: A cooperative learning approach to the
traveling salesman problem. IEEE Transactions on Evolutionary Computation, 1:5366, 1997.
[6] K. Finkenzeller. RFID Handbook: fundamentals and applications in contactless smart cards and
identiﬁcation. Wiley, 2nd edition edition, 2003.

2315

Performance Limits of Small, Planar Antennas

Hettenhausen, Lewis, Thiel and Shahpari

[7] P. G´
omez-Meneses, M. Randall, and A. Lewis. A multi-objective extremal optimisation approach
to RFID antenna design. In EVOLVE - A Bridge between Probability, Set Oriented Numerics,
and Evolutionary Computation II, Advances in Intelligent Systems and Computing, page 431446.
Springer, 2012.
[8] Mats Gustafsson, Christian Sohl, and Gerhard Kristensson. Physical limitations on antennas of
arbitrary shape. In Proceedings of the Royal Society of London A: Mathematical, Physical and
Engineering Sciences, volume 463, pages 2589–2607. The Royal Society, 2007.
[9] Mats Gustafsson, Christian Sohl, and Gerhard Kristensson. Illustrations of new physical bounds
on linearly polarized antennas. IEEE transactions on antennas and propagation, 57(5):1319–1327,
2009.
[10] J. Kennedy and R. Eberhart. Particle swarm optimization. Neural Networks, 1995. Proceedings.,
IEEE International Conference on, 4, 1995.
[11] James Kennedy and Russell C Eberhart. A discrete binary version of the particle swarm algorithm.
In Systems, Man, and Cybernetics, 1997. Computational Cybernetics and Simulation., 1997 IEEE
International Conference on, volume 5, pages 4104–4108. IEEE, 1997.
[12] A. Lewis, M. Randall, A. Galehdar, D. Thiel, and G. Weis. Optimising eﬃciency and gain of small
meander line RFID antennas using ant colony system. In 2009 IEEE Congress on Evolutionary
Computation, 2009.
[13] A. Lewis, M. Randall, M. Galehdar, D. Thiel, and G. Weis. Using ant colony optimisation
to construct meander line RFID antennas. In A. Lewis, S. Mostaghim, and M. Randall, editors, Biologically-inspired Optimisation Methods: Algorithms and Applications, pages 189–218.
Springer-Verlag, Heidelberg, 2009.
[14] Thorsten Liebig, Andreas Rennings, Sebastian Held, and Daniel Erni. openems–a free and open
source equivalent-circuit (ec) fdtd simulation platform supporting cylindrical coordinates suitable
for the analysis of traveling wave mri applications. International Journal of Numerical Modelling:
Electronic Networks, Devices and Fields, 26(6):680–696, 2013.
[15] J. Montgomery, M. Randall, and A. Lewis. Diﬀerential evolution for RFID antenna design: A
comparison with ant colony optimisation. In GECCO’11 Proceedings (Genetic and Evolutionary
Computation Conference), pages 673–680, 2011.
[16] M. Randall, A. Lewis, A. Galehdar, and D. Thiel. Using ant colony optimisation to improve the
eﬃciency of small meander line RFID antennas. In 3rd IEEE International e-Science and Grid
Computing Conference, pages 345–351, 2007.
[17] K. Seshagiri Rao, P. Nikitin, and S. Lam. Antenna design for UHF RFID tags: A review and a
practical application. IEEE Transactions on Antennas Propagation, 53:38703876, 2005.
[18] Morteza Shahpari, David V Thiel, and Andrew Lewis. An investigation into the gustafsson limit
for small planar antennas using optimization. Antennas and Propagation, IEEE Transactions on,
62(2):950–955, 2014.
[19] Y. Shi and R. Eberhart. A modiﬁed particle swarm optimizer. Evolutionary Computation Proceedings, 1998. IEEE World Congress on Computational Intelligence., The 1998 IEEE International
Conference on, pages 69–73, 1998.
[20] D Thiel, M Shahpari, J Hettenhausen, and A Lewis. Point contacts in modeling conducting 2d
planar structures. DOI: 10.1109/LAWP.2014.2387437.
[21] T. Warnagiris and T. Minardo. Performance of a meandered line as an electrically small transmitting antenna. Antennas and Propagation, IEEE Transactions on, 46(12):17971801, 1998.
[22] G. Weis, A. Lewis, M. Randall, A. Galehdar, and D. Thiel. Local search for ant colony system to improve the eﬃciency of small meander line RFID antennas. In WCCI 2008 Proceedings
(2008 IEEE World Congress on Computational Intelligence, including 2008 IEEE Congress on
Evolutionary Computation (CEC 2008)), 2008.

2316

