Procedia Computer Science
Volume 29, 2014, Pages 134–144
ICCS 2014. 14th International Conference on Computational Science

Performance-Aware Energy Saving Mechanism in
Interconnection Networks for Parallel Systems
Hai Nguyen, Daniel Franco, and Emilio Luque
Computer Architecture & Operating Systems Department
Universitat Aut`
onoma de Barcelona, 08193 Bellaterra, Barcelona, Spain
hai.nguyen@caos.uab.es, daniel.franco@uab.es, emilio.luque@uab.es

Abstract
The growing processing power of parallel computing systems require interconnection networks
a higher level of complexity and higher performance, thus consuming more energy. Link components contributes a substantial proportion of the total energy consumption of the networks.
Many researchers have proposed approaches to judiciously change the link speed as a function
of traﬃc to save energy when the traﬃc is light. However, the link speed reduction incurs an
increase in average packet latency, thus degrades network performance. This paper addresses
that issue with a performance-aware energy saving mechanism. The simulation results show
that the proposed mechanism outperforms the energy saving mechanisms in literature.
Keywords: energy saving; performance-aware; interconnection network; distributed systems

1

Introduction

Parallel and Distributed Computing Systems open the door to address open grand challenge
problems in Science and Engineering. The ever growing amount of data to be processed demands a larger number of processing units; according to the statistics published by TOP500
on November 2013, the top supercomputer Tianhe-2 reaches a performance of 33.86 Petaﬂop/s
with 3.120.000 cores [2]. The massive number of processing units puts interconnection network
systems under the pressure to increase performance to better accommodate the communication among them. The higher level of network complexity and higher link bandwidth increase
the energy consumed and the heat emitted. Empirical data show that a 10 degree increase in
temperature results in a doubling rate of system failure, which reduces the realibility of the
system. The energy cost and the heat dissipation problems in interconnection networks necessitate future network systems be built with much more eﬃcient power than today. As a result,
low power has become a priority design requirement for implementing scalable interconnected
parallel systems [6].
Among many components, links contribute a substantial portion of the total power usage
of an interconnection network. For instance, the link components in an IBM Inﬁniband 8-port
134

Selection and peer-review under responsibility of the Scientiﬁc Programme Committee of ICCS 2014
c The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V.
doi:10.1016/j.procs.2014.05.013

