Procedia Computer Science
Volume 80, 2016, Pages 530–541
ICCS 2016. The International Conference on Computational
Science

Agent-based Modelling Using Ensemble Approach
with Spatial and Temporal Composition
Andrey V. Kiselev, Vladislav A. Karbovskii, Sergey V. Kovalchuk
ITMO University, Saint-Petersburg, Russia.
aw.v.kiselev@gmail.com, vladislav.k.work@gmail.com, sergey.v.kovalchuk@gmail.com

Abstract
Crowd behavior and its movement has been an actively studied domain during last three decades.
There are microscopic models used for realistic simulation of crowds in different conditions. Such
models reproduce pedestrian movement quite well, however, their efficiency can vary depending on
the conditions of simulation. For instance, some models show realistic results in high density of
pedestrians and vice versa in low density. This work describes an early study aimed at developing an
approach to combine several microscopic models using an ensemble approach to overcome individual
weaknesses of the models. Possible ways to build hybrid models, as well as the main classes of
ensembles are described. A prior calibration procedure was implemented using the evolutionary
approach to create an ensemble of the most suitable models using dynamical macro-parameters such
as density and speed as the optimization objectives. Several trial experiments and comparisons with
single models were carried out for selected types of hybridization.
Keywords: agent-based modeling, collision avoidance, ensemble simulation, social force, calibration

1 Introduction
Today multi-agent systems modeling is actively studied. One of the key problems in this area is the
simulation of the realistic movement of pedestrian agents in different conditions. There are many
models to simulate the behavior of pedestrians in various environments: both open (stadiums, streets,
squares, etc.) and closed (areas, offices, corridors, shopping centers, trains, planes). Goals of the
simulation may vary from the implementation of Artificial Intelligence in computer games or training
programs to design or prediction of a large flow of people.
The behavior of models is traditionally divided into three classes: macroscopic, mesoscopic, and
microscopic. The first class of models considers the crowd as a whole, i.e. collective behavior and
dynamics. Mesoscopic models deal with an ensemble of agents in a certain area. Microscopic models
describe interaction between particular agents and their individual behavior, which could include
various characteristics such as psychological states, physical capabilities, etc. A wide range of

530

Selection and peer-review under responsibility of the Scientiﬁc Programme Committee of ICCS 2016
c The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V.

doi:10.1016/j.procs.2016.05.333

Agent-based Modelling Using Ensemble Approach...

A.V. Kiselev, V.A. Karbovskii, S.V. Kovalchuk

different approaches is used to implement these classes of models. The most popular among them are
force models based on Newtonian dynamics. In the 70s Henderson [1] compared the crowd traffic
with the Navier-Stokes equation. Others, taking as a basis the fact that human movements are chaotic,
used the gas kinetic equations [2] (the Boltzmann equation). In 1995, Dirk Helbing proposed a social
force model [3], which is the form of nonlinear-dependent Langevin equations.
Other type of agent-based models is cellular automata [4], [5], [6] where space and time are
discrete, and the space state is also discrete and limited as well. In each moment of time the values of
all cells are updated synchronously based on the values of neighboring cells.
In our work, we will be considering force-based and collision-avoidance models, in particular
Social Force (SF) and Reciprocal Velocity Obstacles (RVO) [7]. In SF, a velocity vector is computed
with using social forces – interaction forces between agents and agents and obstacles. In RVO, the
velocity that mostly close to preferential speed of agent is selected from set of velocities which is
guaranteed collision-free motion. This set is counted by the way of searching minimal changes of
velocity vector. It`s an important fact for this research that the minimal change is bisected because it`s
assumed that other agent behaves the same manner. Each approach has its drawbacks. The SF model,
as stated in [8], gives good results in high-density crowd, but situations with low density show
unrealistic behavior, given the simplicity of their physical nature. RVO in turn creates congestion in
narrow areas and crowd can form turbulence.
A natural question arises about the accounting for the heterogeneity and complexity of crowd
behavior. One possible way is to compare different models. There are several works [9], [10] in which
attempts were made to combine different models. In [9] authors join continuous models that are better
suited to simulate situations with a high density of crowds and discrete models for low and medium
density agents. Determining the density of the crowd, the paper proposes a mixture of models using
weights. In work [10] a hybridization of micro- and macroscopic models are proposed, where they are
used simultaneously in different regions of environment which is divided into partitions in
heterogeneous areas of agent-based models and macroscopic homogeneous. Operations of
disaggregation and aggregation are applied to represent simulation result into correct format when
agent goes to partition with another type.
Unlike the above works, in this paper, an attempt will be made to create the ensemble of
microscopic models, considered simultaneously, and can be used under different conditions, which
will be discussed below.
Several main aspects are considered within the proposed work. The first one is the choice of tools
of analysis and evaluation of the quality of the results. The second one is the model calibration
procedure which can be implemented in various ways using evolutionary approach. The last part is the
creation of an ensemble of models and its application to the hybrid models.

2 Agent-based Modeling Within the Ensemble Approach
2.1 General Approach
The core idea of the proposed approach is focused on the simultaneous use of several models with
unified control and aggregation. As stated above, the hybridization is divided into several stages,
which are depicted on the diagram in Fig.1. While using one or more different models, the calibration
method is selected to optimize models. Then, the resulting set of modes is sent to Ensemble Module
(EM). This module performs aggregation of the obtained models using different types of ensemble
(PMFE and TME) or a combination of both. Preferential Model Field Ensemble (PFME) stores
models that are pegged to a part of environment and Temporal Model Ensemble (TME) stores these
models using different times of simulation. The resulting ensemble can vary in time and space; thus,
the mapping procedure is defined to adapt the ensemble to the particular condition of the environment.

531

Agent-based Modelling Using Ensemble Approach...

A.V. Kiselev, V.A. Karbovskii, S.V. Kovalchuk

The system can work in two modes: a) preliminary calibration and b) dynamical evaluation of the
current state of the environment to re-calibrate the models. Additionally, during the simulation we
could switch the type of ensemble and remap the environment.
In contrast to the above works, this approach is a framework that provides to combine any models,
in a number that can be limited by computational resources, for searching results that respond to real
data more completely.

EM estimates calibration data,
aggregate multiple ensembles,
send models for up-calibration

Stack of
models for
calibrating
and
ensembling

PMFE
Calibration Module
(CM)

Models

CM can optimize
models before
simulation and
calibrate during the
simulation

Ensemble Module
(EM)

State of
environment for
estimating in EM

TME
Map ensemble

PMFE and TME
calculate its type
of ensemble and
send result to EM

T
Environment

Figure 1: Common scheme of ensemble simulation approach

2.2 Model Approach
In order to obtain a model that is the closest to the desired plan, a behavior calibration is used. One
effective approach to calibrate the crowd models is application of evolutionary algorithms.
Calibration of microscopic models, in particular social force, has been used in several works [11],
[12], [13] and [14]. For example, in [11] the calibration was performed by comparison of trajectories
in simulation and experimental data with the same initial conditions, using the average of the two
fitness functions. One of which computes the error of trajectories, while other computes error
trajectories with collision obtained using physical dynamic and the number of collisions. A more
complex calibration is carried out in [12], where introduced a calibration framework which is used an
algorithm of differential evolution. This calibration consists of several modules and is based on the
calculation of density in, broken into the field, environment. Johansson et al. in [13] also used a simple
evolutionary algorithm, with video tracking data to calculate relative error of the trajectories of each
pedestrian for a predefined period.
We have applied a genetic algorithm with a set of chromosomes (set of model parameters) built
using several model parameters, such as number of neighbors, neighbor distance, preferential speed
and others. The fitness function was calculated using three macroscopic parameters: a) average density
error; b) average velocity error; c) number of collision. Error in density and velocity are averaged over
the whole simulation space. Sum of these three values with preset weight coefficients was used as a
fitness value, the value which determines whether an individual is more appropriate than other
individuals.

532

Agent-based Modelling Using Ensemble Approach...

A.V. Kiselev, V.A. Karbovskii, S.V. Kovalchuk

To extend the evolutionary algorithm with multi-objective optimization, the Pareto front of
individuals (specific set of model parameters) was used. There are many different algorithms for
managing Pareto front within the evolutionary approach. The most popular are NPGA [15], SPEA
[16] and NSGA [17]. Within our work SPEA was chosen, in particular, the improved version SPEA2
[18] due to the simplicity of implementation, as well as a good distraction of the front, which gives
species diversity and avoids premature convergence. The main idea of SPEA2 is forming a set of nondominated individuals (archive) out of population. Fitness value of each individual is computed at
each iteration taking into account dominated individuals and distance with other individuals. Thus, all
individuals with a fitness value less than one (which means that no one is dominated) are chosen, and
then are filtered if their number is more than archive size, or the best dominated are added, if vice
versa. The front is formed using three criteria: density error, velocity error, and the number of
collisions with the same set of chromosomes. All simulated space is divided into small regions in
which the error in density and speed is calculated. Then it is averaged for the whole environment
considering MAE (mean absolute error) as a final objective.
Counting collisions was implemented using the k-d tree, with neighbors searching in a given
radius. Then the number of found neighbors is considered as the number of collision.
Several types of calibration procedures were proposed:
x
x
x

Retrospective calibration over the entire simulation period. This approach is based on the
average measurement error for the entire simulation period.
Time window calibration. This method optimizes the models for a certain simulation period.
This variant of the procedure is used to switch models in time (applied in TME described
above).
Zonal calibration on fields with the most intensive flow. In this embodiment, measurement is
done only in a few places in the environment, usually with heavy flow, helping to reduce
computing resource consumption, while not considering the field, with low density, which
creates a strong error. This procedure can be applied to the data assimilation task where the
observation data is provided for selected regions with sensors (or video tracking systems).

As mentioned above, when the number of non-dominated individuals is larger than the archive,
where non-dominated or the best dominated (with highest fitness) individuals, closest removed in
SPEA2 are stored. This achieves a uniform distribution of values on the front and fully covers it. One
of the objectives is the number of collisions, whose value is many times higher than the error values.
SPEA2 remove individual with objectives by using Euclidian distance. It is easy to miss a suitable
individual as the density and speed errors are too small and almost uninfluenced by this distance.
Thus, the normalization procedure was applied to each parameter separately taking into account the
distribution of the entire population.
തതതȀߪ, where ‫ݔ‬ҧ
Each criterion was normalized according to the standard score equation ‫ݔ‬௜ ൌ ሺ‫ݔ‬௜ െ ‫ݔ‬ሻ
– mean value of criteria in population, σ – criteria dispersion. This approach allows us to unify the
objective distribution within the population and not to lose individuals with good survival from the
front.
As already mentioned, the optimization is performed according to three criteria of error in density
and collision speed. Within our approach, it is assumed that a small number of collisions during a
simulation are allowed and this does not affect the behavior while enabling significant reduction in the
density and speed error.
The algorithm was implemented on a parallel distributed system as a synchronous master-slave
architecture. It is possible to significantly speed up the calibration and increase the population of
individuals.
Further work will include implementation of other methods of optimization, for example, Bayesian
optimization and comparative analysis in order to find the best method.

533

Agent-based Modelling Using Ensemble Approach...

A.V. Kiselev, V.A. Karbovskii, S.V. Kovalchuk

2.3 Ensemble Management and Model Hybridization
We have used the conceptual framework proposed in [19] to manage the ensemble of models
within a hybrid application. To generate an ensemble of microscopic models we applied a two
ensemble techniques class:
1.

2.

Alternative models ensemble. This class of ensembles involves the use of several models
similar in meaning but different in the implementation. As it was already mentioned, we try
to combine different microscopic models that have one approach. However, it is possible to
use, for example, RVO and SF, which belong to different classes, but are both applied for the
same purposes.
Parameter diversity ensemble. According to this class, the ensemble may consist of several
models with different parameters and initial conditions. So, in our case it is possible to use
several identical models, but with different parameters, which are suitable under various
conditions of the environment.

It’s possible to use both ensemble techniques simultaneously. The construction of the ensemble is
implemented using calibrated models. As already mentioned, the ensemble of microscopic models is
necessary to switch to the preferred model according to the selected condition. The conditions in turn
can be divided into the following groups:
1.

2.

3.

Spatial condition is the evaluation of the environment where the agent is located and
selection of the model depending on which model shows the best results for a particular
place. Evaluation is performed with a specified step and agents use models which have less
error density and velocity in region where they are located. Velocity vector and position for
each agent in a certain region are computed taking into account the agents in regions, which
are situated near by, but using parameters and model is appropriated for this region. A field
which consists of a set of models for each region in the environment is called Preference
Model Field (PMF).
Temporal condition involves switching the model of all the agents at certain times, for
example, on the model that has been calibrated in this time window or on a more preferred
model. This approach allows the use of only one model at the same time, solving the problem
of interaction between agents of different models. However, the problem of transition
between two models arises using Temporal Model (TM) since an abrupt change of the model
in simulation can lead to stumbling of agents. In other words, it can briefly stop or slow down
the agent.
Group condition enables scenarios where a set of agents is divided into subsets, which act
according to different models. This approach can evaluate heterogeneity in the behavior of
the agents within the crowd.

It possible to combine these conditions by creating a hierarchical ensemble of models. The
ensemble might consist of one model with several different configurations, and models of different
nature.
It is worth mentioning that besides switching the model, an aggregation approach can be used. e.g.
in case of spatial condition, a weighting function can be introduced for the PMF, when the influence of
the less preferred model remains on a region in a given ratio. This approach introduces a significant
issue of model integration, which may cause unexpected behavior and collisions. When PMF is used,
the simulation environment becomes heterogeneous and one of the challenges is to model coordination, which should provide a collision-free interaction between various models. It will also give
the opportunity to use models originally created for the homogenous environment. An example of
such models is RVO, which do not avoid collisions in a heterogeneous environment, as in the

534

Agent-based Modelling Using Ensemble Approach...

A.V. Kiselev, V.A. Karbovskii, S.V. Kovalchuk

calculation of the velocity vector of the agent it is assumed that all other agents behave in a similar
way. This means that another should avoid collision with the current agent in the same manner.
There are certain types of ensemble and their combination in the hybridization model, as well as a
combination of switching patterns create a complex hierarchical ensemble with nested conditions
expected to be of use.

3 Experimental Study
The experimental case study was designed to examine the capabilities and discover possible issues
introduced by the proposed ensemble-based hybridization approach for agent-based modeling. The
simulation environment was developed using Pulse framework [20] where SF and RVO have been
implemented. Calibration was carried out on the experimental data obtained by Zhang at al. in [21]
and provided online*. Within the paper all experiments were demonstrated in a T-junction corridor,
depicted in the Figure 2 below. There are fixed number of agents moving from left and right corridor
to central where they are merged into one flow going towards exit.
The corridor is divided into square units, as shown in the fig. 2, in each one the density and
velocity are computed. To reduce measurement uncertainty, the regions that had low density in the
experiments were not taken into account. This approach can be improved in the future by adding
microscopic parameters like agent trajectories.

480cm

240cm

1200cm

100cm

240cm

480cm

Figure 2: Experimental T-junction corridor

3.1 Estimation of Calibrated Models
Calibration was carried out using the SPEA2 algorithm with the use of heterogeneous mutations,
which is calculated on the basis of genetic similarity of parents, where the greater the similarity, the
mutation probability of a child increases. This allows us to retain species diversity and avoid
convergence. The reproduction involves only the front and crossing-over probability of 0.9. All
individuals involved in selection are both parents (two individuals whose parameters are mixed up
with certain probability) and new individuals. At least one of the elite individuals is selected, while the
*
Jülich Supercomputing Centre Pedestrian Dynamics Database (http://www.fzjuelich.de/ias/jsc/EN/Research/ModellingSimulation/CivilSecurityTraffic/PedestrianDynamics/Activities/database/databaseNod
e.html)

535

Agent-based Modelling Using Ensemble Approach...

A.V. Kiselev, V.A. Karbovskii, S.V. Kovalchuk

rest are sorted by fitness and intensity of 0.7, meaning that the weakest individuals are eliminated. The
population size is 15 individuals, and the number of generations is about 200. This population size was
chosen as optimal after several calibrations. If population size is smaller, the species diversity is low
and premature convergence can be occurring. Otherwise, with growth of the population size,
computational time is growth too, thus such size was chosen as optimal for the current experiment.
Figure 3 shows the comparison of calibrated models with RVO and SF models without calibration.
The comparison was performed with models that are used in the Pulse framework as default. It is
observed that the behavior of the model has improved significantly, approaching the experimental
data. The graphs show the dynamics of the density flow in the central and side corridors.

Figure 3: Comparison default and optimized RVO model. Left: measure density in region of left corridor.
Middle: same for central corridor. Right: dynamic density of right corridor. Width of measurement area of each
∆x=1m

In addition to a fairly close coincidence of the dynamics of the density, the simulation is almost
identical to the experimental data. Many calibrated models were chosen with the smallest collisions,
since the Pareto front consists of simulation models which happens with a lot of collisions. Velocity
and density mean absolute error comparison are presented in Table 1.

Figure 4: Comparison default and optimized SF model.

3.2 Ensemble-based Simulation
To show the ensemble management and hybridization procedures the parameter ensemble diversity
is discussed in this section. For example, consider the SF PFM approach with two models with
different parameters. In Figure 5, units of influence for each model are shown, where the highlighted
fields in green are running one model, and the red boxes another. As described above, the priority of a
model is determined by the lowest density error in region.

536

Agent-based Modelling Using Ensemble Approach...

A.V. Kiselev, V.A. Karbovskii, S.V. Kovalchuk

SF1
SF2

Figure 5: Preferential fields

As would be expected, the hybrid model inherits the behavior of one of the SF models as the best
member of the ensemble as shown in fundamental diagram (Fig. 7). The behavior of density dynamics
shows similar behavior as a whole with other models.

Figure 6: Single SF models and hybrid dynamic of density comparison

Figure 7: Fundamental diagram of models and experimental data measured in central corridor

Models
SF default
SF with calibrating
RVO default
RVO with calibrating
SF1
SF2
Sf PMF hybrid

Density MAE
1/݉ଶ
1.34
0.09
0.79
0.24
0.08
0.09
0.37

Velocity MAE
m/s
0.39
0.18
0.25
0.02
0.01
0.06
0.09

Table 1: Comparison of density and velocity mean error of default and calibrated models

537

Agent-based Modelling Using Ensemble Approach...

A.V. Kiselev, V.A. Karbovskii, S.V. Kovalchuk

A parameter diversity ensemble which consists of 4 models with different parameters was used
with TM. The simulation was divided into frame windows with size 50 (3.125s) simulation time units
and it was chosen for each frame model that has the smallest error on density. Evidently, it is better to
use larger frames, as a frequent change of models can lead to more unpredictable behavior of the
hybrid model.

Figure 8: Single RVO models comparison

It should be noted that in this case, frame window of the simulation, optimization models are not
implemented and the best five models are used, which were spaced in time in accordance with the
smallest error on the density. The same is true for SF.

Figure 9: Single SF models comparison

The graphs in the figure 10 illustrate that in some places the hybrid model SF is significantly better
than the RVO. It is evident that SF has improved in local areas, where donors had the advantage. RVO
has a large dispersion and worse results than single models in general. The advantage of SF, in this
case, is probably associated with initially much better single models, as well as low variation between
them. However, as RVO and SF do not meet the schedules of the fundamental diagrams, and the
behavior becomes unpredictable, thus, as already mentioned, it should resolve the problem of the
models co-ordination.

Figure 10: Temporal hybrid of SF and RVO models

538

Agent-based Modelling Using Ensemble Approach...

A.V. Kiselev, V.A. Karbovskii, S.V. Kovalchuk

Figure 11: Fundamental diagrams of RVO(right) and SF(left) TM approach

Models
SF1
SF2
SF3
SF4
SF time hybrid

TW1
1/݉ଶ
0.07
0.27
0.17
0.05
0.05

TW2
1/݉ଶ
0.66
0.12
0.35
0.88
0.36

TW3
1/݉ଶ
0.38
0.20
0.02
0.59
0.01

TW4
1/݉ଶ
1.03
1.41
1.31
0.98
1.21

Table 2: Single calibration module and Time hybrid density MAE comparison of each Time Window (TW) is
equal 18.75s

Number of SF model corresponds to the number of Time Window (TW) in table 2, which means
that SF1 is used in TW1 and so on. It is clearly seen that the hybrid model inherits a particular model
in a certain period of time. However, during the transition from one model to another, as already
mentioned, hitches can occur leading to less realistic results. This problem is clearly seen in the
transition from TW1 to TW2. The question of smooth transition should be studied further in future
research.

4 Discussion and Conclusions
Experiments have shown that the application of the ensemble of microscopic models can provide
more realistic agent behavior. The research is still ongoing and requires further development and
refinement. Due to the nature of the RVO algorithm, it shows less realistic results in hybridization
than SF. One of the reasons is the assumption that all agents behave in a similar way in the model.
Positive experience while using SF with TM approach shows that hybridization could yield realistic
results when parameter ensemble diversity is applied. Moreover, in further experiments, we are
planning to use more complicated scenarios and other models, for example, [11].
One of the future tasks is the coordination of several models found in the environment and what
behavior should have the agents located on the border of different models. In addition to spatial
smoothing of boundaries, attention should be paid to the transitions between the models in the TM
approach. An abrupt change in the behavior of the model in the environment can lead to stumbling and
collisions.
Two types of evolutionary algorithms were used – simple genetic algorithm and SPEA2. The
disadvantage of the first method is the difficulty of the weight selection and the possibility to lose
good individuals. The reason is that individuals with a large number of collisions often get in
population, creating a wide range of collision. Because of this, the resulting scalar hardly took into

539

Agent-based Modelling Using Ensemble Approach...

A.V. Kiselev, V.A. Karbovskii, S.V. Kovalchuk

account the influence of the parameters of density and velocity. SPEA2 has shown good calibration
results but for more precise optimization, additional criteria, for example, the trajectories of the agents
should be used. Considering computing complexity, it can be necessary to simplify the search for
optimal solutions by reduction of unnecessary parameters such as a large search space that can slow
down the calibration. This makes it possible to use a short up-calibration during the simulation. In
addition to data obtained during laboratory work, we plan to use video tracking data and solve the
problem of assimilation data from this source.
Further study will also evaluate the computational complexity of the ensemble approach and
determine its efficiency. Besides, our research could be extended by developing the methods for
hybrid calibration, switching and ensemble aggregation and high-end model management.
In our experiments, preliminary calculation of global road agents was used, so one of the issues is
the use of other, more complex methods for global navigation and their impact on the hybrid model.

Acknowledgements
This paper is financially supported by the Russian Scientific Foundation, Agreement #14-11-00823
(15.07.2014). The work was partly performed by the Master student (Andrey V. Kiselev) of the
Master’s Programme in Computational Science [22].

References
[1] Henderson, L. F. (1971). The statistics of crowd fluids. Nature, 229, 381-383.
[2] H Hughes, R. L. (2002). A continuum theory for the flow of pedestrians. Transportation
Research Part B: Methodological, 36(6), 507-535.
[3] Helbing, D., & Molnar, P. (1995). Social force model for pedestrian dynamics. Physical review
E, 51(5), 4282.
[4] Gipps, P. G., & Marksjö, B. (1985). A micro-simulation model for pedestrian flows.
Mathematics and computers in simulation, 27(2), 95-105.
[5] Blue, V., & Adler, J. (1998). Emergent fundamental pedestrian flows from cellular automata
microsimulation. Transportation Research Record: Journal of the Transportation Research Board,
(1644), 29-36.
[6] Burstedde, C., Klauck, K., Schadschneider, A., & Zittartz, J. (2001). Simulation of pedestrian
dynamics using a two-dimensional cellular automaton. Physica A: Statistical Mechanics and its
Applications, 295(3), 507-525.
[7] Van Den Berg, J., Guy, S. J., Lin, M., & Manocha, D. (2011). Reciprocal n-body collision
avoidance. In Robotics research (pp. 3-19). Springer Berlin Heidelberg.
[8] Thalmann, D. (2007). Crowd simulation. John Wiley & Sons, Inc…
[9] Xiong, M., Lees, M., Cai, W., Zhou, S., & Low, M. Y. H. (2010). Hybrid modelling of crowd
simulation. Procedia Computer Science, 1(1), 57-65.
[10] Golas, A., Narain, R., Curtis, S., & Lin, M. C. (2014). Hybrid long-range collision avoidance for
crowd simulation. Visualization and Computer Graphics, IEEE Transactions on, 20(7), 10221034.
[11] Zanlungo, F., Ikeda, T., & Kanda, T. (2011). Social force model with explicit collision
prediction. EPL (Europhysics Letters), 93(6), 68005.
[12] Zhong, J., Hu, N., Cai, W., Lees, M., & Luo, L. (2015). Density-based evolutionary framework
for crowd model calibration. Journal of Computational Science, 6, 11-22.

540

Agent-based Modelling Using Ensemble Approach...

A.V. Kiselev, V.A. Karbovskii, S.V. Kovalchuk

[13] Johansson, A., Helbing, D., & Shukla, P. K. (2007). Specification of the social force pedestrian
model by evolutionary adjustment to video tracking data. Advances in complex systems,
10(supp02), 271-288.
[14] Voloshin, D., Rybokonenko, D., & Karbovskii, V. (2015). Optimization-based Calibration for
Micro-level Agent-based Simulation of Pedestrian Behavior in Public Spaces. Procedia
Computer Science, 66, 372-381.
[15] Horn, J., Nafpliotis, N., & Goldberg, D. E. (1994, June). A niched Pareto genetic algorithm for
multiobjective optimization. In Evolutionary Computation, 1994. IEEE World Congress on
Computational Intelligence., Proceedings of the First IEEE Conference on (pp. 82-87). Ieee.
[16] Zitzler, E., & Thiele, L. (1999). Multiobjective evolutionary algorithms: a comparative case
study and the strength Pareto approach. evolutionary computation, IEEE transactions on, 3(4),
257-271
[17] Deb, K., Agrawal, S., Pratap, A., & Meyarivan, T. (2000, September). A fast elitist nondominated sorting genetic algorithm for multi-objective optimization: NSGA-II. In Parallel
problem solving from nature PPSN VI (pp. 849-858). Springer Berlin Heidelberg.
[18] Laumanns, M. (2001). SPEA2: Improving the strength Pareto evolutionary algorithm.
[19] Kovalchuk, S. V., & Boukhanovsky, A. V. (2015). Towards Ensemble Simulation of Complex
Systems. Procedia Computer Science, 51, 532-541.
[20] Karbovskii, V., Voloshin, D., Karsakov, A., Bezgodov, A., & Zagarskikh, A. (2015). Multiscale
Agent-based Simulation in Large City Areas: Emergency Evacuation use Case. Procedia
Computer Science, 51, 2367-2376.
[21] Zhang, J., Klingsch, W., Schadschneider, A., & Seyfried, A. (2011). Transitions in pedestrian
fundamental diagrams of straight corridors and T-junctions. Journal of Statistical Mechanics:
Theory and Experiment, 2011(06), P06004.
[22] Krzhizhanovskaya, V. V., Dukhanov, A. V., Bilyatdinova, A., Boukhanovsky, A. V., & Sloot, P.
M. (2015). Russian-Dutch double-degree Master’s programme in computational science in the
age of global education. Journal of Computational Science, 10, 288-298.

541

