Procedia Computer Science
Volume 51, 2015, Pages 2859–2863
ICCS 2015 International Conference On Computational Science

Fuzzy indication of reliability in metagenomics NGS data
analysis
Milko Krachunov1 , Dimitar Vassilev2 , Maria Nisheva1 , Ognyan Kulev1 , Valeriya
Simeonova1 , and Vladimir Dimitrov1
1

Faculty of Mathematics and Informatics, Soﬁa University, 5 James Bourchier blvd., Soﬁa 1164,
Bulgaria
2
Bioinformatics group, AgroBioInstitute, 8 Dragan Tsankov blvd., Soﬁa 1164, Bulgaria

Abstract
NGS data processing in metagenomics studies has to deal with noisy data that can contain
a large amount of reading errors which are diﬃcult to detect and account for. This work
introduces a fuzzy indicator of reliability technique to facilitate solutions to this problem. It
includes modiﬁed Hamming and Levenshtein distance functions that are aimed to be used as
drop-in replacements in NGS analysis procedures which rely on distances, such as phylogenetic
tree construction. The distances utilise fuzzy sets of reliable bases or an equivalent fuzzy logic,
potentially aggregating multiple sources of base reliability.
Keywords: next-generation sequencing, metagenomics, artiﬁcial intelligence, neural networks, fuzzy
sets, error detection

1

Metagenomics and the need for coping with errors

Metagenomics is a fast-growing ﬁeld that studies genetic material from unsorted collections of
microorganisms found in diﬀerent kinds of environments. Still largely unexplored, the studied
microbial communities are crucial for areas of research such as human health [7] and microbial
evolution [4]. At the same time, it poses many challenges to researchers, particularly in error
calling for NGS de novo sequencing in metagenomics where reliable enough error detection
methods are not readily available.
This paper extends our work to develop and test an analytical conﬁdence scoring approach
suitable for metagenomics [3] as well as our ongoing work in combining the analytical approach
with machine learning. It presents a way to apply the error scores during the data processing
itself with the help of fuzzy sets [11] and fuzzy logic [8].
Selection and peer-review under responsibility of the Scientiﬁc Programme Committee of ICCS 2015
c The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V.
doi:10.1016/j.procs.2015.05.448

2859

Fuzzy indication of reliability

2

Krachunov, Vassilev, Nisheva et al.

Error prediction with similarity and neural networks

In our previous work we have successfully combined two diﬀerent approaches for dealing with the
presence of multiple genomes in metagenomics samples, and they will be used as the foundation
for the application of fuzzy sets in section 5.
Base approach. The analytical approach based on similarity weights and the rationale behind it, together with the results of its application, have been described in detail in [3]. It
introduces the following weighted frequency of base rk in position k function in which sequences p locally similar to the evaluated one r have higher importance than locally dissimilar
sequences p.
sweighted (r, k) =

p=r
p∈R

similarity(r, p, k)[rk = pk ]
p=r
p∈R

similarity(r, p, k)

(1)

When this modiﬁed frequency function is used as a conﬁdence score to evaluate a sequence,
other sequences from diﬀerent and dissimilar organisms are ignored proportionally to their
degree of dissimilarity.
Machine learning approach. Artiﬁcial neural networks (ANN) oﬀer a powerful apparatus
to create classiﬁcation models and are good at ﬁnding dependencies present in the data that
are diﬃcult to ﬁnd by other means. We trained an ANN to classify input examples of separate
bases into correct and incorrect. An early version of the ANN model has been published in [1],
and a version using an updated training procedure utilising simulated virtual errors is to be
published in [2]. In raw tests, the model recognized errors with an accuracy of 99.5% and
correct bases with an accuracy of 99.7%.
Since the accuracy of either method is insuﬃcient for error detection due to the rarity
of errors and the high diversity, a Boolean conjunction of the error predictions from the two
approaches was needed to predict the errors.

3

Fuzzy sets and fuzzy logic

Both of the presented approaches are used to produce a Boolean prediction of whether a base
is an error or not. Since both can be easily modiﬁed to produce continuous conﬁdence scores
in [0, 1], the apparatus of fuzzy sets [11] and fuzzy logic [6, 8] can be applied on them so that
they can be used directly inside NGS metagenomics processing algorithms.
The fuzzy set A describes a generalised set whose elements have a degree of membership as
deﬁned by a membership function A(x) taking values in [0, 1]. All the set operations, such as
complement c, union ∪ and intersection ∩ are extended for fuzzy sets. They can be generalised
to negation ¬, disjunction ∨ and conjunction ∧ in fuzzy logic. The standard operations, used
in this work, are the following.
cA(x) = ¬A(x) = 1 − A(x)
(A ∪ B)(x) = A(x) ∨ B(x) = max(A(x), B(x))
(A ∩ B)(x) = A(x) ∧ B(x) = min(A(x), B(x))

(2)
(3)
(4)

Both the fuzzy set and fuzzy logic apparatus are used to extend the distance functions used
in distance matrix construction.
2860

Fuzzy indication of reliability

4

Krachunov, Vassilev, Nisheva et al.

Distance matrices in metagenomics analysis

A lot of NGS metagenomics processing problems rely on the utilisation of matrices containing
the distances between the pairs of sequences in the dataset. This includes the construction of
phylogenetic trees, estimation of biodiversity and multiple alignment. A widely used choice
for calculating the distances in sets of sequences is the Hamming distance [9]. The distance
between sequences r and p of length m can be calculated with the following formula.
m

H(r, p) =
i=1

[ri = pi ]
=
m

i [ri

= pi ]
i1

(5)

For situations in which an alignment is not available, the Leventshtein distance [5] can be
used instead. It is roughly equivalent to the Hamming distance applied over pairs of aligned
sequences.

5

Fuzzy distances and fuzzy pairwise alignment

We extend the used distance functions to take into account a conﬁdence score s(r, i), of position
i in read r, as a fuzzy indication. This score can be produced by an arbitrary scoring approach
(subject to normalization—see 6). To achieve this, for each sequence r we deﬁne a fuzzy set Rr
to denote the reliable positions, and its complementary Er to denote the erroneous positions,
Er = cRr . When using the standard fuzzy set complement, these sets are as follows.
Rr (i) = s(r, i),

Er (i) = cRr (i) = 1 − s(r, i)

(6)

The apparatus of fuzzy sets allows us to deﬁne such sets for our two diﬀerent scoring
sources—Rrweighted for the sweighted score of the analytical approach, and Rneural for the respective score produced by the ANN. That way the Boolean conjunction of the two error
predictions can be directly translated into an intersection of the E sets, or an union of the R
sets.
Rr (i) = Rrweighted ∪ Rrneural ,

Er (i) = Erweighted ∩ Erneural

(7)

The standard distance functions rely on a binary indication of matches and mismatches.
To simplify the formulas, the conjunction between these Boolean indications and our fuzzy
indicators can be written as multiplication.
Once we modify the Hamming distance function H from (5) to use the fuzzy indication
of reliability Rx , we get the following weighted Hamming distance through a straightforward
modiﬁcation.
H f (r, p) =

∩ Rp )(i)[ri = pi ]
(R
r ∩ Rp )(i)
i

i (Rr

(8)

The same extension can be applied to the Levenshtein distance L with the apparatus of
fuzzy logic. This results in the following extended weighted Leventshtein distance.
2861

Fuzzy indication of reliability

Lfr,p (i, j) =

⎧
⎪
⎪
⎨

i
k=1 Rr (k)
j
k=1 Rp (k)
⎪
⎪
⎩ Lf sbs (i, j)
r,p

Krachunov, Vassilev, Nisheva et al.

if j = 0
if i = 0
otherwise

⎧
⎪
⎨ Lr,p (i − 1, j) + Rr (i)
f sbs
Lr,p (i, j) = min Lr,p (i, j − 1) + Rp (j)
⎪
⎩
Lr,p (i − 1, j − 1) + δrfi ,pj

δrfi ,pj = Rr (i) ∧ Rp (j)[ri = pj ]

(9)

(10)

The use of fuzzy logic can be further generalised for any algorithm that uses a similarity
S(ri , pj ) between a pair of bases. Since, in many practical cases, S takes values in [a, b], using a
and b as normalizing constants, the following weighted measure can be used as its replacement.
S f (ri , pj ) = b Er (i) ∨ Ep (j) ∨

1
b

(S(ri , pj ) − a) + a

(11)

It can be demonstrated that the modiﬁcations in H and S are equivalent.

6

Normalization

To normalize the score of the analytical approach and ensure that the threshold for errors is
always at 0.5, the same procedure as for gamma correction in image processing [10] is applied.
If it has been experimentally established that T (i) is a good threshold for base ri , the value Γ
would be logT (i) 12 , and the fuzzy set membership function will look as following:
Rrweighted = (sweighted )

logT (i)

1
2

(12)

This ensures that the threshold for errors will be scaled up to 0.5, even for tasks which have
necessitated the use of a variable threshold.

7

Results

In an earlier evaluation of the Boolean indication of errors, the addition of a similarity function
decreased the number of incorrectly detected errors by 6-35%, and by using the ANN this percentage was brought up to 46-61%. The predictions were still insuﬃciently reliable, warranting
the use of fuzzy indication.

(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)

ATGCGAT (10000)
ATTCGAT (100)
ATGCTAT (1)
ATTCTAT (100)
AGTCTGT (1)

(a)
.0000
.0985
.0895
.2154
.4372

(b)
.0985
.0000
.1994
.1062
.3082

(c)
.0895
.1994
.0000
.1114
.3157

(d)
.2154
.1062
.1114
.0000
.1790

(e)
.4372
.3082
.3157
.1790
.0000

Table 1: Rare substitutions
An example experiment with fuzzy indicator, done with ﬁve groups of sequences, is shown in
Table 1. The ﬁrst column contains the sequence content and their counts, while the remaining
columns show the pair-wise distances. Substitutions, which are underlined, are introduced in
the sequences, with the ones in rarer (c) and (e) intended to be erroneous. The measure fuzzy
reliability indication decreases the distances for potentially erroneous (c). It is much rarer in the
2862

Fuzzy indication of reliability

Krachunov, Vassilev, Nisheva et al.

sample than (b), and its distance to (a) is smaller. Sequences (d) and the (e) remain correctly
identiﬁed as more distant than any of the other two, and are correctly clustered together, while
also being identiﬁed as closer to the (b) than to (c)—the substitution in (b) is more certain
than the potentially erroneous (c).
As expected, errors are suppressed and sequences with rarely occurring substitutions (potential errors) lead to smaller distances, while sequences with more frequently occurring substitutions lead to larger distances. This is consistent with the expectation that the more frequently
occurring substitutions are single-point mutations and not errors.

8

Conclusions

This paper introduces a theoretical apparatus that oﬀers new means to deal with unreliable
error predictions. The presented fuzzy indicator of reliability can be used to suppress biases
introduced by sequencing errors proportionally to the conﬁdence that a base is erroneous,
instead of making deﬁnite error calling decisions using thresholds. It can also combine multiple
sources of predictions, such as base frequencies and neural networks. While further experiments
are necessary, preliminary tests show that the application of the introduced measure performs
according to expectations and has a good potential to lead to practical improvement in results.

Acknowledgements
This work has been supported by the National Science Fund of Bulgaria within the “Methods
for Data Analysis and Knowledge Discovery in Big Sequencing Datasets” project, contract
DFNI-I02/7 of 12 December 2014.

References
[1] M. Krachunov. Denoising of metagenomic data from high-throughput sequencing. In Advanced
Research in Mathematics and Computer Science, pages 67–76, Soﬁa, 2013.
[2] M. Krachunov, O. Kulev, M. Nisheva, V. Simeonova, V. Dimitrov, and D. Vassilev. Machine learning in de novo metagenomics error discovery. Proceedings of the Bulgarian Academy of Sciences,
2015. [submitted].
[3] M. Krachunov and D. Vassilev. An approach to a metagenomic data processing workﬂow. Journal
of Computational Science, 5:357–362, 2014.
[4] D. Kristensen, A. Mushegian, V. Dolja, and E. Koonin. New dimensions of the virus world
discovered through metagenomics. Trends in Microbiology, 18(1):11–19, Jan. 2010.
[5] V. I. Levenshtein. Binary codes capable of correcting deletions, insertions, and reversals. Doklady
Akademii Nauk SSSR, 163(4):845–848, 1964. (in Russian).
[6] J. Lukasiewicz. O logice tr´
ojwarto´sciowej. Ruch ﬁlozoﬁczny, 5:170–171, 1920.
[7] K. Nelson and B. White. Metagenomics and its applications to the study of the human microbiome.
Metagenomics: Theory, Methods and Applications, pages 171–182, 2010.
[8] F. Pelletier. Mathematics of fuzzy logic. The Bulletin of Symbolic Logic, 6(3):342–346, sep 2000.
[9] H. P. Pinheiroa, A. Pinheiroa, and P. Sen. Comparison of genomic sequences using the hamming
distance. Journal of Statistical Planning and Inference, 130:325–329, 2005.
[10] C. A. Poynton. Digital Video and HDTV: Algorithms and Interfaces. Morgan Kaufmann, 2003.
[11] L. Zadeh. Fuzzy sets. Information and Control, 8:338–353, 1965.

2863

