Procedia Computer Science
Volume 80, 2016, Pages 1856–1864
ICCS 2016. The International Conference on Computational
Science

Psychological warfare analysis
using Network Science approach 
Ilya Blokh1 and Vassil Alexandrov2
1

Perm State University, Russia,
ICREA-Barcelona Supercomputing Centre, Spain.
ilyablokh@gmail.com, vassil.alexandrov@bsc.es
2

Abstract
In this paper, we analyze the concept of psychological warfare in an Internet setting and investigate its
possible influence on the public opinion in certain areas researching a manifold of mass media
publications. We have formulated the basic research questions concerning psychological warfare and
suggested simple steps that provide initial analysis. In our research, we consider Twitter as a typical
representative of the social networking phenomenon as it is one of most subscribed social networks.
To determine points of view related to chosen theme an algorithm of keyword clustering is used. We
propose a network science based method and performed the corresponding network properties
analysis, which we further interpreted in the context of psychological warfare analysis.
Keywords: psychological warfare, network science, scale free networks, news.



1 Introduction
When searching and analyzing significant news, the corresponding events could be, for example,
different by their spreading scale: some events could not be noticed outside the region where they
originated while others could attract attention from various regions, countries and news agencies.
Moreover, it is common that one event or accident could be commented and interpreted from very
different points of view.
Observing a large amount of data published daily by news agencies around the world, it could be
noticed that there is a variety of different positions and opinions expressed. News sources translate
some opinions, some emotional context and by this way influence large amount of people to form their
point of view and opinion about some object or event. The battle for people minds covers the whole
world. Different countries try to express their position and opinion to their own as well as the external
population. Usually we look at this as a form of democracy, the demonstration of opinion pluralism.
However sometimes this battle starts to be more aggressive and directed not into the delivery of the

1856

Selection and peer-review under responsibility of the Scientiﬁc Programme Committee of ICCS 2016
c The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V.

doi:10.1016/j.procs.2016.05.479

Psychological warfare analysis using Network Science approach

Ilya Blokh and Vassil Alexandrov

objective information about something but into producing information in a way that is correcting, and
changing human's opinion focusing on certain narrative. In that case, we could confidently say that we
are dealing with a psychological warfare (PW).
Thus, we regard PW as the demonstration of multi-directed regular actions forwarded into
influencing the social opinion in some area and consisting of mass media publication's policy and the
corresponding Internet media policy in particular. The first research that considered this phenomenon
dates from the middle of XX century (Doob and Leonard 1949, Szunyogh and Béla 1955) and is
named - psychological warfare. Nowadays this topic gained new popularity. The term “information
warfare” is close to PW and usually contains the actions like disabling communication networks,
jamming TV and radio translations along with propaganda in mass media. However, PW focuses on
actions aimed at evoking a planned psychological reaction in other people and at changing the public
opinion (Haeni 1997). Thus, as such PW is a subject of our research.
We suppose that it is possible to analyze processes of PW to reveal some hidden interconnections
and facts to construct the whole picture of sides in PW and their position, propaganda strategy. Such
analysis could be useful for politics analytics, in diplomacy and in social science in general.
We plan to analyze the PW processes in an Internet setting starting from social networks because
nowadays social networks are one of the most widely used channels to get access to an audience and
also so many news sources are situated and work inside the social networks. The role of social
networks in PW is prominent and it grows continually (Niekerk and Maharaj 2013, Marinho 2015,
Theohary 2015). 
First, we identified potential research directions and questions related to psychological warfare:
1. How to detect PW, what are its criteria?
2. What are the laws of information spreading in situation of PW? How it influences at people?
How propaganda ideas evolve and spread in Internet?
3. What factors could influence the spreading dynamics of such ideas?
4. How to find and reveal hidden connections between published news and facts from different
sources? What kinds of hidden connections we could find?
In this research, we analyzed data from Twitter network because it is one of the most popular social
networking platforms for news publishing and distribution (Kwak 2010). We didn’t introduce any
special limits for PW and analyzed all statements considering some observable theme.

 Network Science approach
Network science approach could be a convenient tool to be applied since we have to deal with
social networks and network science gives a strong apparatus for network analysis.
Besides network analysis, we need to deal with the news text understanding and interpretation
problems. There are a wide number of methods used for text analysis ranging from keywords and key
phrases processing to natural language processing.
Since Twitter messages are quite short (140 symbols maximum) it will be convenient to use
keywords for classifying news. Twitter's hashtag mechanism could be a natural way for keyword
extraction.
We propose the following algorithm of news distribution analysis:
1. Define the theme, which will become the observation subject.
2. Define research geography (countries, languages). To enhance the PW analysis in the
Internet, we have to try to cover regions, which admittedly push different points of view on
the Internet.
3. Define keywords that characterize the theme.

1857

Psychological warfare analysis using Network Science approach

4.
5.
6.
7.

Ilya Blokh and Vassil Alexandrov

Define the time period for research.
Extract data from Twitter and use Network Science methods construct the network that
embraces selected theme.
Analyze and compare the data spreading character in different parts of chosen geographical
regions.
Use additional analysis to understand the news ideological affiliation with some of the
present sides in PW. It may be difficult to draw a strong line between some ideas and define
sides, but we could put each piece of news towards some ideological direction or declare that
news have rather neutral character.

Now let us have a detailed look at proposed steps. 
First, we define the theme. Here it is assumed that theme is not just one event but also something
more global, for example, a theme. Themes could be some long-term confrontations in a global sence
(such as civil war in Ukraine, arab-israeli conflict, confrontation with DPRK), some social significant
questions (e.g. minority rights, ecology problems) and other.
After the theme is specified, by its scale - the geography of involved parts and by its duration, these
could dictate the geography and time period of the research. Thus depending on the chosen theme, the
analyzed data could cover area ranging from one city up to the whole world.

 Keywords processing
As we pointed above, we use Twitter’s hashtags as keywords. We have to compose the keyword set
which has to be as complete as possible. To find all theme-related hashtags on different languages we
use services hashtagify.me and hashtags.org. However to provide a deeper analysis of news data it is
not enough just to get keywords. One keyword characterizes prticular point of view. So a selection of
analogous and connected keywords form a set of verbal characteristics of one point of view for given
theme. Thus, keywords have to be grouped into several clusters where each cluster corresponds to one
point of view of the theme. Here under the “point of view” we imply not the opinion of concrete
person or organization but the collection of similar opinions. Hence, the task of keywords clustering,
or finding corresponding keywords clusters should be solved. We provide a plain hierarchical
agglomerative clustering algorithm adapted for our specific task (Jain and Dubes 1998, Hastie et al
2009, Kaufman and Rousseeuw 1990). The choice of the clustering algorithm is conditioned by the
nature of keywords. We assume that keywords could be distributed among clusters with different
proximity. This proximity is manually tuned parameter and its value is specified during the
experiments.
One of the features of clusters should be that one keyword could be included in several clusters.
This condition is required because a keyword could be a common word for the theme or common for
some or similar points of view. We describe the clustering algorithm adapted for Twitter hashtags
model.
Let us assume 
 2  81  2     * 9 
be a set of tweets which acts as initial data. 
Each tweet % is characterized by several keywords 1     ' . Thus
 2  8     ) 9
is a set of all retrieved keywords. Our goal is to form a collection of sets 
1  2     ( 
where
%  2  '1  '2     '0   2 1  m,
.

1858

Psychological warfare analysis using Network Science approach

Ilya Blokh and Vassil Alexandrov

& 
 $-     $/   2 1  n,
	 & 2 .
As we use agglomerative approach, each keyword is a cluster in the beginning. In order to decide
the rule for cluster merging we have to define the metric - a measure of distance between two
keywords. Let us assume 
% - is a quantity of keyword % appearances in tweets from ,  2 1  n,
%& - is a quantity of simultaneous entries of keywords % and & into tweets from ,   2 1  n.
Consequently,
%& 5 % ,  .
Since we aim to understand the distance between keywords we use their simultaneous and separate
appearance rate for metric formulation. Thus the value

%& 2

%&

&

reflects the relative rate of keyword % concerning keyword & . From this definition follows that
0 5 %& 5 1.
The closer the value %& is to 1 - the more frequently keyword % appears together with keyword
& . And to the contrary if %& is close to 0 that means that % usually doesn’t appear with & in one
tweet. Also it should be noted that%&  3 &% 
In other words if % usually appears with & it doesn’t mean that & could not appear frequently
without % . We define the metric for clustering as a mean value:
 2  2 6 1  72
0 5 +, 5 1
Proposed estimation provides a possibility to distinguish keywords pairs that often go together and
rarely appear separately - for such pairs metric estimation is closer to 1. In addition, we have to specify
clustering proximity threshold  as criteria of cluster merging:
if  4L we put % and & to one cluster 
In general, we form a cluster by following the rule:
     
     4 
The optimal value for threshold will be specified during the experiments. If we set the threshold
value close to 0 then we get more small sparse clusters. Otherwise, if threshold value is close to 1 we
get a several big and abstract clusters. In this way we have a possibility to change the precision of the
algorithm by changing the threshold value. Thus, we propose to use the algorithm above for
determining the points of view. After that we are able to compare the properties of distributing and
spreading information for discovered and determined points of view. 

 Data analysis using Network Science
The first thing we can do after retrieving the data from social networks and composing the
keyword sets is tweets assignment by keyword sets. All collected tweets could be distributed among
keyword sets where each set corresponds to some point of view in context of chosen theme. Besides
tweet could be assigned simultaneously to several sets because corresponding keywords could be
included into different clusters. The tweets distribution between sets could show which point of view
is prevailing. Also the distance measure between sets should be specified to learn which points of view
are closer to each other.
We provide a network science approach for twitter data analysis. We decided to take Twitter as a
typical representative of the social networking phenomenon as it is one of most subscribed social

1859

Psychological warfare analysis using Network Science approach

Ilya Blokh and Vassil Alexandrov

networks. We compose a network where each tweet acts as a node. Next, we define each retweet or
favorite action as equivalent outgoing tie from a node. The total link number for each node is its
degree. 
 % 2 6% 7 1 6% 7,
6% 7- degree of node% ,
6% 7- retweets qusntity of tweet corresponding to the node % ,
6% 7- favourites quantity of tweet corresponding to the node % .
Thus, we have some degree distribution for initial tweet collection. Accordingly, our previous
research (Blokh and Alexandrov 2015) such distribution is scale-free. Therefore we can examine the
network for several properties specific to scale-free networks.
1. Significant messages.
In (Blokh and Alexandrov 2015) we introduced the concept of significance as an integral measure
of the degree of the message (news particularly) impact on the society and public opinion. Also
quantitative measure of significance has been defined. In our research we follow the same algorithm.
At first hubs should be discovered. The message is significant thus meeting the condition that the
corresponding node in the network is a hub. Because we have all tweets distributed by clusters via
keywords we could compare the quantity and the size of hubs in each category and learn what point of
view is more popular at the moment and has attracted more attention from people.
2. Assortativity.
The scale-free network is assortative if hubs tend to link with each other, while avoiding smalldegree nodes. In the opposite situation, when hubs avoid each other and prefer to link with smalldegree nodes the network is named as disassorative. To explore that property the degree correlation
matrix should be composed.
Taking into account the specifics of research data we expect to find some kind of assortative
mixing (Xulvi-Brunet and Sokolov 2005) where similar nodes, which belong to one cluster or to close
clusters, tend to link with each other but avoid nodes from distant clusters. Such situations were
discovered, for example, in political blogosphere analysis by Barabasi (Barabási 2015).
3. Dynamic data research. Node lifetime and fitness.
To learn about the additional network properties nodes degree should be examined in its dynamics.
Optimal time step for data collection should be specified during experiments. Dynamic analysis of
degree distribution allows us to determine two important characteristics: lifetime and fitness.
Lifetime value of the node reflects the time when node continues to attract new links. This measure
could describe the whole time period when anyone keeps notice to a news message. However, node
retweet frequency distribution is described by power law (Clauset 2009, Lu el al 2014). Thus we could
use a half-life metric for node degree: a time while the node gains a half value of its degree. So halflife of node could describe the duration of period when a news message is discussed more actively.
Let us assume
% - half-life value for node %   2 1  n.
The half-life value for each previously composed keyword cluster could be estimated via half-life
values of related nodes:
1 )
#/ 2
 .
) %!1 "
As each set corresponds to one point of view, we are able to compare different points of views
interpreting their half-life values as an average duration of the public discussion of opinions raised
inside.
Fitness is a node characteristic that shows the speed of new ties occurrence. Nodes with a high
fitness have a big rate of link acquiring. Fitness analysis and comparison could reveal which point of
view is more socially resonant. We can state that a node has a big fitness if it has a big degree value
and a low half-life value. Thus we propose to estimate node fitness in the following way:

1860

Psychological warfare analysis using Network Science approach

Ilya Blokh and Vassil Alexandrov

%

  %
For half-life and fitness estimation, we use the methods proposed by Barabasi (Barabási 2015).
% 2

5 Experimental results
For our experiment, we decided to investigate a fixed number of themes discussed by Russian- and
English-language mass media in Twitter. Search included keywords concerning the events in Ukraine
and Crimea, the discord between Russia and Turkey, the war in Syria, the Russian national currency
collapse and the Ebola epidemic. We have analyzed 70 accounts, which had from 10 thousands up to
25 million followers. Samples included more than 300000 tweets for the period of 1st of April 2015 up
to 31st of December 2015. In total, we found more than 1000 keywords which characterized the events
mentioned by mass media accounts.
We provided the result of keywords clustering in Fig.1., where the Proximity threshold is L = 0.3.

Figure 1. Keywords clustering results



It illustrates that five major clusters formed by most common keywords from analyzed accounts
have been identified. Below are given some of the most popular keywords for each group:
1. Ukraine, Russia, Crimea, Donetsk, Luhansk, Украина, Россия, Крым, Донецк, Луганск,
ато, maidan
2. Turkey, УдарВСпину, Эрдоган, Турция, НАТО, ИГИЛ, Су24, Erdogan, ISIS, Daesh,
NATO
3. IRGC, Assad,Hezbollah, Russia, Assad, Obama, Syria
4. USD, RUB, EUR, рубль, Russia, Россия, курсвалюты, euro, usdollar
5. Ebola, SouthAfrica
Using then the so composed keyword sets, it is possible to provide a data analysis using Network
Science approach. The network is scale-free (Cha el al 2010). So we could discover significant

1861

Psychological warfare analysis using Network Science approach

Ilya Blokh and Vassil Alexandrov

messages by following the algorithm we presented at (Blokh and Alexandrov 2015). According to that
method the network hubs correspond to significant news. We discovered around 5000 nodes, which
meet the conditions to be network hubs. Next we compared the popularity of clusters over the period
investigated. We measured an average node degree at each time step for all clusters. The results are
presented in Fig.2. The value on vertical axis is the node degree value. Clusters differ by color.

Figure 2. Clusters comparison

We can observe that some themes were popular over the whole time period investigated having
several popularity splashes. These splashes mostly are induced by some resonance events, which were
actively discussed by society (e.g. ruble collapse, military operations in Syria, negotiations about
captives exchange between Ukraine and self-proclaimed Donetsk and Luhansk national republics). At
the same time, some other themes had a short period when they were popular and were discussed and
after that the interest diminishes. Chart in Fig. 2 is rendered using the SciVi scientific visualization
tool (Ryabinin and Chuprina 2015).
We estimated an average node half-life + for each cluster and found out that the biggest estimate is
obtained for the 2nd cluster (keywords: Су24, Erdogan, ISIS, Daesh, NATO, Turkey, УдарВСпину
e.t.c.): 21 minutes. The 5th cluster got the lowest half-life value: 9 minutes.
The inspection of assortativity showed that messages belonging at one set are frequently connected
via retweet and favorite mechanisms and tend to make connections with hubs. However, users from
different clusters rarely interconnect. Consequently, we could conclude that only the parts of network
are assortative and in general, the investigated case can be named as mixed assortativeness one.

1862

Psychological warfare analysis using Network Science approach

Ilya Blokh and Vassil Alexandrov

We have calculated the node fitness for all messages as well. Some messages with maximum
fitness value are provided at Table 1:
News message
Liberia declared free of the #Ebola virus by @WHO, after 6 weeks of no new cases
German & French leaders arrive in Moscow for #Ukraine peace plan talks with Russian President
Pope Francis calls for peace "above all" in #Syria & #Iraq during traditional Easter Sunday message
Table 1. Messages with maximum fitness value.



 Conclusion and future research
We introduced the concept of psychological warfare as the demonstration of multi-directed regular
actions aiming at influencing the social opinion in certain areas area and consisting of mass media
publication's policy, in an Internet setting in particular. In our research dedicated into PW analysis in a
web setting, we focused on Twitter data because the Twitter is a typical representative of the social
networking phenomenon and it is one of most subscribed social networks.
We have identified and posed the main research questions and determined the first steps needed for
data analysis. We provided an algorithm for keyword clustering that enables to identify the different
points of view. The network for initial data was composed and a Network Science approach was
applied to identify crucial properties of the network used further in our investigation and
interpretation of the results. Particularly, we used methods for determining the assortativity, half-life
and fitness definition of the network. We also proposed an algorithm based on the Network Science
approach enabling us to discover the global properties of the data in the context of our research.
We chose several themes actively discussed in Twitter for the first experiment. During keyword
processing, we found out that the sample data could be divided into five major clusters and after that
we could compare them. We discovered also how different themes were discussed using Twitter
accounts during the investigative period. For instance, the theme of exchange rates and Russian ruble
stability was fairly active during the whole period. In contrast, the theme concerning situation in
Ukraine became less discussed over time. By comparing how actively themes are discussed in
different regions we could make first guesses about PW presence. To increase the accuracy of the
algorithm we plan to take more hashtags into account and use methods for cross-language translation.
In addition, network properties were analyzed. Composed network has mixed assortativeness. We
found significant messages in sample data and compared clusters by the significant messages quantity.
We analyzed how different themes were discussed during the whole time period and found that some
themes were popular for much longer time than others. We estimated average node half-life time and
revealed news with the maximum fitness value.
In future research we plan to consider and deal with larger data sets by using and adding other
sources such as Facebook, etc. Also we plan to analyze all available themes which were not examined
in the current research. New approaches for PW analysis will be presented because current methods
don’t cover all formulated questions and problems. More sophisticated Network Science and
optimization approaches are planned to be used for that.

1863

Psychological warfare analysis using Network Science approach

Ilya Blokh and Vassil Alexandrov

References
A.Clauset, C.R.Shalizi and M.E.J.Newman (2009). Power-law distributions in empirical data. SIAM
Review S1: 661-703. ArXiv e- prints.
Anil K. Jain, Richard C. Dubes (1988). Algorithms for Clustering Data.
Barabási A.L. (2013). Network Science.
Blokh I., Alexandrov V. (2015). Discovering most significant news using Network Science approach.
Procedia computer science 51:1811-1817.
Brett van Niekerk, Manoj Maharaj (2013). Social Media and Information Conflict. International
Journal of Communication 7, 1162–1184.
Doob, Leonard W. (1949). The Strategies Of Psychological Warfare. Public Opinion Quarterly
13.4.635-644. SocINDEX with Full Text. Web. 20 Feb. 2015.
H. Kwak, C. Lee, H. Park, S. Moon (2010). What is Twitter, a social network or a news media?.
Proceedings of the 19th international conference on World wide web, 591-600.
Hastie, Trevor; Tibshirani, Robert; Friedman, Jerome (2009). Hierarchical clustering. The Elements
of Statistical Learning (PDF) (2nd ed.). New York: Springer. pp. 520–528. ISBN 0-387-84857-6.
Retrieved 2009-10-20.
Jorge Marinho (2015). Media / Social Psychological Warfare: High-Precision Targeting. Marinho
Media Analysis.
Kaufman, L.; Rousseeuw, P.J. (1990). Finding Groups in Data: An Introduction to Cluster Analysis (1
ed.). New York: John Wiley. ISBN 0-471-87876-6.
M. Cha, H. Haddadi, F. Benevenuto and K. P. Gummadi (2010). Measuring user influence in Twitter:
The million follower fallacy. Proceedings of international AAAI Conference on Weblogs and Social.
R. Xulvi-Brunet, I.M. Sokolov (2005). Changing correlations in networks: assortativity and
dissortativity. Acta Phys. Pol. B, 36, 1431.
Reto E. Haeni (1997). Information Warfare - an introduction.
Ryabinin K., Chuprina S. Development of Ontology-Based Multiplatform Adaptive Scientific
Visualization System. Journal of Computational Science. – Elsevier, 2015. – Vol. 10. – P. 370-381.
Szunyogh, Béla (1955). Psychological warfare; an introduction to ideological propaganda and the
techniques of psychological warfare. United States: William-Frederick Press. p. 13. Retrieved 201502-11.
Theohary, Catherine A. (2015). Information Warfare: The Role of Social Media in Conflict. CRS
Insights, IN10240.
Yao Lu, Peng Zhang, Yanan Cao (2014). On the Frequency Distribution of Retweets. Procedia
Computer Science, vol. 31, 2014, p. 747–753



1864

