Procedia Computer Science
Volume 51, 2015, Pages 875–884
ICCS 2015 International Conference On Computational Science

Variations of Ant Colony Optimization for the solution of
the structural damage identiﬁcation problem
Carlos E. Braun1 , Leonardo D. Chiwiacowsky2 , and Arthur T. G´omez2
1
2

University of Vale do Rio dos Sinos, Master Program in Civil Engineering, S˜
ao Leopoldo, Brazil
ceduardobraun@gmail.com
University of Vale do Rio dos Sinos, Master Program in Applied Computing, S˜
ao Leopoldo, Brazil
ldchiwiacowsky@unisinos.br; breno@unisinos.br

Abstract
In this work the inverse problem of identiﬁcation of structural stiﬀness coeﬃcients of a damped
spring-mass system is tackled. The problem is solved by using diﬀerent versions of Ant Colony
Optimization (ACO) metaheuristic solely or coupled with the Hooke-Jeeves (HJ) local search
algorithm. The evaluated versions of ACO are based on a discretization procedure to deal
with the continuous domain design variables together with diﬀerent pheromone evaporation
and deposit strategies and also on the frequency of calling the local search algorithm. The
damage estimation is evaluated using noiseless and noisy synthetic experimental data assuming
a damage conﬁguration throughout the structure. The reported results show the hybrid method
as the best choice when both rank-based pheromone deposit and a new heuristic information
based on the search history are used.
Keywords: Ant Colony Optimization, Damage Identiﬁcation, Inverse Problem, Metaheuristic, Hybrid
Method

1

Introduction

In recent decades, a large research eﬀort has been dedicated to the system identiﬁcation subject
for diﬀerent reasons. One of the most important applications of system identiﬁcation techniques
is the monitoring of physical integrity of engineering structures by identifying damage. It is
well known that the existence of damage in a given structure changes the dynamic response of
it. At same time, identiﬁcation of changes from measurements in the vibration behavior can be
associated with changes in the mechanical properties of the structure [5].
The damage identiﬁcation problem is classiﬁed as an inverse problem in vibration, since the
evaluation of the damage can be obtained by determining variations in the stiﬀness coeﬃcients,
or by determining themselves [25]. Due to the characteristics of this class of problems, it
is observed that small perturbations in the input data, such as random errors inherent to
experimental data used in the inverse analysis, can cause large variations in the ﬁnal solution.
Selection and peer-review under responsibility of the Scientiﬁc Programme Committee of ICCS 2015
c The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V.

doi:10.1016/j.procs.2015.05.218

875

Variations of Ant Colony Optimization for the solution . . .

Braun, Chiwiacowsky and G´
omez

Such behavior characterizes an ill-posed problem [11]. In general, the ill-posed inverse problem
can be solved by using a well-posed functional form whose solution is obtained through the use
of optimization methods.
Based on these considerations, diﬀerent experimental, numerical and analytical techniques
have been proposed to solve the problem of structural damage identiﬁcation [10]. The diﬀerent
methods can be classiﬁed into diﬀerent categories, such as local and global strategies, linear and
non-linear schemes [6], time and frequency domains methods or deterministic and stochastic
approaches [4].
Since the localization and quantiﬁcation of structural damage, placed as an optimization
problem, is a highly complex problem subject to a large number of local optima, becomes
mandatory the use of non-conventional optimization techniques such as those based on stochastic search [19, 26].Within the set of stochastic approaches used for the solution of inverse
vibration problems, heuristic methods have been used successfully. Thus, both single-solution
and population-based strategies have been proposed to localize and quantify structural damages, such as Simulated Annealing [16], Tabu Search [1], Genetic Algorithm [2], Particle Swarm
Optimization [21], Ant Colony Optimization [19, 26] but also hybrid approaches which combine
optimization techniques to achieve better results [15, 12].
Regarding the stochastic approach inspired by the behavior of ant colonies, the Ant System
paradigm was originally proposed to solve discrete optimization problem [7]. An incremental
constructive mechanism is used to build up a complete path which represents a solution in the
context of the problem [9]. If the solution for the optimization problem can be deﬁned by a set
of discrete points, inherently observed in the context of combinatorial optimization problems
[8], the solution of this kind of problem is naturally related to the path constructed by the ants.
However, when continuous optimization problems are faced, the natural relation to the ﬂoating
values of design variables is no longer direct.
Proposed adaptations found in literature [17, 24] are usually related to the use of a probability density function (PDF instead of a discrete probability distribution for choosing the next
component in the solution construction process. Some works have already used successfully
the Ant Colony Optimization (ACO) algorithm to solve the inverse problem of identiﬁcation
of structural stiﬀness coeﬃcients of diﬀerent structures [26, 19, 18]. Nevertheless, the original
idea of Ant Colony algorithms to deal with discrete values is still a possible choice to be used
for identiﬁcation of structural damage.
With this in mind, one of the contributions of this work is the use of a discretization process
of the design variables domain which allows the solution of damage identiﬁcation problems by
the native Ant Colony Optimization algorithm rather than an adapted version of it. Furthermore, diﬀerent from the ACO approaches found in literature [26, 19, 18], the present ACO
approach uses all the components present in the original version of ACO proposed by Dorigo et
al. [8]. Among these resources, the heuristic information stands out. Thereby, an Ant System
with heuristic information is proposed, as well as other variations of ACO, such as elitist AS and
rank-based AS. Besides, a hybrid approach characterized by the use of ACO method combined
with the Hooke-Jeeves (HJ) local search method [13] is also proposed.
Simulations were performed assuming damaged elements throughout the structure, which is
generally not reported in the literature, assuming diﬀerent levels of damage and considering both
noiseless and noisy synthetic experimental displacement data. Among the evaluated versions
of the ACO, the hybrid approach with the heuristic information provided the best results for
the solution of the damage identiﬁcation problem.
876

Variations of Ant Colony Optimization for the solution . . .

2

Braun, Chiwiacowsky and G´
omez

The Damage Identiﬁcation Problem

The determination of system vibratory response, either in time or frequency domain, can be
obtained based on the structural parameters (mass, stiﬀness and damping), initial and boundary
conditions and external forces applied to the system. This problem is identiﬁed as a Direct
Problem in vibration. On the other hand, when one or more structural parameters are to
be determined from measurements of displacements and/or natural frequencies and vibration
modes, it is identiﬁed as an Inverse Problem in vibration.
In this work, the inverse problem of structural stiﬀness identiﬁcation of a damped massspring system will be addressed. Therefore, it will be assumed known the other structural
parameters (mass and damping rates) of a N degrees-of-freedom (DOF) system, external forces
and also the time history of structural displacement.

2.1

Direct Problem

From the analysis and application of Newton’s second law, the dynamic equation of motion for
a vibratory system is described by the following ordinary diﬀerential equation [20]:
M¨
x + Cx˙ + Kx = f (t) ,

(1)

where M, C and K are matrices denoting structural parameters of mass, stiﬀness and damping,
and x(t) is the displacement vector and f (t) is the vector of the external forces applied to
the system. In this work, the solution for the direct problem was computed numerically by
employing the Runge-Kutta 4th order method [14].

2.2

Inverse Problem

As mentioned earlier, for the solution of damage identiﬁcation problems where the damage
localization and quantiﬁcation are to be determined, data corresponding to the vibrational
response of the structure under study are needed. In this work it will be assumed available
experimental data and information related to the time history of structural displacements.
Since inverse problems are classiﬁed as ill-posed problems, its solution was obtained through
the minimization of a well-posed functional form. For a generic N -DOF system, the following
objective function is deﬁned:
N

Nt
od
xM
(K, ti ) − xExp
(K, ti )
j
j

OF =

2

,

(2)

j=1 i=1

where estimated values for the stiﬀness coeﬃcients are obtained by the minimization of the
squared diﬀerence between the displacement computed by the mathematical model (xM od ) and
the experimental displacement (xExp ). The parameter N is the number of degrees of freedom of
the system and Nt is the number of time steps used in the integration process of the numerical
method.
Despite the functional form be deﬁned as a diﬀerence of displacements, it must be emphasized that there is an implicit constraint between displacements and the damaged stiﬀness. This
constraint is imposed by the relationship deﬁned in equation 1.
877

Variations of Ant Colony Optimization for the solution . . .

Braun, Chiwiacowsky and G´
omez

Figure 1: Forager ants perform random search among the integrity values of structural springs.

3

Optimization Methodology

The Ant System algorithm is a population-based metaheuristic inspired by the foraging behavior
of ants. In nature, many species of ants are almost completely blind and the communication
among them is performed through a chemical substance called pheromone. When walking, the
pheromone is deposited by the ants on the performed paths, forming trails of pheromone. The
following ants by perceiving the pheromone presence, choose the trail with higher concentration
of it. These trails help population members to ﬁnd food sources, as well as the way back. This
makes the ants able to ﬁnd the shortest path between their nest and the food source.
In the damage identiﬁcation problem, the ants forage randomly within the search space and
are evaluated according to their Objective Function (OF). The adopted modeling assumes each
spring Ks (s = 1, . . . , ns = N ) with integrity value from the interval [0, 1] which is split in np
discrete points, where the value 1 means no damage and value 0 means completely damaged
spring (Figure 1). These discrete points represent the nodes of a hypothetical graph on which
the ants will generate their paths.

3.1

Ant Colony algorithm and variations

In order to study the eﬀectiveness of the ACO method in solving the damage identiﬁcation
problem, some variations of the original procedure of two phases are proposed. In the original
procedure assumed in this work, the forward phase is characterized by ants choosing probabilistically the next values of stiﬀness integrity to construct a complete solution. The probability of
a speciﬁc ant k = 1, . . . , na of choosing the position j, from position i, is computed according
to pheromone (φij ) and heuristic information (ηij ), given by equation (3). This equation represents the ratio between the weight of using arc (i, j) and the sum of all weights of using all
the possibilities in the vicinity Nik :
pkij =

(φij )α (ηij )β
,
α
β
l∈N k (φil ) (ηil )

for

i = 1, . . . , np ,

k = 1, . . . , na ,

j ∈ Nik .

(3)

i

The parameters α and β determine the proportion between the amount of pheromone associated
with each arc and the quantity related to the heuristic information provided by the problem.
Following, the backward phase is performed characterized by the pheromone updating, which
is carried out in two steps: Evaporation and Deposit.
The pheromone updating is deﬁned by the following expression:
φij = (1 − ρ)φij + Δφkij ,

for

k = 1, . . . , na ,

∀(i, j) ∈ A,

(4)

where ρ is the evaporation rate and Δφkij is a constant amount of pheromone that every ant k
878

Variations of Ant Colony Optimization for the solution . . .

Braun, Chiwiacowsky and G´
omez

in the current iteration deposits on the visited arcs (i, j) from the set A of all arcs. Algorithm 1
presents the pseudocode of the standard ACO method used in this work.
Algorithm 1: Template of the ACO.
Input: Initial values of pheromone trails.
Output: Best solution found or a set of solutions.
repeat
for each ant do
Solution construction using the pheromone trail;
Update the pheromone trails:
Evaporation;
Reinforcement;
end
until Stopping criteria;

All the variations presented in this work are based on the same operating principle, diﬀering
only with respect to the way the probability of choosing a particular arc is computed and how
the pheromone information associated to each one of the arcs is updated.
3.1.1

Ant System (AS)

The Ant System is known as the ﬁrst ACO algorithm. In this work, the AS method assumes
the probability of choosing j as next position computed by equation (3), with α = 1 and
β = 0 as assumed in [19], since the shape of the heuristic information is not clearly deﬁned.
The pheromone updating is performed following equation (3) with the deposit term Δφkij =
φ0 = ns /OF (k = 1, . . . , na ), where ns is the number of design variables, which for a damped
spring-mass system is equal to the number of DOF, i.e ns = N , and OF is computed according
equation (2) when assumed the structure without damage.
3.1.2

Hybrid Approach (AS+HJ)

To improve the quality of the solution found by the previous AS version, a hybrid method
was implemented, where the Hook-Jeeves local search heuristic [13] was used coupled with the
AS algorithm. The HJ heuristic aims to intensify the search for better quality solutions in
promising regions. For sake of brevity the respective algorithm is not presented here but it is
based on the pseudocode presented in [23].
In the proposed hybrid approach, the optimization procedure starts by running the AS
algorithm which is paused after a predeﬁned number of iterations is reached. Thereafter, the
HJ local search is executed for ns iterations starting from the best-so-far solution found by the
AS algorithm.
For the application of HJ heuristic, the following parameters were set: (i) terminating
condition set as 5 algorithm loops; (ii) initial step size Δ = 0.01; and (iii) acceleration factor
δ = 2. The ﬁrst parameter ensures at least 5N attempts of improvement of the solution. This
value proved to be suﬃcient to ensure an exploiting search. The second value was set to ensure
the local search performing. Both values were deﬁned empirically. The third value was set
based on the standard HJ heuristic.
After ﬁnishing the HJ heuristic, the AS algorithm is resumed taking into account the ﬁnal
solution provided by the local search (HJ) phase which is used for pheromone updating. Different versions of the hybrid method were evaluated according to the frequency of calling the
HJ heuristic.
879

Variations of Ant Colony Optimization for the solution . . .

3.1.3

Braun, Chiwiacowsky and G´
omez

Rank-based Ant System (RAS)

Another alternative to the AS algorithm was evaluated by a new proposal for the amount of
pheromone to be deposited, deﬁned according to the quality of the solution provided by each
ant in the current iteration, deﬁned by the value of the objective function. Thus, the best ant in
the current iteration deposits the maximum amount of pheromone, while the others contribute
with a quantity proportional to its quality. This strategy is similar to the rank-based AS
proposed in [3]. The amount of deposited pheromone is deﬁned in equation (5), which replaces
the corresponding term in equation (4).
Δφkij = φ0

OF k
,
OF best

k = 1, . . . , na ,

(5)

where φ0 = ns /OF as deﬁned in section 3.1.1, OF k is the objective function value for the k − th
ant and OF best is the best objective function value in the current iteration.
3.1.4

Ant System with Heuristic Information (ASH)

Another variation proposed on the original AS algorithm considered the inclusion of a heuristic
information ηij to be used together the pheromone trials φij for computing the pij probabilities.
The probability of choosing a speciﬁc arc can be based not only on the pheromone associated to
the neighborhood Ni of an ant when in node i, but also on the neighborhood Nj of all nodes i
that can reach a node j. Therefore, the information associated to the arcs which reach a speciﬁc
destination node j is proposed as heuristic information, taking place on equation (3) as the term
ηij . The relative inﬂuence of the pheromone trail and the heuristic information was assumed
equal by taking α = 1 and β = 1. Diﬀerent from the traditional heuristic information used
in some combinatorial optimization problems, which can be previously computed, the heuristic
information proposed here is a runtime measure, and varies from run to run.
Thus, the probability for the transition from node i to the next node j is still deﬁned by
equation (3) however with the parameters ηij deﬁned as
φpj ,

ηij =

for

j = 1, . . . , np ,

k = 1, . . . , na ,

i ∈ Njk .

(6)

p∈Njk

This variation can be better understood through Figure 2, which shows the parts to be
considered in the computing of heuristic information. The next node on the path of an ant
placed in the node related to spring K2 integrity will be determined based not only on the
amount of pheromone associated with the arcs that leave it, but also the quantities of pheromone
of all the other arcs that reach a node of speciﬁc integrity value for spring K3 .

Figure 2: Heuristic information scheme for a 3-DOF damage identiﬁcation problem.

880

Variations of Ant Colony Optimization for the solution . . .

3.1.5

Braun, Chiwiacowsky and G´
omez

Elitist Ant System (EAS)

It represents a modiﬁcation of the original AS method [8]. The main ideia is to provide additional reinforcement to the parts belonging to the best path found since the beginning of the
solution procedure. This best path is named best-so-far tour (T bs ). In this work, all the ants
in the current iteration perform the standard deposit along with the deposit related to the best
path found so far since the beginning of the search. In the pheromone updating expression, the
term related to the deposit in equation (4) is replaced by the expression in equation (7) if the
arc (i, j) belongs to T bs path, otherwise the updating expression remains the same.
na

Δφkij + e φbs
ij ,

φdeposit =

(7)

k=1

where Δφkij = ns /OF as deﬁned in section 3.1.1, φbs
ij = φ0 is the reinforcement quantity
deposited in the arcs that belongs to the best solution found so far, and ﬁnally, the symbol e is
a user deﬁned parameter to weigh the the best-so-far tour T bs .

4

Numerical Experiments

In this section details about the numerical simulations are presented and the results for the different versions of ACO are discussed. The parameters which deﬁne the undamaged conﬁguration
of the dampeg spring-mass system, are taken as follows: Mi = 10.0 kg, and Ki = 2 × 105 N/m,
where i = 1, . . . , 10. The following damage conﬁguration with the respective percentage has
been considered: Kd = [0.1, 0.15, 0.05, 0.2, 0.5, 0.3, 0.1, 0.15, 0.1, 0.2]%.
Concerning the ACO metaheuristic, the size of colony was assumed na = 150 ants and
the stopping criteria of 200 iterations when noiseless experimental data is considered. For
the simulations where the experimental data are contaminated by measurement noise, the
discrepancy criterion [22] was employed to ﬁnish the solution process.
Diﬀerent simulations were performed according to the noise level in the experimental data.
Diﬀerent intensities of noise are assumed to simulate the errors from the measuring apparatus
due to, for example, lack of gauge resolution, drift measures or hysteresis eﬀects, among other
practical diﬃculties. The experimental data are generated computationally based on the displacement data obtained from the solution of direct problem, equation (1), and perturbed by a
random bias, according to the following expression:
xExp = xM od [1 + σR] ;

(8)

where σ is the standard deviation of measurement errors and R is a pseudorandom value from
the standard normal (Gaussian) distribution.
Since synthetic experimental data were used, the eﬀective error can be computed as:
N

E(K) =
s=1

ˆs
Ks − K
Ks

2

;

(9)

ˆ s is the respective estimated value.
where Ks is the exact stiﬀness value of spring s and K

4.1

The Hybrid Approach - AS+HJ

In the hybrid approach, the AS algorithm is combined with the Hook-Jeeves local search heuristic. In order to identify the best hybrid strategy to achieve more accurate results, diﬀerent
881

Variations of Ant Colony Optimization for the solution . . .

Braun, Chiwiacowsky and G´
omez

Figure 3: OF evolution for the 10-DOF system, σ = 0% and HJ local search activated after
each 20 iterations.
frequencies of calling the local search were evaluated. Also, the hybrid method performance
was evaluated for diﬀerent noise levels.
Based on the results presented in Table 1 it can be seen that there is a suitable routine for
the application of local search method. The frequency of calling after every 10 iterations stands
out, because better results were achieved for all noise levels, except for σ = 10% for which such
frequency provided the second best result. It is also possible to observe that, when experimental
data are contaminated by measurement noise, the hybrid method has always provided better
results than the ACO applied in isolation.
Method
AS
AS+HJ
AS+HJ
AS+HJ
AS+HJ
AS+HJ

end
50
20
10
5

σ = 0%
29.0722
18.5038
6.3393
3.7686
2.8920
2.9417

σ = 1%
20.8861
15.6149
4.7666
4.7666
1.9048
2.7606

σ = 5%
25.6597
13.7709
6.6205
4.0812
2.3286
5.0644

σ = 10%
29.2051
12.0315
6.7937
5.7879
4.3357
3.3980

Table 1: Achieved error values for diﬀerent levels of noise and diﬀerent frequencies of calling
the local search heuristic.
Figure 3 shows the great inﬂuence of the local search method for determining the best quality
solutions. In the ﬁgure, is possible to observe that at every 20 iterations the value of OF has
sharp falls. Such behavior demonstrates the eﬀectiveness of local search heuristic coupled with
the AS method. In the hybrid approach, the AS algorithm provides a more comprehensive
search of the solution space (diversiﬁcation), while the HJ local search method provides a more
intensiﬁed search, providing improvements in the ﬁnal results.

4.2

ACO Variations

The proposed variations of ACO metaheuristic were compared based on the achieved results
for the stiﬀness coeﬃcients identiﬁcation problem.
Table 2a summarizes the achieved results for each of the cases evaluated. Columns show
the average iteration in which the best result is obtained, from a set of 30 runs, the best ﬁnal
objective function value and the error for each of the variations, respectively. The best results
were achieved when employed the ASH variation where the rank-based strategy is used together
882

Variations of Ant Colony Optimization for the solution . . .

AS
RAS
ASH
EAS

Iteration
107.100
190.400
151.400
153.667

OF value
12684.000
2998.000
354.100
7081.167

Error
41.396
19.665
2.8373
29.072

Error
ASH
ASH+HJ

Braun, Chiwiacowsky and G´
omez

σ = 0%
2.8373
1.6062

σ = 1%
4.0424
2.7134

σ = 5%
6.5992
1.8253

(b)

(a)

Table 2: (a) Achieved results when using diﬀerent variations of AS algorithm; (b) Achieved
errors when using modiﬁed AS method.

the heuristic information. It is worth noting that the value of error for the ASH variation is an
order of magnitude smaller than the other methods.
Table 2b shows the error values when employed the ASH method solely or coupled with
the local search method, applied every 10 iterations, assuming noiseless and noisy experimental
data. The hybrid method achieved better results than the original AS, assuming both noiseless
and noisy experimental data, reaching lower errors. However, very small amounts of noise
compromise the quality of estimation structural stiﬀness coeﬃcients.

5

Final Remarks

This work presents the application of diﬀerent variations of the ACO metaheuristic to solve the
structural damage detection problem. The study of the variations of the ACO metaheuristic
allowed to determine the more suitable strategy to solve de damage identiﬁcation problem
of a damped spring-mass system. The ASH strategy was identiﬁed as the one with superior
results compared with the others. The reported results showed that also the hybrid method has
provided superior results for all the proposed methods, showing that the local search strategy
has a key role in intensifying the search for better results. Moreover, the AS algorithm has
also proved to be eﬀective in problems with experimental data contaminated by diﬀerent noise
levels. The quality of achieved results suggests the proposed hybrid method as a promising
tool in real situations of damage identiﬁcation. As future works, diﬀerent structures such as
truss and distributed parameters structures should be evaluated as well as experimental data
in frequency domain.

References
[1] Mustafa Arafa, Ayman Youssef, and Ashraf Nassef. A modiﬁed continuous reactive tabu search
for damage detection in beams. In Proceedings of the 36th Design Automation Conference, pages
1161–1169, Quebec, Canada, aug 2010. SRI International.
[2] Kittipong Boonlong. Vibration-based damage detection in beams by cooperative coevolutionary
genetic algorithm. Advances in Mechanical Engineering, 2014:10 pages, 2014. Article ID 624949.
[3] Bernd Bullnheimer, Richard F. Hartl, and Christine Strauss. A new rank-based version of the ant
system: a computational study. Central European Journal for Operations Research and Economics,
7(1):25–38, 2009.
[4] E. Peter Carden and Paul Fanning. Vibration based condition monitoring: a review. Structural
Health Monitoring, 3(4):355–377, 2004.
[5] Peter Cawley and R. D. Adams. The location of defects in structures from measurements of
natural frequencies. Journal of Strain Analysis, 14(2):49–57, 1979.
[6] Scott W. Doebling, Charles R. Farrar, Michael B. Prime, and Daniel W. Shevitz. Damage identiﬁcation and health monitoring of structural and mechanical systems from changes in their vibration

883

Variations of Ant Colony Optimization for the solution . . .

[7]
[8]
[9]

[10]
[11]
[12]
[13]
[14]
[15]

[16]

[17]

[18]

[19]

[20]
[21]

[22]
[23]

[24]
[25]

[26]

884

Braun, Chiwiacowsky and G´
omez

characteristics: a literature review. Technical Report LA-13070-MS, Los Alamos National Laboratory, Los Alamos, USA, 1996.
Marco Dorigo, Gianni Di Caro, and Luca M. Gambardella. Ant algorithms for discrete optimization. Artiﬁcial Life, 5(2):137–172, 1999.
Marco Dorigo and Luca M. Gambardella. Ant colonies for the travelling salesman problem. Biosystems, 43(2):137–172, 1997.
Marco Dorigo, Vittorio Maniezzo, and Alberto Colorni. The ant system: optimization by a colony
of cooperating agents. IEEE Transactions on Systems, Man and Cybernetics Part B, 26(2):29–41,
1996.
Wei Fan and Pizhong Qiao. Vibration-based damage identiﬁcation methods: A review and comparative study. Structural Health Monitoring, 10(83):83–111, 2011.
Jacques Hadamard. Lectures on the Cauchy Problem in Linear Partial Diﬀerential Equations.
Yale University Press, New Haven, 1923.
Rong-Song He and Shun-Fa Hwang. Damage detection by an adaptive real-parameter simulated
annealing genetic algorithm. Computers and Structures, 84(31-32):2231–2243, 2006.
Robert Hooke and T. A. Jeeves. A direct search solution of numerical and statistical problems.
Journal of the ACM, 8:212–229, 1961.
Daniel J. Inman. Engineering Vibration. Prentice-Hall, New Jersey, 1994.
Seweryn Kokot and Zbigniew Zembaty. Damage reconstruction of 3D frames using genetic algorithms with Levenberg-Marquardt local search. Soil Dynamics and Earthquake Engineering,
29(2):311–323, 2009.
Seyed Sina Kourehli, Abdollah Bagheri, Gholamreza Ghodrati Amiri, and Mohsen GhaforyAshtiany. Structural damage detection using incomplete modal data and incomplete static response. Journal of Civil Engineering, 17(1):216–223, 2013.
Wang Lei and Wu Qidi. Ant system algorithm for optimization in continuous space. In Proceedings
of the 2001 IEEE International Conference on Control Applications (CCA’01), pages 395–400,
Mexico City, Mexico, sep 2001. IEEE.
Aditi Majumdar, Bharadwaj Nanda, Dipak Kumar Maiti, and Damodar Maity. Structural damage
detection based on modal parameters using continuous ant colony optimization. Advances in Civil
Engineering, 2014:14 pages, 2014. Article ID 174185.
Aditi Majumdara, Dipak Kumar Maitia, and Damodar Maityb. Damage assessment of truss
structures from changes in natural frequencies using ant colony optimization. Applied Mathematics
and Computation, 19(1):9759–9772, 2012.
Leonard Meirovitch. Principles and Techniques of Vibrations. Prentice-Hall, New Jersey, 1997.
S.C. Mohan, Dipak Kumar Maiti, and Damodar Maity. Structural damage assessment using FRF
employing particle swarm optimization. Applied Mathematics and Computation, 219:10387–10400,
2013.
V.A. Morozov. On the solution of functional equations by method of regularization. Soviet Math.
Doklady, 167(3):414–417, 1966.
Ana Carolina Rios-Coelho, Wagner F. Sacco, and N´elio Henderson. A metropolis algorithm combined with hooke-jeeves local search method applied to global optimization. Applied Mathematics
and Computation, 217(2):843–853, 2010.
Krzysztof Socha and Marco Dorigo. Ant colony optimization for continuous domains. European
Journal of Operational Research, 185(3):1155–1173, 2008.
S.Sandesh and K. Shankar. Damage identiﬁcation of a thin plate in the time domain with
substructuring-an application of inverse problem. International Journal of Applied Science and
Engineering, 7(1):79–93, 2009.
Ling Yua and Peng Xua. Structural health monitoring based on continuous aco method. Microelectronics Reliability, 51(2):270–278, 2011.

