Procedia Computer Science
Volume 29, 2014, Pages 2462–2471
ICCS 2014. 14th International Conference on Computational Science

Social networks mining for analysis and
modeling drugs usage
Andrei Yakushev1and Sergey Mityagin1
1

ITMO University, Saint-Petersburg, Russia.
andrew.yakushev@ya.ru, mityagin@iac.spb.ru

Abstract
This paper presents approach for mining and analysis of data from social media which is based on
using Map Reduce model for processing big amounts of data and on using composite applications for
performing more sophisticated analysis which are executed on environment for distributed computingbased cloud platform. We applied this system for creation characteristics of users who write about
drugs and to estimate factors that can be used as part of model for prediction drug usage level in real
world. We propose to use social media as an additional data source which complement official data
sources for analysis and modeling illegal activities in society.
Keywords: social media, data mining, gig data, illicit drug use, map reduce, clavire, feature selection

1 Introduction
The growth of modern society, among others, has led to increasing role of information
development and using of information technology in everyday life. Nowadays, the speed of
information and the ease of access to it are one of the criterions for the society development. In this
situation the prominent role is played by the social media which provides an opportunity to share
information about some topic among interested users.
Social media refers to a group of Internet-based applications that allows users to create and
exchange content [1]. Examples of social media are Social Network Sites (SNS), blogs and
microblogs, collaborative projects and etc. Openness of some social networks allows mining data
which should be stored in local database and lately can be used to study processes that take place in
social media. Social media usually considered as a kind of real world reflection and sometime used for
analysis of real society. Since computerization has touched all without exception spheres of society, it
is of interest to assess the impact of the development of information technologies and especially social
media to the illegal activities in society.
This paper describes our solution for mining and analysis data from social media. Our approach for
data processing consist from three stages and combines the use of two different concepts – big data
and cloud computing. First and second stages are data mining from social media and its filtration or

2462

Selection and peer-review under responsibility of the Scientiﬁc Programme Committee of ICCS 2014
c The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V.
doi:10.1016/j.procs.2014.05.230

Social networks mining for analysis and modeling drugs usage

A. Yakushev and S. Mityagin

aggregation which in result gives relatively small datasets with data relevant to the solving task. Data
mining is performed by crawler which is based in MapReduce model for distributed computations and
which we implemented using Hadoop framework [2]. On the last stage obtained small datasets are
analyzed using sophisticated models. Whole data analysis process is formalized in composite
application which is run in our environment for distributed computing-based cloud platform
CLAVIRE (CLoud Applications VIRtual Environment) [3].
Another part of the paper describes analysis of people who write about drugs in social media. We
present an idea of using social media as an additional data source for analysis and modeling of illegal
activities in society. Developed technologies for mining and analysis are applied to characterize users
who write about drugs. Characteristics reveal additional interests of users and compose their
psychological portrait. This paper also describes prediction model for the level of drug use among
population which considers various factors, like macro-state of the population and individual
characteristics of residents. Results of social media analysis such as level of interest to the drug theme
or characteristics of users who uses drugs can be used to increase accuracy of this model.
Despite the relatively recent appearance of the term Big Data in 2008 [4] this area of science
attracted huge attention of business and academia. Many tasks require analytics of huge amounts of
data, for example, experiments on Large Hadron Collider [5], climate simulations [6] and creation a
recommendation systems for internet services [7], but the need of analytical solutions is especially
important for the business. The cost-effective solution for business is to use clouds systems which will
provide transparent resource and task management [8]. Unfortunately data management and its
analytics in the clouds give a lot of challenges [9] and currently there is no best way to overpass them
[10].
Social media are increasingly being used in academia and business to analyze the different
processes of the real world, for example stock market prediction [11], viral marketing [12], correlation
with the incidence of influenza [13] and identifying potential new harmful drug side effects [14].
There are also plenty of researches concerning drug addiction, for example, about connection between
needle-sharing patterns and real world social networks [15] and social networks influence on the
transition to injecting drug use [16] which studies people physically addicted to drugs and their
friendship network. This paper is the first that tries to use data from social media i.e. virtual world to
study drug usage. Main advantage of this work is that it provides insights on hardly observable group
of people who rarely use drugs or do not have addiction to them.
Section 2 of this paper describes background information about drug addiction, defines groups of
people formed by the level of drug addiction, and describes data sources for analysis of drug addicted
people. Section 3 describes our approach of data analysis which is based on combining big data with
cloud platform. Section 4 describes analysis of people who writes about drugs in blog platform
Livejournal. Section 5 describes model for prediction level of drug consumption.

2 Background
Research of the drug usage touches many questions, some of which are addressed in this paper:
measurement and prediction of the drug consumption level among population, drawing up a
characteristic of people who uses drugs. But many other questions which are rather a pure sociology
could be asked: what are the reasons of a person to use drugs and how to reduce level of illicit drug
usage. To get a chance to answer these questions many aspects of the drug usage should be analyzed.
Like many social processes, drug usage analysis gives a lot challenges because many hardly
formalized factors should be taken into account. For example different types of drugs have different

2463

Social networks mining for analysis and modeling drugs usage


















A. Yakushev and S. Mityagin














    









	




	




Figure 1. a) Prevalence of the drug type as a percent of respondents confirmed their experience of
drug usage. b) Statistics about the weight of seized drugs of different types.

levels of consumptions among different age and sex groups. Also cultural, subcultural and
ethnographic aspects of the population and economic level of the area have influence on the drug
usage [17]. Moreover level of the drug usage changes over the time because of the changes in many
factors: social censure which encourages the consumption of any drug, law enforcement activities,
availability of advocacy and other changes in a particular culture.
It is important to divide population of the territory into groups based on the drug usage level. This
division changes over the time because individual can change level of the drug usage and transfer to
another group. Usually distinguish the following groups of people [17] which are hereinafter referred
by Roman numerals: not related to drug usage and not susceptible to their consumption (I); having
prerequisites to drug usage, as they consist in the risk group (II) possibly connected with interests, age,
social group, etc.; drug users who do not have forms of dependence (III); consumers having a
psychological dependence on drugs (IV); consumers having a physical dependence on the drug (V). It
should be noted that it is possible for a man to have both psychological and physical dependences and
in this case we will refer him to V group. Modeling of the drug usage denote to prediction of the sizes
of the defined groups or how people transfer from one of these groups to another.
It is also important to consider different drug types separately because they differently influence on
how individual gets psychological or physical dependences on the drug use. Following the
classification of drugs, adopted the Law on controlled Psychotropic Substances (Controlled
Substances Act) (CSA) all drugs fall into five categories [17]: psychedelic drugs or hallucinogens,
stimulants, opiates, depressants or sedative-hypnotic drugs. Categories of danger of physical
dependence are next: drugs of high danger - opiates, some hallucinogens (heroin, LSD); moderate
hazard drugs - hallucinogens, stimulants, depressants (codeine, steroids, barbiturates); low hazard
drugs. Obviously, the use of drugs causing physical dependence makes man adjust their activity in
connection with the need to receive regular doses of drugs, search and spend money on a drug. Also
drug usage can change person lifestyle so his new environment will also share his interests.
Every drug type has target group of people with specific lifestyle. Opiates are popular among
people who have physical and psychological dependence and who got strong drug addiction. And
psychedelic drugs are popular among people who are interested in expansion and altering of the
human mind. The question of finding these target groups for different drug types is quite interesting
and still unresolved. Answering on this question can help in creating anti-drug propaganda which will
reduce their using.
In Russia analysis of drugs usage is quite challenging because of its illegal and secrecy nature.
Only few sources of information exist which, unfortunately, are biased and are not complete. Direct
interviews about drug use experience are possible but sample size is small and data is biased to the
soft drugs (see Fig. 1.a). It is also possible to track number of people who have physical dependence

2464

Social networks mining for analysis and modeling drugs usage

A. Yakushev and S. Mityagin

on the drugs and who have been “registered” by narcologists. This data source can give information
only about groups IV - V and is strongly biased to people who use opium or heroin. Soft drugs are not
at all represented in this data. The most valuable source of information is official statistics about
seizure of illegal drugs (see Fig 1.b) since it shows state of the drug market which in turn correlates
with demand and usage of the drugs among the population.
We propose to use social media as an additional source of information about drugs usage. First of
all they can give information on the level of interests to the drugs topics and secondly they can provide
information about different subcultural and psychological characteristics of people who uses drugs.
This information can be used as additional factors to model level of the drug usage and to create more
efficient anti-drug advertisements.

3 Data Management
This section describes our management of data from social media which provides unified approach
for solving scientific tasks. Because social media contains huge amount of data we used BigData
paradigms to mine and analyze it. Firstly, data from social media is mined using our crawler [2] which
stores it into Hadoop cluster. Secondly, big volume of mined data is filtered and aggregated in order to
get relatively small datasets of information that is relevant to the solving task. Finally aggregated data
is used as an input for composite applications which perform final and sophisticated data analysis. To
organize computational process of the composite application we used AaaS (Application as a Service)
model which is implemented in our environment for distributed computing-based cloud platform
CLAVIRE (CLoud Applications VIRtual Environment) [3]. Composite application operates with data
which is obtained from Hadoop cluster using developed API and calculations are performed by
computational module which can be seamlessly integrated in CLAVIRE. As a result this provides
unified approach for mining and analysis data from social media.
Data from social media is obtained from the API (Application Programming Interface) provided by
social media sites. Social media contains different types of data – user information, connections
between users, generated by users’ content and etc. Each data type usually accessed by separate API
and each API impose restrictions to the amount of accesses. This lead to the impossibility to collect in
reasonable time all data stored in social media. But even with these restrictions amounts of data are
big. Also data types can be structured (e.g. user profiles, links between users) and unstructured (e.g.
user’s interests, posts or pictures). To efficiently work with big and unstructured data we use Hadoop
framework which implements MapReduce model for distributed computations and other associated
with it technologies. Another important characteristic of the data from social media is its «sparseness»
which lies in the fact that only small amount of data is relevant to the solving problem. This means
that original big data mined from social media should be filtered, mapped or aggregated to some small
dataset that is actually used in further analysis.
Hadoop framework consists from two main components: the distributed file system HDFS and
component that performs data processing in MapReduce model. HDFS uses NoSQL data model in
which records consist of key and value parts of arbitrary type. Records forms table which on physical
level are stored by parts (chunks) on several machines that works under Hadoop framework and
processed in place. HDFS is highly scalable, reliable and at the same time flexible. One of its benefits
is ability to store data on physical level in different formats. We used Google Protobuf binary
serialization mechanism to store retrieved from social networks data. Protobuf also simplifies handling
situations with data format changing. To increase performance of the HDFS we compress data using
Snappy compression format which is designed to fast compress and decompress data but have average
compress ratio.
In the problems we faced, different data types were aggregated separately but further aggregated
small datasets were considered together in order to get final result. In turn final analysis required the

2465

Social networks mining for analysis and modeling drugs usage

A. Yakushev and S. Mityagin

work of several steps each representing some basic algorithm or analysis. This inspired us to formalize
this analysis as a workflows or composite applications which are run on CLAVIRE. CLAVIRE is a
distributed computing-based cloud platform of the second-generation that implements paradigm AaaS
(Application as a Service) and which provided seamless integration of separate software module.

Figure 2: Iterative crawling procedure.

Our approach is illustrated with two examples. First one describes iterative algorithm for mining
data from social media (see Fig. 2). On each iteration set of requests to social media is processed and
responses are written to HDFS. This data can be analyzed directly on the Hadoop cluster for example
to estimate activity of users or to obtain topological characteristics of the networks. But data can be
also provided to some composite application that performs more complex data analysis. This
application is run in distributed computational environment CLAVIRE. Results of this analysis are
used to control crawling process and to create lists of requests that will be processed on the next
iteration. Crawler control procedure is also implemented as a composite application which solves three
subtasks: filtration of objects relevant to some topic, quota distribution between already crawled object
of social media and choosing which new objects should be crawled on the next iteration.
Another example (see Fig. 3) describes application that is used to find communities of users that
are interested in same topics. On the first step data from social network is mined, and then data about
users’ interests and tags that they used to mark posts are extracted. These steps are performed using
Hadoop cluster. At the same time friendship network is analyzed and community structure is
extracted. And finally for each community the most frequent interest and tag sets are extracted. These
steps are realized as standalone applications which can be reused for many different networks. Union
of these steps in workflow forms composite application which can be further transparently used by
clients of the system.

Figure 3: Examples of workflows that run on distributed computing-based cloud platform.

2466

Social networks mining for analysis and modeling drugs usage

A. Yakushev and S. Mityagin

4 Data Analytics
This section describes analysis of users that have blogs at Livejournal SNS and which can be used
in model of drug usage in society. We analyzed users who writes about drugs in their blogs and
created their characteristics by analyzing interests (Dijkstra & Yakushev, 2012). Characteristics
consist of set of topics of interest that arise this group of users significantly more (or less) often. This
allows to create psychological portrait which describes features that distinguish members of this group
from all other users and to determine their lifestyle. Described in this section approach can be also
used to create characteristics of any group of users and it has practical importance in case of analyzing
group of users with common feature which is rather difficult to obtain in real world.
It should be noted that sets of people who use drugs in real world and who write about them in
social media are not the same, however they should overlap. User may have many reasons to write
about drugs: cure drug addiction may be his profession; he may try to draw attention to the problem of
increased level of drug usage; user may write about not using drugs and healthy lifestyle; user may
simply use drug slang as a joke. But we believe that in the huge amount of data from social media
contains information about users that share their experience of drug usage. And by analyzing users
who writes about drugs it is possible to extract information about people who uses drugs.
To identify users who write about drugs we used dictionary of the official and slang keywords and
keyphrases. Each keyword was assigned to one of the nine groups depending on the semantic meaning
of the word. We identified following groups of words: heroin, marijuana, cocaine, raw opium, pills,
injections, preparation slang, syringe, needle, methamphetamine, ephedrine and general words.
Keyphrases were defined based on the predefined rules which in turn were based on the semantical
groups of keywords. For example we used following rules to automatically create set of keyphrases:
“drugs” + “ways of using”; “drugs” + “preparation”; “drugs” + “effects” and “drug” + “drug
synonym”. We also did manual revision of the keyphrases in order to add new phrases or to remove
non-relevant to drug theme phrases. We also manually split keywords on the three groups depending
on their “strength” of belonging to the drug theme. Each group has same weight which is used to
estimate relevance of the text to the drug theme. We made keyphrase weight larger than a sum of its
keywords weight to indicate that keyphrase is stronger signal of document relevance to the drug
theme. Weight of the document is calculated as a sum of all keywords and keyphrases that are found
in it. Top 20% documents with largest weights are assumed to be relevant to the drug theme. If user
has at least one document relevant to the drug theme then he is assumed to be interested in drug theme.
Our dictionary consists from 368 keywords and 8359 keyphrases. We mined data for about 100000
randomly selected users from Livejournal Social Network Site (SNS). For each user we know his last
25 posts, his in-coming and out-going connections with other users, data that he specified in his profile
(real name, age, place of living) and his interests – keywords that describes user’s areas of interests
(e.g. music, films, computers or sport). Using the method described above we identified 16553 users
who writes about drugs. We will further call this group of users as drug community.
Let        be set of interests specified by all users in data set. Each interest is described by
set of users that defined it in their profiles and for each user it is known whether he is from drug
community or not. Then for each interest  should be determined whether it appears significantly
more or less often in drug community. Let        be this set of significant interests based on
which we will draw up characteristic of users from drug community.
To check if interest is significant or not we use two-tailed Fisher Exact Test for 2×2 contingency
tables (Fisher, 1922). Each interest is described by four values: total number of users from drug
community specified it in their profiles, total number users from drug community that do not specified
it in their profiles and similar two values for users that are not from drug community. Based on these
four values 2×2 contingency table is created for which Fisher Exact Test is applied. Fisher Exact Test
check hypothesis  that interest is significant and returns for each interest  a corresponding -value

2467

Social networks mining for analysis and modeling drugs usage

A. Yakushev and S. Mityagin

 . By comparing -value  with the fixed significance level  it is possible to determine set of
significant interests .
Set  may contain interests mistakenly called significant (false discoveries) despite using threshold
for significance level  for each interest. This may happen due the large number of interests for each
of which one hypothesis is checked. To upper-bound percentage of false discoveries by value  in the
set  we used Benjamini and Hochberg controlling procedure for multiple hypotheses testing
(Benjamini & Yekutieli, 2001) which rejects several interests. Finally set of significant interests  is
formed.
Set of significant interests  used to create characteristics or psychological portrait of users. To
simplify manual analysis of this set we automatically grouped interests in more general topics. For this
purpose we used hierarchical agglomerative clustering algorithm with a complete linkage strategy
(Everitt, Landau, & Leese, 2001) with similarity between two interests defined as:     
  
, where  and  are sets of users that mentioned in their profiles interests  and 
  

respectively. Described similarity measure is also known as cosine similarity.
Statistical analysis of the dataset reveals 268 significant interests of the 3282 interests which
appeared more than 10 times in dataset. Clustering of the interests gave 42 different themes. Names of
themes compiled by the authors and thus have some subjective. Figure 4 shows the most popular and
unpopular themes in drug community and rest of the dataset. For each theme we calculated probability
of its occurrence in drug community and rest of the dataset as a probability of occurrence at least of
one interest from that theme.

Figure 4: Characteristic of users writing about drugs. For each theme its popularity in drug community
and rest of the dataset is specified.

5 Modelling
This section describes modeling of drug usage among population of the specific area. Modeling
involves determining and prediction of sizes of different groups of people that uses drugs (e.g. groups
I, II, III, IV and V described in Section 2) and is based on the analysis of different factors that
influence on the drug usage. Modeling should take into account population dynamics on the territory
and the possibility of individual to become a drug addict and the possibility of recovery. As factors
that influence on the drug usage can be used macro and micro characteristics of the territory and
society. It is important to note that influence of the factor differs depending on the age and sex of
individuals. Among the most important groups of factors are the following:

2468

Social networks mining for analysis and modeling drugs usage

A. Yakushev and S. Mityagin

 - Socioeconomic factors determining the level of life of the Territory as a whole, including the
characteristics of the stratification of society, improvement, social security and other factors. Dynamic
factors can be estimated from the observed data and official statistical indicators provided by
government. However, since official statistical reports are used, significant latency of observed values
should be taken into account. In general group of factors  characterizes the overall «condition» of
the territory.
 - Factors of emotional and psychological state of the society that are indicators of well-being.
These factors are usually determined by sociological researches and are not always objective because,
for example, highly susceptible to propaganda.
 - Affiliation of an individual to some classes of society. This factor is reasonable because
sociological researches (LINK [1]) shown that some classes of society have greater susceptibility to
drug use.
 - Individual has interests similar to people who uses drugs. Presence of drug-related interests
can signal that user belongs to some subculture or communities that endorse drug use of any type.
Information about individual interests and common interests of people who uses drugs can be
extracted from social media.
Model divides each group        on subgroups depending on age and sex of people.

Denote size of each subgroup as 
where  is age and  is sex of people in subgroup. The goal is to



express  as a function of factors that influence on the level of drug usage in group : 
        . Shape and parameters of the functional  can be adjusted based on the
retrospective statistical data, sociological studies and relevant data of social networks and the public.
Examples of values of some factors are presented in table 1.
Age
group

Unemployment
level

Gini
index

Ratio of mortality
and fertility rates

Ratio of divorces
and marriages

Life
satisfaction

15-17

0.3692

-0.7886

0.7539

0.6892

0.6855

18-19
20-39
40-59

0.5143
-0.3822
-0.2032

-0.8771
0.8188
0.6967

0.8469
-0.9837
-0.7679

0.8501
-0.8513
-0.8169

0.6516
-0.8438
-0.8951

Table 1. Pierson correlation between age and factors for group of people with physical drug addiction.

The state of all age and sex subgroups in group  can be described by matrix   whose general
view is presented at (1):

 








  






 
(1)
    
(2)





 




 

   

As noted earlier, each group characterized by matrix  changes over time. Evolution of   can

be described in terms of Markov chain by matrix equation: 
    , where  – matrix of
probabilities of the individual with corresponding sex and age fall within one of five groups I-V, and
 - net migration from the adjacent group to the group . General view of the matrix  is presented

to estimations of transitions
at (2). Last equation allows to turn from estimations of sizes of groups 

between groups  which are also can be used as a basis for the construction of forecasts of drug use
in the territory.

2469

Social networks mining for analysis and modeling drugs usage

A. Yakushev and S. Mityagin

6 Conclusion and Discussion
In this paper we presented our approach for mining and analysis data from social media which is
based on combination big data and cloud computing paradigms. Map Reduce model is used to mine,
store and process big amounts of data from social media. Using Hadoop framework we implemented
distributed topic crawler for social media. Processing of mined data is also performed by Hadoop
which simplifies development of new algorithms and provides high scalability and flexibility.
We proposed to use cloud computing environment for distributed computations which simplifies
creation and execution of composite applications which perform complex data analysis. Composite
application operates with data accessed from Hadoop by API and consists of atomic computational
tasks that achieve some analysis and modeling goals. We used environment for distributed computingbased cloud platform CLAVIRE which implements AaaS model for cloud computing and provide
seamless integration of separate software modules and that runs on different computing resources. As
a result this strongly simplified designing, executing and reusing already implemented applications.
Social media contain a lot of personal information and can be used as an additional data source for
analysis of social processes in real world. Especially processes that are hardly observable in real world
like spread of infections or interest and attitude of society to drug usage. Despite the fact that social
media cannot replace traditional sources of information are available from social researches or official
statistical indicators provided by government, they can complement this data. Another advantage of
social media is that they provide macro and micro characteristics of users. Macro characteristics are
general interest of whole population of users to some topic and micro characteristics are for example
centrality of user to some community. And again social media reveal knowledge about micro level of
social processes while other sources of information are more about macro parameters.
We proposed to use data from social media as an additional source of information for analysis and
modeling of drug usage among population of certain territory. Analysis at the micro-level of users
who write about drugs gave insight about their interests which distinguish them from others. We
obtained their psychological portrait which consists of topics of interest that appear more (or less)
often in this group. We used dictionary of drug related keywords and key phrases to determine if user
writes in blog posts about drugs. We think that among different users who have different reasons to
write about drugs we found some set of users who share their experience of using drugs. This is
indirectly confirmed by the presence of such topics as Russian rock, non-traditional medicine, occult,
eastern teachings, and esotericism which in Russia are generally considered drug-related. But to
confirm this further research is required. Described approach uses many different parameters and
thresholds which significantly influence on the list of significant interests. However our experiments
showed that list of significant topics remains quite stable.
We described model for prediction of number of people that have different levels of drug addiction
on the specified area. Prediction is based on factors of the macro and micro state of the society on the
specified territory. Several macro factors can be estimated based on the official data sources, but level
of interest to drugs is much easier to estimate based on the data from social media. Moreover official
data sources cover people with strong physical drug addiction but social media cover people with light
drug addiction forms. We showed estimations of factors values for strong addicted people but
estimation of factors based on the data from social media as well as modeling with these factors is a
future work.
However some criticism about using social media should be noted, for example not all society
groups are presented equally in social media and their main consumers are young people. Also there
are criticisms about trustworthiness [22] and reliability [23] of using data from social media which
look quite reasonable. Despite these criticisms, we believe that the study of social networks is
important and can reveal information about processes that are hidden or can’t be directly observed in
society. This work was financially supported by the Government of the Russian Federation, Grant
074-U01.

2470

Social networks mining for analysis and modeling drugs usage

A. Yakushev and S. Mityagin

References
[1] M. Kaplan, M. Haenlein, Users of the world, unite! The challenges and opportunities of Social
Media, Bus. Horiz., 53:59–68, 2010.
[2] A. Yakushev, A. Boukhanovsky, P.A. Sloot, Topic Crawler for Social Networks Monitoring, P.
Klinov, D. Mouromtsev (Eds.), Knowl. Eng. Semant. Web SE - 17, Springer Berlin Heidelberg,
214–227, 2013.
[3] K. V Knyazkov, S. V Kovalchuk, T. N Tchurov, S. V Maryin, A. V Boukhanovsky, CLAVIRE:
e-Science infrastructure for data-driven computing, J. Comput. Sci., 3:504–510, 2012.
[4] Community cleverness required, Nature, 455:1, 2008.
[5] C. Lynch, Big data: How do your data grow?, Nature, 455:28–29, 2008.
[6] Jenny Mangeksdorf, Supercomputing the Climate: NASA’s Big Data Mission, Comput. Inf. Sci.
Technol. Off., 2012.
[7] V. Borkar, M.J. Carey, C. Li, Inside Big Data management: ogres, onions, or parfaits?, Proc. 15th
Int. Conf. Extending Database Technol., 3–14, 2012.
[8] X. Sun, B. Gao, Y. Zhang, W. An, H. Cao, C. Guo, et al., Towards Delivering Analytical
Solutions in Cloud: Business Models and Technical Challenges, E-Bus. Eng. (ICEBE), 2011
IEEE 8th Int. Conf., 347–351, 2011.
[9] D.J. Abadi, Data Management in the Cloud: Limitations and Opportunities., IEEE Data Eng.
Bull., 32:3–12, 2009.
[10] M.D. Assun, Big Data Computing and Clouds : Challenges, Solutions, and Future Directions,
arXiv preprint arXive:1312.4722, 2013.
[11] J. Bollen, H. Mao, X. Zeng, Twitter mood predicts the stock market, J. Comput. Sci., 2:1–8, 2011.
[12] P. Domingos, Mining social networks for viral marketing, IEEE Intell. Syst., 20:80–82, 2005.
[13] A.F. Dugas, Y.-H. Hsieh, S.R. Levin, J.M. Pines, D.P. Mareiniss, A. Mohareb, et al., Google Flu
Trends: correlation with emergency department influenza rates and crowding metrics., Clin.
Infect. Dis., 54:463–469, 2012.
[14] David Shaywitz and Mathai Mammen, The next killer app, Boston Globe, 2011.
[15] J.B. Unger, M.D. Kipke, C.J. De Rosa, J. Hyde, A. Ritt-Olson, S. Montgomery, Needle-sharing
among young IV drug users and their social network members: The influence of the injection
partner’s characteristics on HIV risk behavior, Addict. Behav., 31:1607–1618, 2006.
[16] A. Neaigus, V.A. Gyarmathy, M. Miller, V.M. Frajzyngier, S.R. Friedman, D.C. Des Jarlais,
Transitions to injecting drug use among noninjecting heroin users: social network influence and
individual susceptibility, JAIDS J. Acquir. Immune Defic. Syndr., 41:493–503, 2006.
[17] C.R. Bartol, A.M. Bartol, Criminal behavior: A psychosocial approach, Upper Saddle River, NJ:
Prentice Hall, 1999.
[18] L. Dijkstra, A. Yakushev, Inference of the Russian drug community from one of the largest social
networks in the Russian Federation, Quality & Quantity, 2013.
[19] R. Fisher, On the interpretation of X2 from contingency tables, and the calculation of P, J. R. Stat.
Soc., 85:87–94, 1922.
[20] Y. Benjamini, D. Yekutieli, The control of the false discovery rate in multiple testing under
dependency, Ann. Stat., 29:1165–1188, 2001.
[21] B.S. Everitt, S. Landau, M. Leese, Cluster Analysis, Arnold, 2001.
[22] A. Kittur, B. Suh, E.H. Chi, Can you ever trust a wiki?: impacting perceived trustworthiness in
wikipedia, Proc. 2008 ACM Conf. Comput. Support. Coop. Work, 477–480, 2008.
[23] M.R. Auer, The policy sciences of social media, Policy Stud. J., 39:709–736, 2011.

2471

