Available online at www.sciencedirect.com

Procedia Computer Science 9 (2012) 540 – 549

International Conference on Computational Science, ICCS 2012

The Human Microbiome Project: An Opportunity to Engage
Undergraduates in Research
Anne G. Rosenwalda**, Gaurav S. Aroraa, Ramana Madupub,
Jennifer Roecklein-Canfieldc, Janet S. Russelld
a

Department of Biology, Georgetown University, 37th and O Sts., NW, Washington, DC 20057, USA
b
The J. Craig Venter Institute, 9704 Medical Center Drive, Rockville, MD 20850, USA
c
Department of Chemistry, Simmons College, 300 The Fenway, Boston, MA 02115, USA
d
Center for New Designs in Learning and Scholarship, Georgetown University, 37th and O Sts., NW, Washington, DC 20057, USA

Abstract
The Human Microbiome Project (HMP) aims to characterize the diversity of microbial species found at several different
sites on the human body. The HMP has sequenced hundreds of microbial reference genomes from multiple body sites and
provides a wealth of primary genomic sequence data for analysis. Existing open source bioinformatics applications and
resources allow for functional analysis of genomic data. Even budding scientists can quickly learn the tools necessary for
functional gene annotation and comparative genomics analysis. These analyses in turn can provide the bases for hypothesis
generation and testing at the laboratory bench. We are making use of these data and tools for student research in our NSFsponsored project, Genome Solver. Our project has two parts: (1) development of workshops for faculty training in use of
these tools, incorporated into a framework of sound pedagogy and (2) generation of a web site that will serve as an online
community of practice for students, faculty, and bioinformatics experts to share work and ideas.
Keywords: Human Microbiome Project; bioinformatics; genomics; undergraduates

1. Introduction
The field of biology is increasingly multidisciplinary. The relatively new fields of bioinformatics and
genomics have already become critical components of basic biological research, incorporating mathematical
and computational techniques to analyze biological information. It has been strongly advocated by many
experts that current undergraduates should to be trained in multidisciplinary approaches with hands-on
research experiences in order to be competitive in the workforce [1-8]. These studies, which all recommend
that research begin early urging efforts beyond the typical classroom lab experience, have proposed that
students engage intellectually in real research problems to develop into creative scientists with advanced
critical thinking skills. The wealth of prokaryotic DNA sequence data that has emerged from the Human
Microbiome Project (HMP) provides wonderful opportunities for undergraduate faculty and their students to
engage with partner scientists on research projects of real significance. Here we describe our efforts to engage

*

Corresponding author: Tel: +1-202-687-5997; Fax:+ 1-202-687-5662.
E-mail address: rosenwaa@georgetown.edu.

1877-0509 © 2012 Published by Elsevier Ltd. Open access under CC BY-NC-ND license.
doi:10.1016/j.procs.2012.04.058

Anne G. Rosenwald et al. / Procedia Computer Science 9 (2012) 540 – 549

faculty and students on this work by first, creating genomics workshops for faculty training, oriented towards
an in depth introduction to genome sequence analysis and functional interpretation of data and second, creating
an online community, called Genome Solver, where faculty and their students have access to a centralized
space containing tutorials, tools, and resources, and can meet with experts to discuss their findings. We also
describe two different pilot studies, one at Georgetown University and one at Simmons College that illustrate
the power of this approach for education and training of undergraduates.
1.1 The Human Microbiome Project: A Wealth of Data for Student-Scientist Partnerships
There are estimated to be 10 trillion cells in an adult human. However, the number of microorganisms
associated with a human body is estimated to be 10 times higher [9]. Collectively, the organisms found
throughout are known as the microbiome and include bacteria, yeasts and other micro-eukaryotes, and viruses.
The HMP initiative focuses on describing the diversity of microbial species from different designated body
sites. A major objective of the HMP is to define a core set of microbial species in the human body. The
National Institutes of Health (NIH) supports a coordinated effort to characterize the human microbiome, work
being conducted at four sequencing centers, including the J. Craig Venter Institute (JCVI), a partner in the
current project. The first large-scale paper from the HMP consortium describes 178 reference genomes that
were generated [10]. Approximately 547,968 polypeptides that were greater than 100 amino acids in length
were identified from these genomes, of which 29,987 were unique; i.e. they had not been seen before when
compared against all publicly available sequence data. The genomes included in this initial study – although
the largest conglomeration of sequenced genomes in a single publication - represent but a subset of the species
associated with the human body based on interrogation of available 16S rDNA surveys of the human body.
Continued data-mining of these and other datasets that are being generated by the HMP and international
consortia (see [11]) as well as other smaller groups is anticipated to reveal additional significant gene clusters,
antibiotic markers, plasmids, phages, etc.
Complete reference genomes are powerful tools for exploring the metabolic and functional capabilities of
an organism and provide a snapshot of the diversity present in any single isolate. Moreover, multiple strains of
bacteria from the same species have been sequenced and it has become clear how different even very closely
related organisms can be [12]. By measuring the “genomic fluidity” of a population it is increasingly possible
to estimate the gene content associated with a particular clade of microbes [13]. Whole genome and
metagenome studies provide us with a clearer picture of the conservation and diversity found within and across
microbial species. We propose to utilize the genomic data generated by the HMP to design research modules
for undergraduate classroom and laboratory curriculum. By using comparative genomics approaches we
propose to design experiments to explore the relationships between the hundreds of sequenced bacterial
genomes. In short, this “fire hose” of genomic sequence data presents a unique opportunity for faculty and
students to partner with scientists and engage in original research that is at the intersection between biology
and computer science.
1.2 Engaging Students in Authentic Research: A Win-Win-Win for Students, Faculty, and Experts
Previous work has shown that students are engaged by authentic research projects, which encourages them
to consider research as a career. The Summer Undergraduate Research Experiences (SURE) and the
Classroom Undergraduate Research Experiences (CURE) surveys [14-16] demonstrate that research
experiences, whether in the summer or during the academic year, have a positive impact on student views of
science and the scientific process. Students become invested in the research, care about the outcome of their
work, and have pride of ownership. Investment brings the underlying science into better view and students are
then able to make deeper contextual and conceptual connections. Because increased self-confidence is one of
the outcomes of participation in undergraduate research [8], the possibility of attracting and retaining underrepresented minorities to science is improved, because assurance in their own skills is increased.
Many of today’s faculty were trained in the “pre-omics” era and have had little formal training in
bioinformatics, genomics, proteomics, or other aspects of current research involving the intersection of
computation, statistics, and biology. In other words, many undergraduate biology faculty may be reluctant to

541

542

Anne G. Rosenwald et al. / Procedia Computer Science 9 (2012) 540 – 549

include such exercises in their classrooms without training, which may be precluded by lack of
funding. Faculty value opportunities for professional development, for engagement in real research projects
with their students, and for access to other faculty members with similar interests [7]. The workshops, which
begin in June 2012, will address these needs, providing faculty with an opportunity to update their skills and
engage in research at the cutting edge. Further, faculty will have opportunities to continue engagement with
others of like-minded philosophy after the workshops by participating in our online community, Genome
Solver, described in more detail below.
Among the topics that we discuss at the workshops include
• Microbial genome sequencing and annotation methodologies
• HMP and the impact of current sequencing technologies
• DNA and protein sequence analysis resources and tools
• Tool suites for comparative genomics
• Interpretation of genomic data
• Importantly, the pedagogy necessary to implement these tools effectively in a classroom setting
Because there are more sequences available than experts to evaluate them, faculty and their students
become important partners in the scientific process – making more information available about the constituent
properties of organisms within the microbiome. In short, the HMP provides a data platform that can be used by
individuals at multiple levels of expertise to examine myriad problems of biological interest.

2. Pilot Studies
2.1 Studies at Georgetown University
Beginning in 2008, several students, all Biology majors, investigated a Salmonella enterica strain, serovar
Agona, known to cause food poisoning [17, 18]. Each of them spent 2-4 semesters on the project to fulfill
their senior thesis requirement. The S. enterica strain was sequenced and annotated by JCVI. The students
were able to view and manually curate the genomic data using JCVI’s manual annotation tool, MANATEE
[19]. With this tool, students investigated sequence homology to genes of other organisms, determined the
likelihood of functional conservation, and investigated biochemical pathways. In total, the students annotated
approximately one-half of the genes in the genome, meaning that they correctly determined the start and end of
the protein coding sequence for these genes and curated genetic names.
Because all of the students had previously taken a biochemistry course, but few had taken a formal
microbiology course, we initially focused on the biochemical pathways necessary for creation of important
building blocks for proteins, the amino acids. We also studied several additional pathways, including the
synthesis of the building blocks for DNA and RNA, carbohydrate utilization (important for energy production
in cells), and responses to environmental changes, such as the presence of antibiotics or metals, and changes in
temperature. Although the initial focus was on biochemical pathways because of their background in this area,
these studies nevertheless provided a framework for the students to learn about microbial physiology, ecology,
and evolution.
Based on the annotation each student performed (which pathways each student studied in the organism),
each generated hypotheses to test. The first experiment, done as a group, was an effort to understand whether
the presence of the genes for carbohydrate metabolism, amino acid synthesis, and nucleotide synthesis
corresponded with functional characteristics exhibited by the organism. Thus, the experimental question was
deceptively simple: could the organism grow if provided with a simple carbon source (glucose) and a simple
nitrogen source (ammonium chloride). As shown in Figure 1, the organism can indeed grow if given these
precursors; therefore S. enterica serovar Agona has the ability to make all of the diverse molecules necessary
for growth from these two simple precursors, confirming the functionality of the annotated biosynthetic
pathways.

Anne G. Rosenwald et al. / Procedia Computer Science 9 (2012) 540 – 549

Figure 1 (Left Panel): All biosynthetic pathways in Salmonella enterica serovar Agona are intact, since the organism can grow using
glucose and ammonium chloride as carbon and nitrogen sources, respectively.
Figure 2 (Right Panel): Growth of an S. enterica serovar Agona lawn on minimal medium. Disks were soaked with the indicated
concentrations of ampicillin. This result demonstrates that S. enterica serovar Agona is sensitive to ampicillin.

Each student was then responsible for designing his/her own experiments. To highlight one effort, two
students collaborated on an investigation of the so-called “pathogenicity island” genes. This region contains a
number of genes important for response to antibiotics [20]. The students found several genes specific for
antibiotic-resistance suggesting the S. enterica strain ought to be resistant to these drugs, as well as the absence
of others, suggesting sensitivity to that class of antibiotics. For the most part, these predictions were correct
(see Figure 2 and Table 1), but we encountered a few surprises. First, the strain was predicted to be sensitive
to erythromycin, yet it showed resistance, suggesting there may be novel genes for resistance to this drug.
Second, by annotation the organism contains genes that presumably code for resistance to penicillin G,
streptomycin, and sulfomethoxazole, but the organism was found to be sensitive to these three. These results
suggest that these genes were not expressed under the conditions tested. Further, these results have important
implications for treatment of bacterial infections based solely on the DNA sequence of the pathogen. These
data are summarized in Table 1.
Table 1. Annotation of the pathogenicity island in Salmonella enterica serovar Agona and test of resistance or sensitivity
Antibiotic

Hypothesis from Annotation

Bench Test Result

Acriflavine

Resistant

Resistant (to less than 5 mM)

Ampicillin

Sensitive

Sensitive

Chloramphenicol

Resistant

Resistant

Enrofloxacin

Sensitive

Sensitive

Erythromycin

Sensitive

Resistant

Naladixic Acid

Sensitive

Sensitive

Penicillin G

Resistant

Sensitive

Streptomycin

Resistant

Sensitive

Sulfomethoxazole

Resistant

Sensitive

Through participation in this project the students reinforced their knowledge of biochemistry and molecular
biology. In addition, this approach gave them a platform to understand microbiology and microbial evolution
in a novel way.

543

544

Anne G. Rosenwald et al. / Procedia Computer Science 9 (2012) 540 – 549

2.2 Studies at Simmons College
The Chemistry curriculum at Simmons College is completely research integrated beginning second
semester of freshman year. Biochemistry majors can enroll in an elective advanced course, CHEM347
Advanced Topics in Biochemistry, a laboratory-based research integrated course. In Spring of 2011, twelve
students enrolled and the theme was “The Wee Beasties Among Us”. The overall focus was on exploring the
connections between molecular evolution and gene acquisition, using available sequences of gut microbes in
the HMP [21]. The overarching objective was to look for evidence of lateral gene transfer between species and
evidence of human Ras-like GTP-binding proteins in prokaryotes. This work was based on a collaboration
with Paul March, a faculty member at nearby Emmanuel College [22-24]. The students had previously taken
cell biology, genetics, and biochemistry. This project involved integration of topics from previous courses and
introduced the new topics of molecular evolution, functional genomics, and bioinformatics.
Until recently, Ras superfamily proteins were thought to be specific to eukaryotes [25, 26]. The presence of
a GTPase, MglA, found in the soil dwelling bacterium, Myxococcus xanthus, opened up a new avenue of
research into the presence and origin of GTPases in other prokaryotes [27, 28]. The projects centered on the
question of whether GTPases in prokaryotes are a product of lateral gene transfer or whether they evolved
independently. The project goal was deliberately left open-ended and provided for multiple student groups to
define smaller more directed research questions. The students had access to background literature showing
that bacterial MglA has considerable similarity to MglA from the eukaryotic Dictyostelium discoideum and
Saccharomyces cerevisiae [29]. They defined two specific aims: to look for the presence of MglA in other
bacteria, specifically focusing on gut microbes of the human microbiome, and to search for evidence of other
human Ras-like GTPases in the same data set.
The initial assignments involved using Basic Local Alignment Search Tool (BLAST [18]) with sequences
from the HMP to analyze bacterial genomic sequences for both DNA and protein homology with respect to
human Ras. The students then began independent work, first looking for the presence of Ras-like GTPases in
the HMP database. They found four subclasses of bacteria contained sequences with GTPase motifs:
Bacteriodetes, Chlamydiae, Firmicutes, and Fusobacteria. Within three of these subclasses the following
organisms expressed Ras-like proteins with high homology to the 20 kD human Ras protein (Table 2). The
students then investigated whether these proteins were stand-alone monomeric Ras GTPases or functional
domains within larger proteins. Their results showed that all proteins found contained Ras-like GTP binding
domains within a larger protein.
In other work, students looked specifically for evidence of MglA in other bacteria. In addition, the students
examined amino acid alignments of MglA with the human 20 kD Ras proteins using BLAST and generated
fingerprint scans [21] to determine that there were unique sequence components that are present in MglA and
MglA-like proteins, but are not found in eukaryotic Ras proteins.
The students spent 10 weeks working on these projects. The majority of work was done using computer
databases and molecular biology software, gathering data from the HMP database. They met weekly for lab
meetings and presented their raw findings. Open discussion of the data was encouraged. Additionally, the
students were in frequent contact with Dr. March for consultation on prokaryote GTPases. The final
assignment was to prepare a research seminar and to write up their findings in a manuscript using the
instructions to authors from the Journal of Bacteriology. The students participated in pre- and post-quizzes
online on genomics, bioinformatics, and molecular evolution. They also participated in a student survey that
asked for self-evaluation of learning and engagment with the subject material. All students reported a gain of
knowledge about the subject matter and a sense of ownership of the research experience. Most telling were the
number of students who reported an increased interest in the subject matter and in scientific research. Several
student comments are reported here
• This class gave me a real sense of doing research and an new interest in using computers to do that
work
• I felt more like a graduate student who was responsible for work being done. I now understand how
to approach a scientific questions and design the experiments to answer it

Anne G. Rosenwald et al. / Procedia Computer Science 9 (2012) 540 – 549

•

This class showed me how to be a real scientist. I was interested in graduate school before, but now I
know I really want to go further in science. I like how we got to decide the questions to ask and how
we used computers to do real science.

Table 2. Identified bacterial species with a protein showing homology to human Ras
Bacterial Family

Species

Bacteriodetes

Bacteroidetes uniformis ATCC 8492
B. stercoris ATCC 43183
B. dorei DSM 17855
B. sp. 9_1_42FAA
B. dorei 51_36/D4
B. sp. 4_3_47FAA

Firmicutes

Clostridium L250
C. bartlettii DSM 16795
C. ramosum DSM 1402
C. scindens ATCC 35704
C. sp. SS2/1
C. spiroforme DSM 1552
C. nexile 1787
C. hiranonis DSM 13275
C. hylemonae DSM 15053
C. difficile NAP08
C. difficile NAP07
Lactobacillus amylolyticus DSM 11664

Fusobacteria

Fusobacterium mortiferum ATCC 9817
F. varium ATCC 27725
F. sp. 3_1_5R
F. sp. D12
F. ulcerans ATCC 49185
F. gonidiaformans ATCC 25563

The Simmons and Georgetown pilots illustrate the benefit of using real world research questions to teach
advanced topics in biochemistry, molecular biology, ecology, and evolution. The student driven research
process allows for increased engagement with the topic material and a broader mechanism for application.
Students gain greater experience in critical thinking and analysis. As the trend in biology educations continues
to move towards more hands-on approaches to learning, access to computer based learning tools and research
questions will be essential. In both sets of pilot studies we found these approaches useful as ways to illustrate
the scientific method to students. Each student was responsible for his/her own learning and virtually all of
them took ownership of the research. In future iterations, however, we would like to include both Computer
Science and Math majors so that we can not only talk about the biology of the HMP, but also discuss some of
the computer tools that are used in the analysis in more detail. In addition, we will implement formal
assessments so that student learning may be measured.

3. Genome Solver – An Online Community
As the preceding examples illustrate, there are numerous approaches that faculty can take to use the

545

546

Anne G. Rosenwald et al. / Procedia Computer Science 9 (2012) 540 – 549

information in the HMP. Some other possibilities for work include
• Compare novel species from various body sites with known reference strains
• Compare the distribution of virulence genes in commensals and pathogenic bacteria
• Compare metabolic pathways in commensals and pathogenic bacteria to pinpoint pathways important in
pathogenesis
• Compare species of bacteria isolated from different body sites - for example GI tract versus oral cavity to
detect body site specific bacterial lineages
• Compare flora in the GI tract from healthy and obese individuals and individuals with diabetes
• Compare flora in the GI tract from geographically isolated human hosts with a broad global distribution
• Examine the variety of gram-negative organisms found in the GI tract –Firmicutes, Bacterioides, etc.,
and plasmid encoded functions to detect of horizontal gene transfer events
• Compare genomic sequences from microbial communities to make evolutionary hypotheses.
Faculty, as a result of the workshops, will have the ability to create curriculum modules for their students
that best serves their curricular needs. This can either be done from scratch, as we have done, or can be done
by adoption or modification of existing modules and student work. Access to existing work will be possible
through our unique online community, called Genome Solver (http://genomesolver.org; Figure 3).
The Genome Solver site was developed with several goals in mind. Specifically, genomesolver.org will
provide a place for
• Students to discuss their work with one another
• Faculty to share curricular ideas
• Faculty and student to engage with genomics experts, such as those from JCVI
• All to access and share scientific resources especially within the context of HMP
The website provides a rich opportunity for faculty, students, and experts to collaborate and discuss ideas
on current topics related to the HMP. Both faculty and students can self-organize into groups that will facilitate
a healthy exchange of ideas around topics of particular interest to members of that group. For example, groups
could include ones on bioinformatics, evolution, individual organisms, individual body sites, and science
pedagogy. There is also the possibility for school-specific groups or class-specific groups. We (GA and AGR)
used the site extensively in our new course, Microbial Genomics, in Spring 2012. The Genome Solver site
offers a platform for individuals interested in inter-disciplinary work to collaborate.
Organizing students in groups and encouraging them to collaborate outside of class meeting times allows
students to learn from each other and get them actively involved in the research [30, 31]. The website provides
opportunities to increase collaboration, while minimizing competition. New materials, including class
exercises, can be posted on the website allowing students to work together to solve problems. Students are
encouraged to discuss online how they approached each exercise and solved the issues that arose. This record
of activity allows faculty to review student development, in order to understand students’ problem-solving
skills and to design exercises that enhance their skills. Having all this information available to view
demonstrates to students that there are often multiple ways to solve a given problem. In addition, because
changes to the information can be made over time, the students are able to observe that iterative processes are
important for refining their work.
Genome Solver also serves as a platform for faculty to collaborate and exchange ideas for research and
pedagogy. Instructors post teaching modules/exercises on the website and get feedback from peers. Other
faculty from participating institutes can use these active-learning modules/exercises to enhance their
knowledge and understand problem-solving strategies. Faculty can use the feedback from collaborating faculty
to improve the quality of their exercises. Other topics of discussion among faculty include instructional
methods, assessment tools, and student learning. Faculty can advise each other on how to deal with all these
issues and also collaborate on new research ideas. Because new comments on Genome Solver appear
immediately, real-time feedback is available at all levels.
The Genome Solver website is actively used to advertise the faculty workshops: announce new workshop
dates, workshop schedules, and logistics. Materials used during the workshop are posted on the website and
access will be provided to registered participants and collaborative faculty. Faculty will have access to
instructional slides, exercises as well a comprehensive list of tools with instructions on tool use. Faculty can
decide which tools are best suited for their classes to ask meaningful scientific questions they seek to answer in

Anne G. Rosenwald et al. / Procedia Computer Science 9 (2012) 540 – 549

their classes and research. Different levels of access on Genome Solver allow space for faculty discussions to
take place away from student views.
Genome Solver also serves as a resource for the latest information about the HMP and microbiome research
projects from popular news sources as well as the scientific literature. Since the inception of the HMP in 2007
[32], the HMP has generated a huge amount of data and provided answers to specific questions such as
differences in the oral flora of healthy compared to diseased individuals, differences in gut flora between obese
and normal individuals, and how the material microbiome influences the microbiome of their neonates [33-35].
Updates to Genome Solver are achieved by gleaning information from a variety of RSS feeds. This feature of
the website keeps students informed of the latest developments in the field and faculty can use the knowledge
to develop new questions to be used in the classroom.

Figure 3: The Genome Solver home page (http://genomesolver.org). The site contains information about how to become part of the
online community of students, faculty, and experts.

The website also functions as a way to integrate the assessment information obtained from participants in
the community, both students and faculty. Assessment materials are available on the web site, and there are
links to satisfaction surveys and pre- and post-quizzes for assessment of student learning as a result in taking
part in the learning environment provided by the web site. Overall the Genome Solver website is a unique tool
for communities to collaborate, learn and teach each other not only about the Human Microbiome, but also
about science education and pedagogy.

4. Summary
The genome data from thousands of prokaryotes associated with the human body is publically available for
faculty and students to explore. We have invested in this project in order to make use of this information
ourselves, but also to provide tools to others who wish to do similar work. The Genome Solver site as well as
the faculty workshops conducted by staff from Georgetown University, Simmons College, and JCVI will
broaden participation of faculty and their students in the Human Microbiome Project.

547

548

Anne G. Rosenwald et al. / Procedia Computer Science 9 (2012) 540 – 549

Acknowledgements
Support for the Genome Solver project comes from the National Science Foundation (DUE-1123016). JRC
was also supported by the W.M. Keck Foundation, which provided funding to redesign the class supporting the
Simmons pilot studies. We thank the students from Georgetown University (Colleen Bennett, Andrew
Federer, Amanda Hassler, An Kim, Kelly Krespan, Christian Pean, and Sam Wiles) and Simmons College
(Sabya Abdul Raf, Sadia Asif, Juliana Barrios, Elizabeth Casey, Hannah Gilman, Stephanie Intriago, Melissa
Trieu, and Bib Yang) who participated in the pilot studies. We also thank Rob Pongsajapan, Justin Secor, and
Marie Selvanadin for their help with development of the Genome Solver website.
References
1.

Beyond

Bio

101:

The

Transformation

of

Undergraduate

Biology

Education.

(2000)

Available

from:

http://www.hhmi.org/BeyondBio101/.
2.

Bio 2010: Transforming Undergraduate Education for Future Research Biologists (2003) Washington, DC: The National
Academies Press.

3.

Vision and Change in Undergraduate Biology Education: A View for the 21st Century. (2009) Available from:
http://visionandchange.org/.

4.

Boyer Commission Report. Reinventing Undergraduate Education: A Blueprint for America's Research Universities. (1998)
Available from: http://naples.cc.sunysb.edu/pres/boyer.nsf/.

5.

Boyer Commission Report. Reinventing Undergraduate Education: Three Years After the Boyer Report. (2001) Available
from: http://dspace.sunyconnect.suny.edu/handle/1951/26013.

6.

J. Stevens and D. Reingold. The Role of Research in Undergraduate Chemical Education. (2000) Available from:
http://www.files.chem.vt.edu/confchem/2000/a/stevens/researchrole.html.

7.

A.L. Zydney, J.S. Bennett, A. Shahid, and K.W. Bauer, Impact of Undergraduate Research Experience in Engineering. J Engr
Educ., 91 (2002) 151-7.

8.

P.A. Mabrouk and K. Peters. Student Perspectives on Undergraduate Research (UR) Experiences in Chemistry and Biology.
(2000) Available from: http://www.chem.vt.edu/confchem/2000/a/mabrouk/mabrouk.htm.

9.

S.R. Gill, M. Pop, R.T. Deboy, P.B. Eckburg, P.J. Turnbaugh, B.S. Samuel, et al., Metagenomic analysis of the human distal
gut microbiome. Science 312 (2006) 1355-9.

10.

K.E. Nelson, G.M. Weinstock, S.K. Highlander, K.C. Worley, H.H. Creasy, J.R. Wortman, et al., A catalog of reference
genomes from the human microbiome. Science. 328 (2010) 994-9.

11.

J. Qin, R. Li, J. Raes, M. Arumugam, K.S. Burgdorf, C. Manichanh, et al., A human gut microbial gene catalogue established
by metagenomic sequencing. Nature 464 (2010) 59-65.

12.

D. Medini, C. Donati, H. Tettelin, V. Masignani, and R. Rappuoli, The microbial pan-genome. Curr Opin Genet Dev 15 (2005)
589-94.

13.

A.O. Kislyuk, B. Haegeman, N.H. Bergman, and J.S. Weitz, Genomic fluidity: an integrative view of gene diversity within
microbial populations. BMC Genomics 12 (2011) 32.

14.

L.A. Denofrio, B. Russell, D. Lopatto, and Y. Lu, Mentoring. Linking student interests to science curricula. Science. 318
(2007) 1872-3.

15.

D. Lopatto, Survey of Undergraduate Research Experiences (SURE): first findings. Cell Biol Educ. 3 (2004) 270-7.

16.

D. Lopatto, Undergraduate research experiences support science career decisions and active learning. CBE Life Sci Educ, 6
(2007) 297-306.

17.

D. O'Flanagan, M. Cormican, P. McKeown, N. Nicolay, J. Cowden, B. Mason, et al., A multi-country outbreak of Salmonella
Agona, February - August 2008. Euro Surveill. 13 (2008) 33.

18.

S.F. Altschul, T.L. Madden, A.A. Schäffer, J. Zhang, J. Zhang, W. Miller, et al., Gapped BLAST and PSI-BLAST: a new
generation of protein database search programs. Nucleic Acids Res.. 25 (1997) 3389-402.

19.
20.

MANATEE. 2007; Available from: http://manatee.sourceforge.net/.
H.C. den Bakker, A.I. Moreno Switt, G. Govoni, C.A. Cummings, M.L. Ranieri, L. Degoricija, et al., Genome sequencing
reveals diversification of virulence factor content and possible host adaptation in distinct subpopulations of Salmonella
enterica. BMC Genomics. 12 (2007) 425.

Anne G. Rosenwald et al. / Procedia Computer Science 9 (2012) 540 – 549
21.
22.

DbBrowser. 2011. Available from http://www.bioinf.man.ac.uk/dbbrowser/PRINTS/index.php.
M. Thomson, ARF family GTPases, in Cell Biochemistry and Function, R.A. Kahn, Editor (2005), Kluwer Academic
Publishers, B.V. 350-60.

23.
24.

C.E. Caldon and P.E. March, Function of the universally conserved bacterial GTPases. Curr Opin Microbiol 6 (2003) 135-9.
C.E. Caldon, P. Yoong, and P.E. March, Evolution of a molecular switch: universal bacterial GTPases regulate ribosome
function.Mol Microbiol, 41 (2001) 289-97.

25.

M. Paduch, F. Jele, and J. Otlewski, Structure of small G proteins and their regulators. Acta Biochim Pol 48 (2001) 829-50.

26.

K. Wennerberg, K.L. Rossman, and C.J. Der, The Ras superfamily at a glance. J Cell Sci. 118: (2005) 843-6.

27.

J.H. Dong, J.F. Wen, and H.F. Tian, Homologs of eukaryotic Ras superfamily proteins in prokaryotes and their novel

28.

B. Thomasson, J. Link, A.G. Stassinopoulos, N. Burke, L. Plamann, and P.L. Hartzell, MglA, a small GTPase, interacts with a

phylogenetic correlation with their eukaryotic analogs. Gene 396 (2007) 116-24.
tyrosine kinase to control type IV pili-mediated motility and development of Myxococcus xanthus. Mol Microbiol 46 (2002)
1399-413.
29.

P. Hartzell and D. Kaiser, Function of MglA, a 22-kilodalton protein essential for gliding in Myxococcus xanthus. J Bacteriol
173 (1991) 7615-24.

30.

K.D. Tanner, L. Chatman, and D. Allen, Approaches to biology teaching and learning: science teaching and learning across
the school--university divide--cultivating conversations through scientist-teacher partnerships. Cell Biol Educ 2 (2003) 195201.

31.

W.B. Wood, Innovations in teaching undergraduate biology and why we need them. Annu Rev Cell Dev Biol 25 (2009) 93112.

32.

P.J. Turnbaugh, R.E. Ley, M. Hamady, C.M. Fraser-Liggett, R. Knight, and J.I. Gordon, The human microbiome project.
Nature 449 (2007) 804-10.

33.

E.A. Grice and J.A. Segre, The skin microbiome. Nat Rev Microbiol 9 (2011) 244-53.

34.

K.J. Pflughoeft and J. Versalovic, Human Microbiome in Health and Disease. Annu Rev Pathol, 7 (2011) 99-122.

35.

J. Walter and R. Ley, The human gut microbiome: ecology and recent evolutionary changes. Annu Rev Microbiol. 65 (2011)
411-29.

549

