Available online at www.sciencedirect.com

Procedia Computer Science 18 (2013) 641 – 650

2013 International Conference on Computational Science

Using an Agent-Based Simulation for predicting the effects of
patients derivation policies in Emergency Departments
Manel Taboadaa, Eduardo Cabrerab, Francisco Epeldec,
Ma Luisa Iglesiasc , Emilio Luqueb *
a

Tomas Cerda Computer Science School , University Autonoma of Barcelona(UAB), Spain
b
Computer Architecture and Operating Systems Department (CAOS), UAB, Spain
C
Hospital of Sabadell,Consorci Sanitari Parc Taulí, Barcelona, Spain

Abstract
The increasing demand of urgent care, overcrowding of hospital emergency departments (ED) and limited economic
resources are phenomena shared by health systems around the world. It is estimated that up to 50% of patients that are
attended in ED have non complex conditions that could be resolved in ambulatory care services. The derivation of less
complex cases from the ED to other health care devices seems an essential measure to allocate properly the demand of care
service between the different care units. This paper presents the results of an experiment carried out with the objective of
, the number of patients attended and the level of activity of ED
analyzing the effects on
Staff) of different derivation policies. The experiment has been done with data of the Hospital of Sabadell (a big hospital,
one of the most important in Catalonia, Spain), making use of an Agent-Based model and simulation formed entirely of the
rules governing the behaviour of the individual agents which populate the ED, and due to the great amount of data that
should be computed, using High Performance Computing.
©
© 2013
2013 The
The Authors.
Authors. Published
Published by
by Elsevier
Elsevier B.V.
B.V. Open access under CC BY-NC-ND license.
Selection
peer-review
under
responsibility
of the
organizers
of the
2013
International
Conference
on Computational
Selection and/or
and peer
review under
responsibility
of the
organizers
of the
2013
International
Conference
on Computational
Science
Keywords: Healthcare operational management, agent-based modelling, individual oriented simulation, emergency department, decision
support systems.

1. Introduction
Hospital emergency departments (EDs) are a primary healthcare unit, usually the main entrance to the
hospital and a key component of the whole healthcare system. The increasing demand of urgent care, the
overcrowding of ED and limited economic resources are phenomena shared by health systems around the
world [1-5], giving place to the delay in the first attention of patients who attend ED.
* E-mail address: manel.taboada@eug.es (Manel Taboada), ecabrera@caos.uab.es (Eduardo Cabrera), epelde@comb.es (Francisco
Epelde), MIglesias@tauli.cat (Ma Luisa Iglesias), Emilio.luque@uab.es (Emilio Luque).

1877-0509 © 2013 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. Open access under CC BY-NC-ND license.
Selection and peer review under responsibility of the organizers of the 2013 International Conference on Computational Science
doi:10.1016/j.procs.2013.05.228

642

Manel Taboada et al. / Procedia Computer Science 18 (2013) 641 – 650

Between 70 and 80% of patients visit the ED on their own initiative [3,4,6,7], and it is estimated that up to
50% of patients that are attended in ED have non complex conditions that could be solved in ambulatory care
services [7]. In addition several Spanish authors have established that a variable percentage of these patients for
up to 80% visit the ED inappropriately.
The derivation of less complex cases from the ED to other health care devices seems an essential measure to
allocate properly the demand of care service between the different care units. Such derivation should be
decided once the triage process is completed, the ED process in which nurses or physicians identify the priority
level of patients. This has been borne out by the results of studies conducted in Spanish hospitals of large size
like Hospital Clinic of Barcelona or Hospital Mutua de Terrassa [5].
Salmeron et al. [5] try to identify ways for achieving safety and efficacy of discharging from a hospital
emergency department with referral to another point of care based on the application of an Algorithmic Aid to
Triage (AAT) by nurses without physician evaluation of the patient. They carried out the study with data of the
ED of the Hospital Clinic of Barcelona, considering a total of 102,063 visits, and concluding that the referral
done by nurses accredited using the AAT is safe and effective. Gomez et al. [8] conclude that structured
emergency department triage scales can be used to develop patient referral strategies from the ED to primary
care, and specifically that non urgent patients that attend ED may be discharged. In fact in Spain several
hospitals redirect to more appropriate levels of care (without being visited) those patients that go to the ED with
minor illnesses [9].
There are no standard models to describe complex systems like ED, but simulation becomes an important
tool for their modeling. Simulation modeling approach started to be used for solving healthcare problems in the
US and UK more than three decades ago. In 1979 computer simulation was applied to hospital systems for
improving the scheduling of staff members [10], and in Saunders et al. [11] the aim was to quantify the impact
that the amount of staff members and beds had on patient throughput time. Especially over the last decade there
have been fruitful efforts in developing simulation-optimization models for solving healthcare management
problems [12, 13].
Discrete event simulation (DES), system dynamics (SD) and agent-based modeling and simulation (ABMS)
are the main three approaches used in simulation of healthcare systems. Healthcare systems are based on
human actions and interactions, and the ability of ABMS to represent this makes it an appealing approach,
while DES is not well suited to model them [14]. The potential of the use of agent-based modeling and
simulations techniques in emergency departments modeling is clearly illustrated and shown in Kanagarajah et
al. [15], Günal [16] and Staindsby et al. [17].
In 2008 Hutzschenreuter et al. [18] present an agent-based simulation and evaluation tool for patient
admission scheduling, with the aim of achieving an efficient use of the hospital resources through the
combination of different profiles of resource use. The work carried out by Jones et al [19] is a specific example
of simulation applied to Hospital Emergency Departments. Authors present an agent based simulation tool,
developed with NetLogo, and designed to evaluate the impact of various physician staffing configurations on
patient waiting times. Brenner et al. [20] use simulation, conducted in the emergency department at the
University of Kentucky Chandler Hospital, for identifying bottlenecks and investigate the optimal numbers of
human and equipment resources (eg, nurses, physicians, and radiology technology). In the case of Holmes and
Dahl [21] simulation is used for evaluating the influence of a 45% increase in patient volume on the ED of
Akershus University Hospital

the participation of the ED Staff Team of the Hospital of Sabadell (one of the most important Hospitals in
Spain, that gives care service to an influence area of 500,000 people, and attends 160,000 patients/year in the
ED). Its general objective is to analyze the effects over the ED of different derivation policies, using for that an
ABM model and simulation designed and developed by the Research Group, with the purpose of aiding the

Manel Taboada et al. / Procedia Computer Science 18 (2013) 641 – 650

administrators and heads of the ED to allow additional knowledge in the purpose of choosing the policy that let
to achieve the best quality of service of the service with the available human and technical resources.
Then, in an attempt to extend the previous studies, specifically the carried out by Salmeron et al. [5], the
Length of
model and simulator have been used for evaluating the effects over the ED performance (
Stay, number of patients attended, and level of activity of ED Staff) of derivation to ambulatory and primary
care services of those patients who go to emergency service without requiring an urgent attention. High
Performance Computing (HPC) have been used due to the specific features of the model (a great number and
variety of agents), the amount of data to be computed and finally the number of executions of the simulator
needed in the experiment.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows; section 2 describes the methodology and the details of
the model and simulation. The features of the experiment and the analysis of results are presented in section 3
and 4 respectively. Finally section 5 closes this paper with discussion and conclusions.
2. Methodology
The objective
that and Agent-Based Model and Simulator previously designed and developed by the Research Group. The
methodology applied in the design and development of the tool is divided in five phases: 1) System analysis; 2)
Model design; 3) Simulator implementation; 4) Simulator verification and validation; 5) and finally Simulator
execution and results analysis.
2.1. System analysis
The information was obtained from two different hospitals. The first one was the above mentioned Hospital
of Sabadell, a large center, and the second a medium size hospital, the Hospital of Mataro, that provides care
service to a geographical area with a population of 250,000 people, attending an average of 110,000 patients
per year in its ED. Such information was collected with the following tools:
Focus groups with the directors of the ED, the coordinators of the main areas of the ED, and different
kinds of the ED staff (admission personal, triage nurses, sanitarian nurses and doctors).
Observation of the different ED zones of both Hospitals, with the purpose of analyzing and taking
notes about how the different processes take place.
Data given by the Information System Department of the Hospitals (ISDH), concerning to the activity
carried out by the ED.
As result of this phase the key information of the system was identified (different kinds of agents, the
interactions that take place, the different areas, etc).
2.2. Model design
This consists of the formal definition of the model, including the environment, the different kinds of agents,
and their behavior. The ED model has been designed using the Agent-Based Modeling and Simulation
describes the complex dynamics found in an ED, representing each individual and system as an individual
agent. Two distinct kinds of agents have been identified, active (the persons involved in the ED such as patients
and the different kinds of ED staff) and passive (reactive systems, such as the information technology (IT)
infrastructure or labs that perform tests). State machines are used to represent the actions of each kind of
agents. This takes into account all the variables that are required to represent the different states in which such
agent may be throughout the course of time in ED. The change in these variables, invoked by an input received

643

644

Manel Taboada et al. / Procedia Computer Science 18 (2013) 641 – 650

from an external source, is modeled as a transition between states. In order to control the interactions that take
place between agents, the communication between individuals (modeled as the Inputs that agents receive and
the Outputs they produce, both implicitly and explicitly) and the physical environment in which these
individuals interact are modeled. Figure 1 shows a general image of all the elements that includes the model.

Fig. 1. General image of the elements included in the model

The communication model represents three basic types of communication: 1) 1-to-1, between two
individuals (as happens between admission staff and patient, during the admission process); 2) 1-to-n,
representing an individual addressing to a group (like a doctor giving information to patient and nurses during
the diagnostic process); 3) and 1-to-location, when an individual speaks to all occupants of a specific area (for
instance when any staff member uses the speaker system to address a message to all the people who are in a
specific waiting room). The environment includes: Admissions Zone (where patients have to address just when
they arrive to the ED, and Admission Staff register their arrival); Triage Box (
the patient, takes his/her vital signals and obtains some additional information in order to identify the priority
level); Waiting Rooms (where patients and their companions wait for being triaged, and once they have past the
triage process, until be called to enter the treatment zone); diagnostic and treatment zone (where Doctors,
nurses and other ED Staff carry out the diagnostic and treatment process with patients).
2.3. Simulator implementation
The simulation of the model has been implemented using the agent-based simulation environment NetLogo
[22], a high level platform that lets modelers give instructions to hundreds or thousands of independent agents,
all operating concurrently, making possible to explore connection between the micro-level behavior of
individuals and the macro-level patterns that emerge from the interaction of many individuals.

Manel Taboada et al. / Procedia Computer Science 18 (2013) 641 – 650

The current version of the simulator includes the four primary areas: admissions, triage, 3 waiting rooms
(one for patients before triage, the second for patients after triage process who are waiting for treatment, and
the third in the treatment area, in which patients wait while have no interaction with physicians or nurses), and
the diagnosis and treatment area. The kind of active agents represented in this simulation are patients (P),
admission staff (AS), triage nurses (TN), clinical nurses (CN) and doctors (D). TN carries out the triage
process, phase in which the priority level of patients is identified, and CN acts in the Diagnostic and Treatment
process. In the specific case of the ED Staff (AS, TN, CN and D), two distinct levels of experience have been
considered (low, labeled as junior, and high, labeled as senior).
Depending on physical condition and symptoms, through the triage process patients are classified in 5
different levels of acuity and priority (from 1, the maximum level, to 5, the minimum) following the Spanish
Triage Model, the acuity scale used in the Spanish Emergency Services. The diagnosis and treatment process
will be different depending on the priority level. In addition, in accordance with the organization model used in
large Spanish EDs, the treatment zone is divided into two different areas: one for treatment of patients with a
level 4 or 5, and the other one for the attention of patients with a level 1, 2 or 3.
In the simulation implemented patients arrive at the ED by their own means, and wait to be attended in the
admission zone. The simulation reads the input information from a text file within the data given by the
hospital within the number and typology of patients arriving at any time within a 24-hour cycle. Once the
admission process has been carried out, the patient waits in a first waiting room (WR) until he/she is called by a
triage nurse, who takes his/her vital signs and obtains some additional information in order to identify the
priority level with which patient will be attended. After the triage process, the patient goes to a different WR
and waits there until a doctor is free and calls him to start the process of diagnosis and treatment. Once this
process has been completed, the patient leaves the ED. In the current version of the simulation patients of all
the kinds (1 to 5) are taken into account until the triage process. But only the part of the diagnostic and
treatment zone in which patients with a priority level 4 or 5 are attended is considered.
The diagnostic and treatment process for such patients is divided into three phases:
Initial evaluation: a phase that takes 20 minutes on average, during which patient and physician remain in
a treatment booth interacting;
Additional testing: during the first 10 minutes the patient and the clinical nurse interact in the treatment
booth, while the test is carried out. After that, the patient leaves the booth and waits in the WR until the
of the test have arrived, physician decide whether patient may be send to home or has to receive a
treatment.
Application of medication or treatment: patient is called to enter a treatment booth, and during the first
five minutes the clinical nurse applies the treatment to the patient. Once the treatment has been applied,
the patient leaves the booth and will be waiting in the WR until the treatment has taken its effects, which
on average takes 45 minutes.
Considering the information given for the Hospital of Sabadell, 20% of patients attended in this zone are
discharged after the initial evaluation, the other 80% require additional testing. Only the 20% of the total will
remain for medication. The simulator takes into account all theses specifications. Figure 2 shows a screenshot
of the simulator. The layout of the different parts of the ED implemented is shown in the central framework.
The user can set both the number of each one of the different types of the ED staff (AS, TN, CN and D), and
their level of experience (junior or senior), through the configuration console which is on the left-hand side of
the interface.

645

646

Manel Taboada et al. / Procedia Computer Science 18 (2013) 641 – 650

2.4. Simulator verification and validation
Taking the definitions of Sargent [23], model verification is the task of ensuring that the model behaves as
intended, while model validation is the process of determining whether the simulation model is a useful or
reasonable representation of the real system. Following the recommendations of Sargent, the model and
simulator verification and validation have been carried out performing the face validity on the conceptual
model and exploring the si
developed partially because the current version of the simulation is not the final one. In both cases the process
has been carried out with the participation of the team from the Hospital of Sabadell ED, and it leads us to
conclude that both model and simulation represent an ED correctly. The techniques applied have been:
different parts of the ED are shown graphically during the simulation run.

Fig. 2. Screenshot of Netlogo with the features of the Simulator

Degenerate Tests: the logic of the proposed model has been examined through a varied set of experiments,
observing overall operations in the simulation ED and tracking different types of patients. All these
experiments needed a great amount of computation, reason why they have been carried out using HPC.
Face validity: the Hospital of Sabadell ED Staff has been heavily involved in all the process, verifying
that the model behaves like the real system.
The details of the verification and validation process done are presented in Taboada et al [24].
2.5. Simulator execution and results analysis
Introduction in the simulator of the configuration and input data given by the ISDH, and then execution of
the simulation for the different scenarios considered in the experiment, in order to obtain the output data
required for completing such experiment.
3. The experiment
In an attempt to extend the previous studies, specifically the carried out by Salmeron et al. [5], the objective
of the experiment is to provide impact values of the alternatives policies of
. With that
purpose the model and simulator have been used for evaluating the effects over the ED performance of

Manel Taboada et al. / Procedia Computer Science 18 (2013) 641 – 650

derivation to ambulatory and primary care services of those patients who go to emergency service without
requiring an urgent attention. High Performance Computing (HPC) have been used due to the specific features
of the model (a great number and variety of agents), the amount of data to be computed and finally the number
of executions of the simulator needed in the experiment.
The Performance of the ED has been measured through three indicators: 1) the number of patients of each
acuity level (in this case only 4 and 5, the patients treated in the ED zone considered in the experiment) that
complete the treatment during the period of time considered in the experiment (1 day of activity); 2) Pa
Length of Stay (calculated separately for patients of 4 level and 5 level of acuity); 3) and finally the occupation
level of each one of the physicians, calculated as the percentage of time that such physician is attending or
interacting with a patient, in relation with the total time available for attending patients.
The simulation has been executed several times for the equivalent to one day of activity, considering the
arrival information of February 2012 (daily average of 397 patients, the 43.22% of them with a 4 level of
acuity, and the 25.35% with a 5 level), and the mix of ED Staff informed by the Hospital of Sabadell (2 AS
with senior profile, 2 TN with junior profile, 1 CN with senior profile and 3 D, 1 senior and 2 junior).
Concerning to the derivation percentage of patients with a level 5 of acuity, six different scenarios have been
considered: 0%, 20%, 40%, 60%, 80% and 100%. A 0% means that all the patients with a level 5 of acuity are
attended in the diagnostic and treatment zone, while a 100% means all the patients with a level 5 of acuity
leave the ED after the triage process. In addition, six different scenarios of patient arrival have been taken into
account: the original one (0%) and five more calculated applying and increase of the original data of 20%,
40%, 60%, 80% and 100%. Combining both, derivation and arrival of patients, a total of 36 different scenarios
have been considered. For each one of them twenty simulations have been executed, each one with a different
seed. Then, a total of 720 executions have been done, what means about 60 hours of computation that have
required the use of HPC. The data taken for each scenario is the average of the results obtained in such twenty
executions.
4. Analysis of results
This section is dedicated to the analysis of results. First part focuses on the scenario concerning to the
original data, and after the analysis takes into account data from all the scenarios.
in the six different scenarios of
Table 1 summarizes the results obtained for the
derivation, including information about the
of Stay. For each one of the % of derivation, the table includes a column
value with the value of
v
,
each variable (in the case of LoS expressed in hours) and another with the variation
calculated as difference with the data of the original column, and expressed in percentage (positive values mean
an increase and negative values a decrease). With a 0% of derivation, only 136 patients complete the process
during the execution (51 of kind 5 and 85 of kind 4), in front of 174 (60 of kind 5 and 114 of kind 4) when the
derivation is 100%. This represents an increase of the 27.94% in the patients attended (34.12% in the case of
patients 4, and 17.65% for patients 5).
Focusing on LoS, with a 0% of derivation patients remain in the ED in average 4.17 hours (4.12 hours in the
case of patients of kind 5 and 4.36 for patients of kind 4), in front of an average 3.73 hours (3.18 in patients of
kind 5 and 3.90 in patients of kind 4) when the derivation is 100%, what represents a reduction of the 14%
considering all patients (6% in the case of patients 4, and 23 % for patients 5). In conclusion both the number
of patients treated and the LoS improve with the increase of the % of derivation.
Analyzing the occupation level of each one of the physicians, calculated as the percentage of time that such
physician is attending or interacting with a patient, in relation with the total time available for attending

647

648

Manel Taboada et al. / Procedia Computer Science 18 (2013) 641 – 650

Table 1. Number of patients that complete the ED process and their LoS (expressed in hours) for different percentage of derivation (from
0% to 100%
rival

patients,
atients such occupation level is lower as the percentage of derivation increases (66
(66.01%
01% with a 0% of
derivation, 53.13% with a 40 % and a 44.71% with a 100% of derivation). Taking this information into
account, a new execution was carried out, now reducing the number of doctors to 2, both with junior profile,
and considering a 100% derivation. With this new mix of Staff, the occupation level increases to 63.96% and
the LoS of patients with a IV level of acuity is 4.21 hours, what means an increase of 18 minutes. In conclusion
a very similar performance is achieved reducing the number of physicians but discharging the 100% of patients
with a 5 acuity level.
Now results obtained for all the scenarios will be analyzed. Such results are summarized in figures 3 and 4.
patients treated and the LoS improve with the increase of the % of derivation. But it seems to have a roof of
200 patients for the number and mix of ED Staff considered (2 AS with senior profile, 2 TN with junior profile,
1 CN with senior profile and 3 D, 1 senior and 2 junior), which means that seems no possible to attend more
than 200 patients per day, whatever the patients
could be a measure to consider but not sufficient, and would have to think in involving more staff and/or
improving their experience.

Fig. 3. Number of patients that complete the ED process for

Manel Taboada et al. / Procedia Computer Science 18 (2013) 641 – 650

Fig. 4. LoS of patients (in hours) that complete the ED process for

Concerning to the
LoS, usually used for measuring the quality of service of ED, derivation policies let
its improving, but again with the number and mix of ED Staff considered, it seems to have a floor or minimum
value of 3,73 hours. For improving this level it will be necessary to involve more staff and/or improve their
experience.
5. Discussion and conclusions
allows to
increase the number of patients attended in the ED, and also reduce the Length of Stay of patients that remain
in the ED. Even more, in some cases the number of physicians required in the zone in which are attended
patients with level of priority IV or V is lower, what make possible to move some of them to other parts of the
ED. In addition the results show that potential benefits of derivation policies have a limit in scenarios of bigger
involving staff with a higher level of experience and/or increasing the amount of staff.
Although the experiment has been carried out for a concrete hospital, the generality of both model and
simulator makes possible that may be applied in different hospital emergency departments, after a previous
adjustment of the configuration parameters achieved through a two-steps process which is carried out through
parametric simulation. The first step consists in carry out a tuning process between the simulator and the real
system, and let to obtain the value of parameters that produce the best similarity level between them. The
second step which is called predictive validation consists of testing its predictive power. After completing the
whole process the simulator will be ready to be used as DSS in such real system (hospital).
The experiment presented in this paper is a clear example of the benefits of using simulation as the core
component of a decision support system that aids healthcare managers to make the best informed decisions
possible (patient admission scheduling, to manage physician staff and resource optimization amongst other
situations), and making better use of resources, achieving a more efficient and improved patient care cycle.
This in turn allows better management of dynamic patient flow, either as a result of specific circumstances
(pandemics, disasters, etc) or seasonal fluctuation of the demand of healthcare service.
Furthermore, using High Performance Computing, the simulator could be used to execute a large number of
simulations, each one of them concerning to different scenarios, in order to obtain a large amount of
information about the real system, which in some cases would not be available without simulation. Applying
data mining techniques on such data could allow to extract interesting patterns maybe unknown before, as well
as other conclusions useful for the decision making process.
One final and remarkable conclusion is that HPC is essential both in the execution of the experiment, the use
of parametric simulation in the two-steps adjustment process mentioned above, and obtaining a great amount of
data concerning to the real system for the improvement of the decision making process.

649

650

Manel Taboada et al. / Procedia Computer Science 18 (2013) 641 – 650

Acknowledgements
This research has been supported by the MICINN Spain, under contract TIN2007-64974, and the MINECO
(MICINN) Spain under contract TIN2011-24384
References
[1] Ovens H. Emergency deparment overcrowdig. A proposal from the system to a system problem. Emergencias. 2010;22:244-6.
[2] Flores CR. Emergency Department Crowding: a call for unity. Emergencias. 2011;23:59-64.
[3] Zaragoza Fernández M, Calvo Fernández C, Saad Saad T, Morán Portero FJ, San José Pizarro S, Hernández Arenillas P. Trends in
hospital emergency department use. Emergencias. 2009;21:339-345.
[4] Juan A, Enjamio E, Moya C, García Fortea C, Castellanos J, Pérez Mas JR, et al. Impact of hospital management measures on
improving the efficiency of bed allocation and reducing emergency department overcrowding. Emergencias. 2010;22:249-253.
[5] Salmerón, J.M., L. Jiménez, O. Miró, M. Sánchez. Safety and efficacy of hospital emergency departments discharge from triage by
nurses accredited to use an algorithm aid for the Spanish Triage System without physician evaluation. Emergencias 2011; 23: p.p.
346-355
[6] Espinosa G, Miró O, Coll-Vinent B, Sánchez M, Millá J. Effects of internal and external factors on emergency department
overcrowding. Ann Emerg Med. 2002;39:693-5.
[7] Sempere T, Peiró S, Sandra P, Martínez C, López I. Inappropriate use of an accident emergency department: magnitude, associated
factors and reasons an approach with explicit criteria. Ann Emerg Med. 2001;37:568-79.
[8] Gómez Jiménez J, Becerra O, Boneu F, Burgués Ll, Pàmies S. Análisis de la casuística de los pacientes derivables desde urgencias a
atención primaria. Gac Sanit. 2006;20:40-6.
[9] Miró, O, Salgado E, Tomás S, Espinosa G, Estrada C, Martí M, et al. Derivacion sin visita desde los servicios de urgencias
hospitalarios: cuantificación, riesgos y grado de satisfacción. Med Clin (Barc). 2006;126:88-93.
[10] Hancock W. M., P. F. Walter, The use of computer simulation to develop hospital systems, SIGSIM Simul. Dig. 10 (4) (1979) 28 32.
[11] Saunders C. E., P. K. Makens, L. J. Leblanc, Modeling emergency department operations using advanced computer simulation
systems, Annals of Emergency Medicine 18 (2) (1989) 134 140.
[12] Ahmed M. A., T. M. Alkhamis, Simulation optimization for an emergency department healthcare unit in Kuwait, European Journal of
Operational Research 198 (3) (2009) 936 942.
[13
Proceedings of the 2011 Winter Simulation Conference
[14] Escudero-Marin, P., M. Pidd.
Conference
into the uses of agent-based modeling to improve
[15
PhD Thesis. Department of Management Science,

[16
Lancaster University, Lancaster 2008.
[17]

-539

-based patient admission scheduling
, pp.45-52
[19] Jones S. S., R. S. Evans, An agent based simulation tool for scheduling emergency department physicians, in: AMIA Annual
Symposium proceedings, AMIA Symposium, 2008, pp. 338 342.
[20] Brenner S, Zeng Z, Liu Y, Wang J, Howard J. Modeling and analysis of the emergency department at University of Kentucky
Chandler Hospital using simulations. Journal of emergency nursing: JEN: official publication of the Emergency Department Nurses
Association 2010;36(4):303-310.
[21] Holmes LB, Dahl FA. Simulating the influence of a 45% increase in patient volume on the emergency department of Akershus
University Hospital. Winter Simulation Conference 2010;129.
[22] Wilensky U. (1999) NetLogo Center for Connected Learning and Computer-Based Modeling, Northwestern University Evanston, IL.
B.
[23
Johansson, S. Jain, J. Montoya-Torres, J. Hugan, and E. Yücesan, 166-183.
-Based Decision Support System for Hospital
[24] Taboada, M., E. Cabrera, M.L. Iglesias, F. Epelde, and E. Luque.
-1879

[18] Hutzschenreuter, A. K., P. A. N. Bosman, I. Blonk-

