Procedia Computer Science
Volume 29, 2014, Pages 289–298
ICCS 2014. 14th International Conference on Computational Science

Mechanism of Traﬃc Jams at Speed Bottlenecks
Wei Liang Quek1 and Lock Yue Chew1
1

Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
School of Physical and Mathematical Sciences,
Division of Physics and Applied Physics,
S130019@e.ntu.edu.sg
2
lockyue@ntu.edu.sg

Abstract
In the past 20 years of complexity science, traﬃc has been studied as a complex system with
a large amount of interacting agents. Since traﬃc has become an important aspect of our
lives, understanding traﬃc system and how it interacts with various factors is essential. In
this paper, the interactions between traﬃc ﬂow and road topology will be studied, particularly
the relationship between a sharp bend in a road segment and traﬃc jams. As suggested by
Sugiyama[1], when car density exceeds a critical density, the ﬂuctuations in the speed of each car
will lead to greater ﬂuctuations in speed of the cars behind it. This enhancement of ﬂuctuation
leads to the congestion of vehicles. Using a cellular automata model modiﬁed from NagelSchreckenberg Cellular Automata model[2], the simulation results suggest that the mechanism
of traﬃc jam at bottlenecks is similar to this. Instead of directly causing the congestion in cars,
bottleneck on roads only causes the local density of traﬃc to increase. The resultant congestion
is still due to the enhancement of ﬂuctuations. Results of this study opened up a large number
of possible analytical studies that could be used as grounds for future works.
Keywords:

1

Introduction

In the past 50 years, the scientiﬁc community has proposed various traﬃc models in its attempt
to understand vehicular traﬃc ﬂow[3]. There are continuous ﬂuid dynamical methods such as
the Lighthill-Whitham theory in the 1950s, and Navier-Stokes-like momentum equation; discrete models such as the follow-the-leader model; as well as stochastic discrete models such as
the Nagel-Schreckenberg Cellular automata models. Regardless continuous or discrete, deterministic or stochastic, the purpose of these models is to shed light on the physics of traﬃc ﬂow
and to provide predictions of various traﬃc phenomena.
Typical to most complex systems, traﬃc ﬂow may be aﬀected by various factors. This factors
are topology, seasonal increase in road demand, signaling lights, weather, etc. Understanding
how each of these factors aﬀect the traﬃc ﬂow is essential in avoiding undesirable phenomena,
Selection and peer-review under responsibility of the Scientiﬁc Programme Committee of ICCS 2014
c The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V.
doi:10.1016/j.procs.2014.05.026

289

The Class File

W.L. Quek, L.Y. Chew

such as massive traﬃc jams. The 2010 China National Highway 110 traﬃc jam had vehicles
stuck in a jam for 10 days, originated from a traﬃc bottleneck due to road works coupled with
the increase in vehicular density of the highway.
In Singapore, a new highway - the Marina Coastal Expressway (MCE) - was open in December 2013[4]. On the 2nd day of its operation, an extremely rare gridlock jam occurred from
late morning to early afternoon. In a press release issued by the Land Transport Authority
(LTA) of Singapore, this gridlock jam is attributed to the presence of a sharp bend as well as
the merging of lanes on various segments of the highway. Traﬃc slowed down at this sharp
bend, resulting in an eﬀect known as the speed bottleneck. Hence, are traﬃc jams directly
caused by the bottleneck mechanism? Or does bottleneck induce congestion, leading to traﬃc
jams? In this paper, the Nagel-Schreckenberg (NaSch) cellular automata (CA) model will be
applied to simulate the eﬀects of a sharp bend on a highway traﬃc ﬂow. With this, we hope to
shed light on the mechanism of traﬃc jam formation at speed bottlenecks.
In a series of papers, Sugiyama[5, 1] used both experimental and simulation methods to
explain the mechanism of traﬃc jams without bottlenecks. Using a continuous uniform road,
he provided experimental evidence that the trigger of traﬃc jams is the critical limit of car
density[1]. For any roads, small ﬂuctuation in speed always exists between cars. If the vehicular
density is high, the interaction between cars enhances these ﬂuctuations, leading to large speed
diﬀerences between them. This speed diﬀerence bunches up slow moving cars into a traﬃc jam
clusters. The paper further states that bottlenecks only push the density beyond this critical
limit, and that the mechanism of traﬃc jam formation at bottlenecks is the same as one without
bottlenecks. The plan of this paper is to provide simulation evidence for this claim.
The physical mechanism of the formation of traﬃc jam at bottlenecks will be studied by
implementing a speed bottleneck based on the eﬀects of a sharp bend using a CA model of a
highway traﬃc ﬂow. We hypothesize the traﬃc bottleneck serves only to increase the density
of cars in its locality. The mechanism of traﬃc jams that occurs at these points is the same
as one that occurs in a high density traﬃc without bottlenecks. This is studied by comparing
traﬃc jam clusters that are formed with and without traﬃc bottlenecks, to understand the
mechanism behind the two diﬀerent traﬃc jam formations. With that, the physics behind
traﬃc jam formation due to a sharp bend will be discussed in this paper.

2
2.1

Simulation model and Preliminary results
Nagel-Schreckenberg Cellular Automata Model[2]

As mentioned earlier, the simulation of traﬃc ﬂow will be done using the NaSch CA model.
This model is a discrete stochastic model, whereby position, velocity, acceleration and time are
discrete variables. For simplicity, the NaSch simulation is written for a 1-lane continuous road,
in which sites of the model are written as a 1-D array with periodic boundary conditions.
The parameters of a typical NaSch simulation are:
Max Velocity, vmax - Maximum velocity of the cars
Density, c - No. of cars per unit road
Random Deceleration Probability, p - Probability that each car will decelerate by 1 per
time step
In the NaSch model, the time evolution of the simulation is governed by a well deﬁned
prescription.
290

The Class File

W.L. Quek, L.Y. Chew

1. Acceleration - increase the speed of the car n if its velocity if lower than vmax
vn → min(vn + 1, vmax ),
2. Systematic Deceleration - decelerate the vehicle to avoid collision with the vehicle ahead
vn → min(vn , dn − 1)
where dn is the distance between the car n and car n + 1
3. Random Deceleration - decrease the velocity of car n by 1 with a probability
vn → max(vn − 1, 0) with probability p
4. Movement
x n → xn + v n
Even though the NaSch simulation simpliﬁes real world traﬃc into a handful of variable and
simple evolution rules, the success of it is the reproduction of the fundamental diagram(ﬁgure
1). The fundamental diagram is essentially the ﬂow-density relation of a given road[6].According
to Chowdhury(2000)[3], the density at which the ﬂow is maximum divides the solution into 2
phases - free ﬂow phase and congested phase.
In our study, we ran the NaSch simulation with the following parameters:
Maximum Velocity, vmax = 6
Random Deceleration, p = 0.2
Road Length, L = 1000
Simulation Time, t = 1000
From these parameters, the fundamental diagram of the simulation is plotted in Figure 1
In Figure 1, the traﬃc ﬂow at density c = 0.10 is higher than that of density c = 0.40. The
solution at c = 0.10 is deﬁned to be in the free ﬂow phase and the solution at c = 0.40 in the
congested phase[3].
Figure 2 and Figure 3 are the space-time distribution plots of the simulations which were
ran at c = 0.10 and c = 0.40 respectively. The general features were observed in these two
ﬁgures are found in similar studies using the NaSch simulations [2]. We have also observed
traﬃc jam clusters in Figure 3.

2.2

Preliminary Results with Modiﬁed NaSch Model

As mentioned in section 1, the NaSch simulation model will be modiﬁed by adding a speed
bottleneck which simulates the eﬀect of a sharp bend. The primary eﬀect of a sharp bend on a
highway is that it will put a limit to the cars’ speeds, which are lower than the average speed
of most cars travelling on a straight path. Our speed bottleneck is then simulated by a velocity
gate, which ensures that all vehicles passing through it are under a prescribed speed limit. This
modiﬁcation is done by adding the following into the NaSch simulation:
dist = gate − j
if dist < vmax and dist > 0
vmax → min(vdecel , dist)

291

The Class File

W.L. Quek, L.Y. Chew

Figure 1: Fundamental Diagram of NaSch Simulation which shows the ﬂow-density relation of
the simulation. Parameters of the simulation is as stated above

Figure 2: Space-Time distribution of NaSchFigure 3: Space-Time distribution of NaSch
Simulation. Density c = 0.10
Simulation. Density c = 0.40

where gate is a chosen point in the simulation, j is the index of the position of the car in
consideration and vdecel is the speed limit of the gate.
The simulation is then modiﬁed with the addition of the velocity gate by the following
parameters:
Position of Velocity Gate, gate = 500
Speed Limit of Gate, vdecel = 1
292

The Class File

W.L. Quek, L.Y. Chew

With the modiﬁed NaSch simulation, the space-time distribution is plotted in ﬁgure 4 for
c = 0.10. As the velocity gate is set to slow down traﬃc, the results are as expected, i.e.
congestion was induced in the locality upstream of the velocity gate.

Figure 4: Space-Time distribution of modiﬁedFigure 5: Local density distribution modiﬁed
NaSch simulation. Velocity gate added at siteNaSch simulation. Velocity gate added at site
= 500, Density c = 0.10
= 500, Density c = 0.10
To understand how density changes due to speed bottlenecks, the distribution of the timeaveraged occupancy[7] across the sites is plotted in Figure 5. As seen in Figure 5, with the
addition of the velocity gate, there is a disparity between the density of the locality of the
bottleneck, and the density of the other segments of the road. We see an average of c = 0.10
at most sites and c ≈ 0.48 upstream of the velocity gate.
From ﬁgure 1, that is ran with the same parameters, we can see that for c = 0.10, the ﬂow is
in the free ﬂow regime. For c = 0.48, the ﬂow is classiﬁed as a congested regime. This suggests
that the speed bottleneck does cause the region near it to have an increased vehicular density.
More importantly, comparing Figure 4 with Figure 3, the congestion seen before the velocity
gate at c = 0.10 has a similar form as the c = 0.40 case without the velocity gate.
The preliminary results seem to be consistent with our hypothesis - the presence of a speed
bottleneck does increase the local density of the traﬃc ﬂow. Furthermore, the local density falls
into the regime of the congested phase of a NaSch simulation of similar parameters (Figure 1),
and that the traﬃc jam clusters shown in Figure 4 and Figure 3 are similar. Nevertheless, there
is need for a stronger indication of the similarities between the traﬃc jams with and without
bottlenecks.

3
3.1

Comparing Traﬃc ﬂow With and Without Bottlenecks
Relation to Sugiyama’s Experiment

In Sugiyama’s experiment[1], there is a relatively uniform backward velocity of the traﬃc jam
cluster which was measured to be approximately 20km/h. In the paper by Schreckenberg et
al.(1993)[8], the formation of traﬃc clusters (jams) propagates backwards to the traﬃc ﬂow
was discussed for the general case of a NaSch simulation (without any modiﬁcations). More
importantly, the characteristic of this backward propagating velocity is that it is independent
of the density c and depends only on the random deceleration probability p.
293

The Class File

W.L. Quek, L.Y. Chew

The following is a logical argument which shows a positive correlation between the dependence of the cluster velocity on the parameters, and the mechanism of the traﬃc jam formation.
As mentioned earlier, the formation of the traﬃc jams without bottleneck is driven by the ﬂuctuations in the car velocities[1]. When the vehicular density is above the critical density, the
speed ﬂuctuation of the car in position i causes a greater ﬂuctuation in the speed of car i − 1
behind it. This propagation of speed ﬂuctuation will lead to an enhancement of ﬂuctuations,
which ultimately lead to a traﬃc jam. When approaching a cluster, the systematic deceleration
of car i will lead to the decceleration of car i−1 which translates to the backward velocity of the
traﬃc jam cluster. The higher random deceleration probability of car i will then correspond
to an overreaction to the systematic deceleration due to traﬃc jam cluster, and propagates
the speed ﬂuctuation(traﬃc jam cluster) at a faster rate. Hence, one of the ways of comparing the mechanism of the traﬃc jam formation is by comparing the dependence of the cluster
velocity on the simulation parameters - density, maximum velocity and random decceleration
probability.

3.2

Measuring Jam Cluster Velocity

The NaSch simulation is ran with the following parameters:
Road Length, L = 1000
Simulation Time, t = 1000
Maximum Velocity, vmax = 6
Random Decceleration, p = 0.2
Density, c = 1.6
Position of Velocity Gate, gate = 500
Speed Limit of Gate, vdecel = 1

Figure 6: Space-Time distribution of modiﬁed
Figure 7: Space-Time distribution of NaSch
NaSch simulation. Velocity gate added at site
Simulation. Density c = 0.16
= 500, Density c = 0.16
294

The Class File

W.L. Quek, L.Y. Chew

With that, the space-time distribution of the simulation is plotted in Figure 6 and Figure
7, with and without the velocity gate respectively. The gradient of the line ﬁtted to the traﬃc
jam clusters is the backward velocities of the clusters.
The simulation is ran by varying c, vmax and p across a series of values, with and without
the velocity gate. The measurement of backward velocity of the traﬃc jam cluster for each case
is measured and the results are plotted in Figures 8, 10 and 9.

Figure 8: Cluster Velocity vs Density of cars. Data derived from measuring plot of the spacetime distribution of simulation of varying road density
Figure 8, 10 and 9 shows that regardless of the bottlenecks in the system, the velocity of
the traﬃc jam cluster remains dependent only on the random deceleration probability, and it is
relatively independent of Vmax and density. Furthermore, Figure 10 suggests that functional
relation between p and the cluster velocity is the same. However, without further analysis of
the functional relation between them, this cannot be ascertained.
From the comparison between the dependence of the cluster velocity on the parameters
with and without bottlenecks, it is likely that the mechanism of the formation of traﬃc jams
is similar. This ﬁnding aﬃrms our hypothesis that the formation of traﬃc jam at the speed
bottleneck is due to the interaction of cars at a high density region. The speed bottleneck only
causes the local density near it to increase, which triggers the interaction for traﬃc jams.

4

Future Work

The result of these studies has been linked speciﬁcally to the mechanism of traﬃc jams at a
speed bottleneck. It has also opened up various possible studies that can be done in the future.
• The ﬁndings in this study shows that the traﬃc jam mechanism is independent of the
bottlenecks - the formation of traﬃc jams are due to the interactions between cars, not
the interactions of the cars with the bottleneck mechanisms. By using other variants
295

The Class File

W.L. Quek, L.Y. Chew

Figure 9: Cluster Velocity vs Vmax. Data derived from measuring plot of the space-time
distribution of simulation of varying Vmax

Figure 10: Cluster Velocity vs Random Deceleration p, Data derived from measuring plot of
the space-time distribution of simulation of varying random deceleration parameter

of traﬃc bottlenecks, we can study whether all bottlenecks only lead to increases the
local density, and does not cause traﬃc jams directly. Furthermore, the mechanism of
bottlenecks increasing the local density can be further studied analytically.
296

The Class File

W.L. Quek, L.Y. Chew

Figure 11: Fundamental Diagram of NaSch Simulation which shows the ﬂow-density relation
of the modiﬁed NaSch simulation. Parameters of the simulation is as stated above
• There is also a resemblance between the dependence on the random deceleration probabilities between the 2 cases (Figure 10). This can be better understood if there is an
analytical relationship between the random deceleration parameters and the cluster velocities. However, no literature was found pertaining to this concept.
• In this study, we have also observed that microscopically, there is a similarity between the
NaSch simulation with and without bottlenecks. However, by plotting their fundamental
diagrams of the 2 cases(Figure 11) and Figure 1), we found that there is a macroscopic
diﬀerence in the two systems. Similar to studies done by Schreckenberg et al.(1993), the
overall eﬀect on this presence of a speed bottleneck is creating an upper bound to the
maximum allowed ﬂow of the system. Further analysis of this macroscopic diﬀerence in
the systems may provide deeper insights to the similarity and diﬀerences of these two
cases.

5

Conclusion

Traﬃc jams is an undesirable traﬃc phenomena. In Singapore’s Marina Coastal Expressway(MCE) traﬃc jam, aﬀected drivers’ time spent could translate to monetary loss and decreased productivity. Should this become a frequent occurence, there will be economic consequence to the nation. Hence, the understanding of the way traﬃc ﬂow is aﬀected by the
topology of the road is important for a country’s land authorities. In this paper, traﬃc jams
at bottlenecks have been studied, and the focus was particularly on speed bottlenecks formed
by bends on traﬃc highways, which was one of the causes of the MCE traﬃc jam in December,
2013.
Sugiyama’s 2008 paper[1] covered the physical mechanism behind the formation of traﬃc
jams without traﬃc bottlenecks. Comparing the similarities of jams with and without bottle297

The Class File

W.L. Quek, L.Y. Chew

necks suggests that the physical mechanism of the traﬃc jams at bottlenecks and the traﬃc
jams that arises spontaneously is the same. Furthermore, it is likely that the physical mechanism of the bottlenecks solely serves to increase the local density of cars and does not aﬀect
the traﬃc jam mechanism of the system. However, to substantiate this claim, further studies
has to be done on the various types of traﬃc bottlenecks.

References
[1] Yuki Sugiyama, Minoru Fukui, Macoto Kikuchi, Katsuya Hasebe, Akihiro Nakayama, Katsuhiro
Nishinari, Shin-ichi Tadaki, and Satoshi Yukawa. Traﬃc jams without bottlenecksexperimental evidence for the physical mechanism of the formation of a jam. New Journal of Physics, 10(3):033001+,
March 2008.
[2] Kai Nagel and Michael Schreckenberg. A cellular automaton model for freeway traﬃc. Journal de
Physique I, 2(12):2221–2229, December 1992.
[3] Andreas Schadschneider Debashish Chowdhury, Ludger Santen. Statistical physics of vehicular
traﬃc and some related systems. Physics Report 329, pages 199–329, 2000.
[4] Marina
coastal
expressway
http://www.lta.gov.sg/content/ltaweb/en/roads-andmotoring/projects/marina-coastal-expressway-mce.html.
[5] Akihiro Nakayama, Minoru Fukui, Macoto Kikuchi, Katsuya Hasebe, Katsuhiro Nishinari, Yuki
Sugiyama, Shin I. Tadaki, and Satoshi Yukawa. Metastability in the formation of an experimental
traﬃc jam. New Journal of Physics, 11(8):083025+, 2009.
[6] A.D. May. Traﬃc Flow Fundamentals. Prentice-Hall, 1990.
[7] A. Schadschneider and M. Schreckenberg. Disorder Eﬀects in CA-Models for Traﬃc Flow. Traﬃc
and Granular Flow 1997, 1997.
[8] A. Schadschneider and M. Schreckenberg. Cellular automaton models and traﬃc ﬂow. Journal of
Physics A: Mathematical and General, 31(31):L225, 1998.

298

