Available online at www.sciencedirect.com

Procedia Computer Science 9 (2012) 1110 – 1118

International Conference on Computational Science, ICCS 2012

Coupling wind dynamics into a DDDAS forest ﬁre propagation
prediction system
Carlos Brun∗, Tom`as Art´es∗, Tom`as Margalef∗, Ana Cort´es∗
Computer Architecture and Operating Systems Department, Escola d’Enginyeria, Universitat Aut`onoma de Barcelona, Campus UAB, Bellaterra
08193, Spain

Abstract
Natural hazards are signiﬁcant problems that every year cause important loses around the world. A good prediction
of the behavior of the hazards is a crucial issue to ﬁght against them and to minimize the damages. The models that
represent these phenomena need several input parameters and in many cases, such parameters are diﬃcult to know
or even to estimate in a real scenario. So, a methodology based on the DDDAS paradigm was developed to calibrate
the input parameters according to real observations of the behavior and evolution of the hazard. Such calibrated
parameters are then used to provide an improved prediction for the next time interval. This methodology was tested
on Forest Fire Propagation Prediction with signiﬁcant results. The developed methodology takes the ﬁre behavior
and propagation during a time interval and then searches for the values of the input parameters that best reproduce
the propagation of the ﬁre during that interval. Several Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AI) methods were applied to carry out
this search as fast as possible. The values of the parameters that best reproduce the behavior of the ﬁre were then
used as input parameters to predict the propagation during the next time interval. These parameters were considered
constant during both time intervals and a single value for each parameter was used for the calibrating process and for
the prediction stage. This methodology ﬁts on the DDDAS paradigm since the prediction is dynamically driven by
the system evolution. However, there are several parameters that are not constant through time, but they may vary
dynamically. In the case of forest ﬁres, a typical example is the wind. In some cases, when the time interval is short an
average value for the wind can be a feasible value, but when the time interval is longer, in most cases, a single value
cannot represent the variability of the wind. We can estimate wind behavior applying some complementary model. In
this work, we are going a step further considering the dynamic behavior of such parameters. We propose an extension
of the existing prediction scheme that takes into account the dynamically changing parameters by coupling a weather
prediction system on a DDDAS Forest Fire Propagation Prediction system.
Keywords: ﬁre, prediction, DDDAS, calibration, wind, simulation, ﬁre spread, genetic algorithm

∗

Email addresses: carlos.brun@caos.uab.es (Carlos Brun), tomas.artes@caos.uab.es (Tom`as Art´es), tomas.margalef@uab.es
(Tom`as Margalef), ana.cortes@uab.es (Ana Cort´es)

1877-0509 © 2012 Published by Elsevier Ltd. Open access under CC BY-NC-ND license.
doi:10.1016/j.procs.2012.04.120

Carlos Brun et al. / Procedia Computer Science 9 (2012) 1110 – 1118

1111

1. Introduction
Hurricanes, tsunamis, ﬂoods or forest ﬁres, among other natural disasters still continue producing devastating
eﬀects on the world [1]. Computational Science provides tools to tackle these phenomena and thus, to minimize their
impact. Researchers from diﬀerent ﬁelds develop models that try to represent and predict the behavior of such hazards
[2][3][4][5]. Such mathematical and physical models require some input parameters describing the conditions and
environment where the hazard is happening. Each model representing a particular hazard has its own input parameters,
but also diﬀerent models describing the same phenomenon can consider diﬀerent input parameters. In some cases,
such mathematical and physical models are used to build simulators that predict the evolution and behavior of the
considered phenomenon. These simulators are usually computationally intensive applications that handle a large
number of input parameters in order to give a prediction of the evolution of the hazard on a certain future time. The
quality of this prediction does not only depend on the model itself, but it is strongly inﬂuenced by the accuracy of the
input parameters. In most real cases, it is not possible to know precisely the values of the input parameters beforehand
and this drawback limits signiﬁcantly the accuracy of the predictions provided by the models. It must be pointed out
that parameters can be classiﬁed according to their time evolution and spatial distribution. Concerning time evolution,
there are parameters that are constant along time. For example, the terrain topography and the vegetation type of a
particular area are constant. Other parameters vary along time, but their variation is much slower than the evolution
of the phenomenon and can be considered constant during a particular hazard, but their value must be evaluated for
each particular case. This is the case of the moisture contents of vegetation. The value of this parameter depends
on the temperature, precipitation, and so on, but the vegetation dries in some days or even weeks, not in minutes.
Finally, there are parameters that vary very quickly, such as wind speed and direction, that can change suddenly. Even
when there are no sudden changes in their values, these parameters do not have constant values for long periods of
time. So, obtaining accurate data representing the state of a natural phenomenon at a particular instant is not a trivial
task. In the case of forest ﬁres, the models provide good results under stable, controlled and known conditions. Such
situations imply small ﬁres propagating for short periods of time. During such short periods of time the weather
conditions can be considered static and the terrain burned can be considered uniform. However, when real scenarios
are considered, ﬁres propagate for longer time intervals and burn wide areas with variable conditions. So, in these
cases the size of the studied area is much larger and irregular. Meteorological data are collected from weather stations,
which are often far from the focus of the forest ﬁre and the data acquisition frequency is not always the expected one.
Therefore, it is so important ﬁnding sensitive solutions to the dynamic evolution of dynamic parameters. This point
is the object of study of this work. This paper is organized as follows: Second section introduces the two-stage
prediction methodology and describes the constraints encountered. Section 3 describes the inclusion of the dynamic
behavior of some parameters such as wind speed and wind direction in the two-stage prediction methodology. In the
following section some experimental results are presented and ﬁnally section 5 summarizes some conclusions of the
work.
2. Two-stage prediction methodology
The classic way of predicting forest ﬁre behavior relies on the evolution results provided by a certain forest ﬁre
spread simulator. Typically, the input parameters needed by the underlying ﬁre simulator such as the initial state
of the ﬁre front (RF = real ﬁre), terrain characteristics, vegetation types, meteorological information and so on are
obtained/estimated at a certain time ti , fed into the simulator in order to provide a ﬁre front evolution at a later time
ti+1 . Comparing the simulation result (Simulated Fire=SF) from time ti+1 with the advanced real ﬁre (RF) at the same
instant, the forecasted ﬁre front tends to diﬀer to a greater or lesser extent from the real ﬁre line. One reason for this
mismatch is that the classic prediction of the ﬁre is based on a single set of constant and uniform input parameters. To
overcome this drawback, a simulator independent data-driven prediction scheme was proposed to optimize dynamic
model input parameters [6]. Introducing a previous calibration step as shown in Figure 1, the set of input parameters
is calibrated before every prediction step. The solution proposed come from reversing the problem: how to ﬁnd
a parameter conﬁguration such that, given this conﬁguration as input, the ﬁre simulator would produce predictions
that match the actual ﬁre behavior. This process is deﬁned as a parameter calibration process. Once, the input
parameter set that best describes the current behavior of the ﬁre has been determined, this set of parameters could
also be used to describe best the immediate future, assuming that meteorological conditions remain constant during

1112

Carlos Brun et al. / Procedia Computer Science 9 (2012) 1110 – 1118

the next prediction interval. Then, the prediction becomes the result of applying to the model a set of adjusted input
parameters. This two-stage ﬁre prediction methodology reduces the negative impact of input parameters uncertainty.
In the Calibration stage we use a Genetic Algorithm (GA) where the evolution operations applied in the GA are
driven according to the observed real ﬁre behavior. Population is formed by a set of scenarios, and each scenario an individual - represents a conﬁguration of input parameters. Each parameter is considered a gene of an individual
for the GA. For every scenario, a simulation is executed to reproduce the behavior of the ﬁre during the time interval
ti - ti+1 . The population of scenarios is evolved by applying the data driven GA a certain number of iterations. The
individual that provides the best adjustment among the simulated and real propagation after this number of iterations
is introduced in the simulator with the real ﬁre front at time ti+1 to provide a prediction at time ti+2 (SF ti+2 ). This
methodology follows the DDDAS paradigm [7] since it takes the actual evolution of the system to determine the
values of the parameters that control the system.

Figure 1: Two-stage prediction methodology

As we have just mentioned, this two stage prediction strategy provides good results when the working hypothesis
is accomplished, that means, that environmental conditions keep quite similar through the whole process (Calibration
and Prediction stages). These conditions are feasible in the case of prescribed burnings where the conditions of the
terrain, vegetation, and weather are easily controlled. In these cases, the terrain is bounded to some thousands of
square meters, with fairly stable weather conditions, uniform vegetation type and short spread times (few hours or
less). Figure 2.a shows one of this burnings. However, when this methodology is transferred to large forest ﬁres, there
is a substantial change in ﬁre conditions. In these cases, the terrain may reach hundreds of hectares, so the topography
could be very irregular, vegetation will probably be heterogeneous, there could be changing weather conditions both
in terms of place and time, and, furthermore, the ﬁre can last several days (see Figure 2.b). The dynamic behavior
of parameters such as wind speed and wind direction cannot be represented by a single value during the calibration
time interval and the same value for the prediction time interval. In a previous work, a ﬁrst approach to overcome this
drawback was proposed [8]. In that work, a mechanism to detect sudden changes in wind conditions was introduced
so that when a sudden change is detected on the wind conditions, the calibrated value for the wind parameters were
not used in the prediction stage, but the measured value of the wind parameters at the beginning of the prediction
stage was injected as input parameter in the prediction simulation. However, the main limitation of that methodology
is to evaluate the continuity of the new value of the wind parameters along the whole prediction time interval. If the
sudden change is just a peak in the wind conditions and, it is not representatives for the whole prediction interval, the
inclusion of such value in the prediction stage is unrealistic. So, new methods and strategies must be introduced in the
DDDAS Forest Fire Propagation Prediction System to be able to tackle the conditions of real big ﬁres.

Carlos Brun et al. / Procedia Computer Science 9 (2012) 1110 – 1118

1113

Figure 2: (a) Prescribed ﬁre; (b) Real ﬁre

3. Coupling wind dynamics on a DDDAS Forest Fire Propagation System.
From the previous discussion it can be stated that including wind dynamic behavior in the two-stage prediction
process must improve ﬁre spread prediction quality when dealing with large scale forest ﬁres. Such wind dynamic
behavior must be considered in both stages, calibration and prediction. In the calibration stage, the data concerning
the time interval ti - ti+1 is available. So, in this stage, the simulations executed to reproduce the behavior during
the interval ti - ti+1 , can be fed with the real measured values of the wind parameters during that interval. It implies
that the simulation of the forest ﬁre propagation does not consider constant values for the wind parameters, but the
measured value for each time subinterval is injected in the simulator. So, these wind parameters are not introduced in
the individuals of the GA and are not calibrated. The other parameters concerning moisture contents and vegetation
features are calibrated in the calibration stage. This methodology is represented in Figure 3.

Figure 3: Proposed methodology with dynamic parameters injection

An additional advantage of the introduction of the wind parameters in the calibration stage instead of calibrating
them as another gene is that the search space for the GA is signiﬁcantly reduced and, therefore, the other parameters
considered in the GA can reach better values and this fact allows reaching smaller calibration errors in shorter time.
In the prediction stage, it is not possible to introduce the exact dynamic values of the wind parameters beforehand. To
overcome this limitation a numerical weather prediction (NWP) model [9] can be used to predict the wind dynamic
behavior coupling the above described forest ﬁre spread prediction system and a NWP (see Figure 4). In this case, the
quality of the forest ﬁre propagation prediction signiﬁcantly depends on the quality of the wind parameters prediction
obtained from the NWP. A similar idea has been recently proposed in [10][11][12]. These works show the beneﬁts of
considering the inﬂuence of the heat ﬂux generated by the ﬁre itself into the surface wind of the meteorological model.

1114

Carlos Brun et al. / Procedia Computer Science 9 (2012) 1110 – 1118

However, those approaches are focused on interfacing intra-models for executing a unique ﬁre simulation evolution.
In our work, as it has been stated, we do not rely on a unique simulation, but on the execution of thousands of them.
The way we propose to couple both models are in a pipeline way were the values obtained at each NWP step is fed in
the corresponding ﬁre simulation step as is shown in Figure 4.

Figure 4: Calibration stage with dynamic observed parameters injection

4. Experimental results
In this section we describe the experimental study carried out to demonstrate the prediction quality improvements
when coupling forest ﬁre spread model with weather forecast systems. FARSITE simulator [13], based on Rothermel
ﬁre propagation model[14], has been used as forest ﬁre spread simulator and, as it was previously mentioned, we rely
on Genetic Algorithm (GA) as a Calibration strategy. We used a population size of 50 individuals and the number of
iterations has been set to 10. In order to avoid random eﬀects, each experiment has been repeated ten times and the
results shown below are the mean value of the corresponding ten results. As a experiment’s ﬁre to test our proposal,
we have used a synthetic ﬁre. This experiment’s ﬁre is generated using a synthetic irregular topography where the size
of the terrain is about several thousand square kilometers. The map has 459 rows and 550 columns and, every cell has
a resolution of 30 meters. This synthetic terrain is divided in 4 regions (see ﬁgure 5). The ﬁrst region is a ﬂat terrain
followed by an upslope of 26 degrees corresponding to the second region. The third region is a downslope equivalent
to the second region and ﬁnally, there is another ﬂat terrain that ends the map. Vegetation is the same in the whole
terrain and it is based on model 7 from Albini classiﬁcation [15], based on a chaparral and shrub ﬁelds vegetation.
Experiment’s ﬁre wind varies from 3 to 15 mph in both experiment’s ﬁres used as benchmark. The ignition point has
been placed in the ﬁrst region and, due to wind conditions, ﬁre propagates towards second region.
The ﬁre propagates during 8 hours and wind direction and wind speed is changed every 30 minutes. Calibration
stage will consider the time interval from hour 0 to 4 and Prediction stage will predict the ﬁre behavior from hour 4 to
8. In particular, we are interested in showing the beneﬁts of predicting very dynamic parameters such as wind speed
and wind direction when the working hypothesis for the two-stages prediction method is not accomplished. For this
purpose, we organize this section in two parts:
• Homogeneous conditions scenarios: in this set of scenarios we will introduce a slight variability in wind parameters from Calibration stage to Prediction stage in such a way that the working hypothesis is accomplished;
• Heterogeneous conditions scenarios: in this set of scenarios sudden changes are introduced both in wind speed
and wind direction during the Prediction stage and, therefore, the working hypothesis is broken.

1115

Carlos Brun et al. / Procedia Computer Science 9 (2012) 1110 – 1118

Figure 5: Elevation map of synthetic terrain used in the experiments

Prediction scheme
Experiment 1: Basic two-stage prediction
Experiment 2: Real Data Assimilation
Experiment 3: Models Coupling

Input. Parameters
Wind
Fuel Moisture
Wind
Fuel Moisture
Wind
Fuel Moisture

Calibration Stage
Random Values
Random Values
Real Data Sampling
Random Values
Real Data Sampling
Random Values

Prediction Stage
Calibrated values
Calibrated Values
Real Unique Value
Calibrated Values
Forecasted Values
Calibrated Values

Table 1: Settings of wind, moisture and fuel characteristics input parameters for each experiment.

In both cases, we carry out three diﬀerent kinds of experiments. The ﬁrst kind of experiment is the basic twostage experiment (Experiment 1). In these experiments, the wind conditions, moisture values and fuel conditions are
introduced as genes in the individuals of the GA population. So, the wind speed and wind direction are calibrated
by the genetic algorithm as the other parameters. During the time interval ti - ti+1 , the values of the parameters are
considered constant. The calibrated values provided by the genetic algorithm for all the parameters are then used as
input parameters for the prediction stage during the time interval ti - ti+1 .
In the second kind of experiments (Real data assimilation Experiment 2), the wind conditions are not calibrated,
but their measured values are assimilated dynamically on each subinterval (1 hour) in the simulations of the calibration
stage. We consider that wind speed and direction are measured every 60 minutes instead of the 30 minutes real wind
evolution. In real wildﬁre cases, the wind data frequency depends on meteorological data sources of the studied zone.
These measured values are not the same as the ones which are used to generate experiment’s ﬁre but these values
have some measurement error. So the parameters that are calibrated by the GA are the moisture parameters and fuel
conditions. In the prediction stage, the calibrated moisture and fuel parameters and the last measure of the wind
parameters are used. So, the prediction is based on a single measured value for the wind conditions.
The third kind of experiment is the model coupling experiment (Experiment 3). In these experiments, the calibration stage behaves like in experiment 2. The wind conditions are assimilated dynamically and the moisture and fuel
parameters are calibrated. However, for the prediction stage the wind conditions are provided by a NWP model, such
as WRF. The experiment’s synthetic ﬁre considers that the wind conditions changes every 30 minutes. For testing our
approach, we assume that the NWP model provides values that have a small deviation from the ones of the ﬁre used
as benchmark. So, we are not injecting the real value of the wind conditions, but we are injecting certain perturbation
on these values. The range of the perturbation is generated considering the statistical behavior of weather predictions.
Table 1 summarizes how each one of the three kind of experiments manages the most sensitive input parameters such
as wind speed and wind direction and the four moisture components: moisture content of dead fuel at 1 hour (M1),
moisture content of dead fuel at 10 hours (M10), moisture content of dead fuel at 100 hours (M100) and moisture
content of live fuel (Mherb). Figure 6 shows the time evolution of wind speed and wind direction considered in the

1116

Carlos Brun et al. / Procedia Computer Science 9 (2012) 1110 – 1118

experiment’s synthetic ﬁre, and in the 3 experiments for the homogeneous scenarios. Figure 7 shows the time evolution of wind speed and wind direction considered in the experiments for the heterogeneous scenarios. It is important
to note what is an homogeneous and an heterogeneous scenario in this work. In homogeneous scenarios, the average
of the values in calibration stage is similar to the average in prediction stage. Although the values of wind components
of experiment’s ﬁre in Figure 6 are very irregular the average of these values in every stage is almost the same. In
heterogeneous scenarios (see ﬁgure 7), the diﬀerence of the average of these values between stages is greater than in
homogeneous conditions.
The quality of each approach is measured by an error function. The error function considered is the symmetric
diﬀerence among the real burned area and the predicted burned area. In the optimal case, the real and the predicted
burned area coincide and the symmetric diﬀerence is 0. The following subsections show the experimental results for
the homogeneous and heterogeneous conditions scenarios.

Figure 6: Wind speed and direction considered for the diﬀerent experiments in the homogeneous conditions scenarios

Figure 7: Wind speed and direction considered for the diﬀerent experiments in the heterogeneous conditions scenarios

4.1. Homogeneous conditions
The experiments settings used in this experimental block correspond to a wind speed and wind direction samplings
with low variability between calibration and prediction stage. The average of wind speed values in calibration stage
is 8 mph and 9.25 in prediction stage. In wind direction case, the average is 258.3 degrees in calibration stage and
255.6 in prediction stage. As we can observe, the conditions are almost the same on average. Under this favorable
conditions, the basic two-stages prediction method best works. Figure 8 represents the mean errors obtained in the
three described experiments for the calibration and prediction stages.
It can be observed in Figure 8 that the calibration and prediction errors are quite similar in the three experiments.
This was the expected behavior since the wind conditions are quite stable during the whole calibration and prediction
stages and then a single value can represent the wind behavior quite successfully. However, even in the favorable case,
the results show a tendency to reduce the error when the weather prediction model is introduced and the wind values
for the prediction stage are considered.

Carlos Brun et al. / Procedia Computer Science 9 (2012) 1110 – 1118

1117

Figure 8: Calibration and prediction mean errors for the experiments on homogeneous conditions

4.2. Heterogeneous conditions
In this case, wind conditions (speed and direction) are not constant, but they present a higher degree of variability
between stages. The average of wind speed values in calibration stage is 6.1mph and 11.5 in prediction stage. This
average, in wind direction case, is 225.4 degrees in calibration stage and 305 degrees in prediction stage. It means that
the wind conditions are signiﬁcantly diﬀerent in the calibration and prediction intervals. Figure 9 presents the mean
error values for the 3 considered experiments in the calibration and prediction stages.

Figure 9: Calibration and prediction mean errors for the experiments on heterogeneous conditions

It can be observed that the calibration error is quite similar in the three experiments, because the wind conditions
are more or less stable during that interval. However, since there is a sudden change in the wind conditions during the
prediction interval, the prediction error is signiﬁcantly diﬀerent. Experiment 3, where the wind conditions during the
prediction stage are injected from the predictions of a NWP model reduces the error signiﬁcantly. Experiment 2, that
considers the wind conditions at time ti+1 for the whole interval ti - ti+1 , produces the worst prediction results since
the wind conditions considered are not representative for the time prediction interval.

1118

Carlos Brun et al. / Procedia Computer Science 9 (2012) 1110 – 1118

5. Conclusions
Natural hazard evolution prediction is a key issue to minimize the damage. There are physical and mathematical
models that try to represent the behavior of such hazards. These models require certain input parameters that in some
cases are diﬃcult to know or even estimate during a real emergency. This input parameter uncertainty is a serious
drawback and provoke that in most cases the evolution predictions are not enough accurate. A two stage methodology
was developed. In this methodology a calibration stage based on observation of real evolution was introduced to determine the values of the parameters tat best represent the evolution of the hazard. However, there are certain parameters
that present a dynamic behavior and vary during the evolution of the emergency. For these dynamic parameters the
calibration process is not feasible when the condition changes from the calibration interval to the prediction interval.
In this case it is necessary to introduce some complementary model that can predict the evolution of the dynamic
parameters to inject the predicted values for these parameters in the prediction stage. In this work, the forest ﬁre propagation has been considered. The wind speed and direction are parameters that aﬀect the ﬁre propagation, but they
have a dynamic behavior and in most real cases they are not constant during the calibration and prediction stages. This
is particularly true when the ﬁre takes several hours or even days and burns hundreds of hectares. So, the coupling of
a Numerical Weather Prediction model has been considered with the DDDAS forest ﬁre propagation system has been
considered. The results show that when the wind conditions are quite stable the estimation of a constant value for
the wind is a good approach. However, when the dynamic behavior is more signiﬁcant and the wind conditions vary
from the calibration to the prediction stage the wind parameters cannot be calibrated but they must be predicted by a
weather prediction model. The preliminary results are very signiﬁcant and the prediction error is reduced.
Acknowledgements
This research has been supported by MICINN-Spain TIN2007-64974 and TIN2011-28689-C02-01.
References
[1] E. Chuvieco, D. X. Viegas, L. M. Ribeiro, M. T. Viegas, L. P. Pita, C. Rossa, Impacts of ﬁre on society: Extreme ﬁre propagation issues,
in: Earth Observation of Wildland Fires in Mediterranean Ecosystems, Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2009, pp. 97–109, 10.1007/978-3-64201754-4 8.
[2] P. J. Vickery, J. Lin, P. F. Skerlj, J. Lawrence A. Twisdale, K. Huang, Hazus-mh hurricane model methodology. i: Hurricane hazard, terrain,
and wind load modeling, Natural Hazards Review 7 (2) (2006) 82–93.
[3] V. V. Titov, F. I. Gonzalez, Implementation and testing of the method of splitting tsunami (most) model, Tech. rep., NOAA Technical
Memorandum ERL PMEL-112, 11 pp UNIDATA (1997).
[4] P. Bates, A. D. Roo, A simple raster-based model for ﬂood inundation simulation, Journal of Hydrology 236 (1–2) (2000) 54–77.
[5] G. Bianchini, M. Denham, A. Cort´es, T. Margalef, E. Luque, Wildland ﬁre growth prediction method based on multiple overlapping solution.,
J. Comput. Science 1 (4) (2010) 229–237.
[6] M. Denham, A. Cort´es, T. Margalef, E. Luque, Applying a dynamic data driven genetic algorithm to improve forest ﬁre spread prediction,
in: M. Bubak, G. van Albada, J. Dongarra, P. Sloot (Eds.), Computational Science – ICCS 2008, Vol. 5103 of Lecture Notes in Computer
Science, Springer Berlin / Heidelberg, 2008, pp. 36–45, 10.1007/978-3-540-69389-5 6.
[7] F. Darema, Dynamic data driven applications systems: A new paradigm for application simulations and measurements, in: M. Bubak, G. van
Albada, P. Sloot, J. Dongarra (Eds.), Computational Science - ICCS 2004, Vol. 3038 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, Springer Berlin
/ Heidelberg, 2004, pp. 662–669, 10.1007/978-3-540-24688-6 86.
[8] A. Cencerrado, R. Rodr´ıguez, A. Cort´es, T. Margalef, Urgency versus accuracy: Dynamic driven application system natural hazard management, International Journal of Numerical analysis and Modeling (9) (2012) 432–448.
[9] W. W. Group, Weather research and forecasting (WRF) model, Director (INT-115).
[10] J. L. Coen, Simulation of the big elk ﬁre using coupled atmosphere–ﬁre modeling, Int. J. Wildland Fire 14 (1) (2005) 49–59.
[11] T. Clark, J. Coen, D. Latham, Description of a coupled atmosphere–ﬁre model, Int. J. Wildland Fire 13 (1) (2004) 49–63.
[12] J. Mandel, J. D. Beezley, A. K. Kochanski, Coupled atmosphere-wildland ﬁre modeling with wrf 3.3 and sﬁre 2011, Geoscientiﬁc Model
Development 4 (3) (2011) 591–610.
[13] M. A. Finney, FARSITE, Fire Area Simulator–model development and evaluation, Res. Pap. RMRS-RP-4, Ogden, UT: U.S. Department of
Agriculture, Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Research Station, 1998.
[14] R. C. Rothermel, A mathematical model for predicting ﬁre spread in wildland fuels, Director (INT-115) (1972) 40.
[15] F. Albini, Estimating wildﬁre behavior and eﬀects, USDA Forest Service, Intermountain Forest and Range Experiment Station , General
Technical Report INT-30 (1976) 92 pp.

