Procedia Computer Science
Volume 80, 2016, Pages 1202–1211
ICCS 2016. The International Conference on Computational
Science

Using Computational Fluid Dynamics (CFD) for Blast
Wave Propagation under Structure
Arif S. M. Sohaimi*, M. S. Risby†, Saiddi A. F. M. Ishak, Khalis S., M. N.
Norazman, Ariffin. I., M. A. Yusof
Protection and Survivability Research Unit (PROTECT), Faculty of Engineering, Universiti
Pertahanan Nasional Malaysia, Sungai Besi Camp, 57000 Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia.
arifmsohaimi@gmail.com, risby@upnm.edu.my

Abstract
In recent years, improvised explosive devices has been an aspect of crusades by terrorist or movements
around the world. The blast wave propagation of an explosive detonation can cause disastrous damage
on the buildings, vehicles and also injuries to vehicle occupants. Full scale blast tests are expensive and
time consuming but by using computational based numerical simulations can virtually predict these
wave propagations and minimize the need of experimental testing. Computational fluid dynamics (CFD)
is a common tool to do an analysis of free-field blast wave and against structure. This paper presents
two different blast analyses; free field air blast and blast loading towards a structure using ANSYS
FLUENT software. A high explosive of 1 kg blast peak overpressure data from an experiment has been
patched at the specific domain of the symmetry plane. The computed results were found to be in
agreement with theoretical and additional experimental data. The verified free field air blast model was
expanded to study the blast loading response towards a structure. It was found that developed CFD can
be further used to predict the blast wave propagation subjected to the vehicle structures or buildings.
Keywords: Blast wave, Computational fluid dynamics, Boundary condition, ANSYS FLUENT

1 Introduction
Explosion is a massive release of energy. It is can be classified as physical, nuclear or chemical
events. In physical explosions, solid explosives such as high explosives on the blast effects are
commonly studied. Explosives such as (TNT) and ANFO when exploded would generate blast waves
that can result in extensive damages to the buildings and environments (Ngo et al., 2007). Blast waves
can be defined as pressure-based waves propagating in the vicinity of the explosive charge and shock
waves serve as the stress-based wave in the protective structure and in turn developed as an outcome of
*
†

Masterminded EasyChair and created the first stable version of this document
Created the first draft of this document

1202

Selection and peer-review under responsibility of the Scientiﬁc Programme Committee of ICCS 2016
c The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V.

doi:10.1016/j.procs.2016.05.463

Using Computational Fluid Dynamics for Blast Wave Propagation

Arif S. et al

the interaction of structure and blast wave (Grujicic et al., 2013). The interactions of blast wave with an
object ignites with an explosion followed by fast chemical reactions. Blast waves caused the air to be
rejected by the explosion. Destruction of an object that is exposed to the blast wave entirely depends on
the complicated interactions of blast wave with the structure. When a blast appears near to the military
vehicles, the explosion wave formed by the detonating explosive impacts skeptically to the combating
capacity of the vehicle and passengers (Yang et al., 2013). Blast explosions induced by accidents or
intentional attacks have resulted in severe damages to buildings and extreme casualties all over the world
(Lee, 2009).
Nevertheless, conducting a field blast test has its own significant disadvantages such as it requires
expensive sensors and the demand for remote test facilities. Experimental setup to generate blast waves
needs the usage real explosives. So, they may be risky and costly. Hence, numerical simulations can be
a good alternative in the investigation of blast events. Recent research and advancement work related to
numerical simulation is vital to overcome these considerable issues, which is structural response and
propagation of blast waves using finite element methods ( Fairlie, 1998). Additionally, computational
fluid dynamics (CFD) approach is seldom used but can be utilized for simulating blast waves (Alpman
et al., 2007).
In recent years there has been considerable interest in evaluating the use of Computational Fluid
Dynamics (CFD) in the blast wave related studies (Hansen et al., 2010 and Tulach et al., 2015). CFD
has wide application prospects because it is able to create big domains as required and present varied
post-process functions such as pathlines, contour, vector, report, animation and plot. Anyway, there a
few studies found on blast wave propagation, mostly related to validating the applicability of
Computational Fluid Dynamics (CFD) in simulating blast events. The challenges of using CFD to
simulate blasts are that it does not possess a specific blast detonation algorithm or subroutine as typically
available in the finite element based solvers. The present work describes method for modeling and
predicting free field air-blast and the blast loading under structure using ANSYS FLUENT. For this
simulation work, an initial "guess'' for the solution of the blast wave flow field where certain functions
or “patch” value is provided for selected flow variables in selected CFD boundary mesh zones. The
initial value was taken from a free field air blast experimentation using high explosives. The validated
CFD simulation model is then extended to investigate the blast wave response upon impact towards a
structural object.

2 Experimental Work
A free field air blast test was conducted using 1 kg plastic explosive (PE4) at 1m standoff as shown
in Figure 1. The transmitted wave or blast peak-overpressure from the detonation was measured using
pressure probes at two different position from the explosive position namely, 1.5 and 4 meters. The
pressure probe implements the following Eq. 1 (Sidik & Risby, 2013):
ܲ‫ ݁ݎݑݏݏ݁ݎ‬ൌ ቀ
‫ܥ‬௙௫
ܸ௠௘௔௦

=
=

஼೑ೞ
௏೐ೣ

Full scale capacity (kPa)
Measured voltage

ቁൈቀ

௏೘೐ೌೞ
஼ி

ቁ

ܸ௘௫
‫ܨܥ‬

(Eq. 1)
=
=

Excitation voltage
Calibration factor (ܸ݉ Τܸ )

1203

Using Computational Fluid Dynamics for Blast Wave Propagation

Arif S. et al

(a)

(b)

Figure 1: (a) Schematic of free field air blast test setup; (b) Actual test setup using 1 kg PE4.

The maximum blast peak-overpressure can also be computed based from the shock wave parameters for
an explosion occurring in the unlimited atmosphere of an ideal gas as shown in Eq. 1.1 (Brode, 1959)
and Eq.1.2 (Cranz, 1926; Hopkinson, 1915):
ܳԢଷ ൌ 

ொ‫כ‬ೢ
௉బ

ൌ

ସగ
௉బ

ோ

௨మ

ସగோ య ᢥ

‫׬‬଴ ᢥ ܳ ቀ‫ ܧ‬൅  ଶ ቁ ܴଶ ܴ݀ െ  ଷሺ௞ିଵሻ

(Eq. 1.1)

Where,
ܳ ‫כ‬௪ = Explosion energy
ܴᢥ = Radius of the shock-wave front
ோ
ܴത ൌ  య ሾ݉Ȁ݇݃ଵȀଷ ሿ
ξௐ

(Eq. 1.2)

Where,
ܴത = reduced distance ሾ݉Ȁ݇݃ଵȀଷ ሿ
R = charge center distance [m]
W = charge weight [kg]
Naumenko & Petrovskyi (1956) have also established similar formula on the basis of theory of model
similarity whereas the coefficients were derived from several experimental results (Eq. 1.3).
οܲᢥ ൌ 

଴Ǥ଻଺
ோത

൅

ଶǤହହ
ோത మ

଺Ǥହ

൅  ത య ቂ
ோ

௞௣
௖௠మ

ቃ ǡͳ ൑ ܴത  ൑ ͳͷ

(Eq. 1.3)

3 Numerical Simulation
In general, ANSYS FLUENT do not possess any specific explosive algorithm or subroutine for blast
problems compared to establish finite element solver such LSDYNA 3D and ABAQUS. For inlet
condition (blast source), the initial blast pressure needs to be defined using profile or patch (Cong, 2014).
Within this study, an initial blast pressure (from experimental data) was used as the initial input value

1204

Using Computational Fluid Dynamics for Blast Wave Propagation

Arif S. et al

for blast source using a patch method. Several points in the computational domain was set for correlation
purpose with the experimental setup of the pressure probes. The pressure vs time history of these points
was computed by ANSYS FLUENT, which later can be compared with experiment data.

3.1 Free field air-blast model
The overall test domain created was modelled as a rectangular box with the dimension of 50 m x 50 m.
Blast input boundary was modelled as an arc with radius of 1.5m, which corresponds to the standoff
distance from the first pressure probe as shown in Figure 1(a). The two monitored points corresponding
to the two pressure probe are shown in Figure 2. Meshing process, which is integrated in ANSYS
Workbench 15.0, was used to generate mesh for the domain. The model was developed using 15,575
nodes and 15,333 elements for the computational domain. Body sizing setup for the blast source was set
to ‘fine’ in order to obtain a high accuracy in the computed results. Density-based and transient solver
was selected for the supersonic compressible flow and also due to the time-dependent nature of
explosions. The inviscid flow function was used as the shock wave capturing method and typically used
in shock wave simulation in shock tunnel (Ofengeim & Drikakis, 1997). Inviscid flow gave a results in
solving complicated flow physics. ANSYS FLUENT software solves the Euler equations. The mass,
momentum and energy conservation equations are shown in Eq. 2.1, 2.2 and 2.3 (ANSYS Inc, 2009):
డఘ
డ௧

ൌ  ‫  ׏‬ή  ሺߩ‫ݒ‬Ԧሻ ൌ ܵ௠

‫  ׏‬ή  ‫ݒ‬Ԧ ൌ 
డ
డ௧

డ௩ഖ
డఞ

൅

డ௩ೝ
డ௥

(Eq. 2.1)
௩

൅ ೝ
௥

ሺߩ‫ܧ‬ሻ ൅ ‫ ׏‬ή ൫‫ݒ‬Ԧሺߩ‫ ܧ‬൅ ‫݌‬ሻ൯ ൌ  െ‫ ׏‬ή ൫σ௝ ݄௝ ‫ܬ‬௝ ൯ ൅ ܵ௛ 

(Eq. 2.2)
(Eq. 2.3)

For the initial value or “Patch Method” to execute the CFD solution process, the measured blast peak
overpressure from 1.5 m standoff distance will be used as the startup value.
50 m

50 m
1 kg of PE4

(a)
(b)
Figure 3: (a) Model of geometry in the ANSYS FLUENT; (b) Patched method

1205

Using Computational Fluid Dynamics for Blast Wave Propagation

Arif S. et al

3.2 Blast Loading under Structure
In order to investigate the blast wave response towards a structural object, a capsule model with
dimension of 2.4 m x 1.4 m x 2 m was developed (as shown in Figure 4). The computational domain
was created with the dimension of 10 m x 15 m. Blast input boundaries was modelled as a half spherical
with a diameter of 1.5m, which corresponds to the standoff of the first pressure probe as shown in Figure
5.

1 kg of PE4

Figure 4: Geometry of capsule

Parallel processing mode was selected in order to reduce the computational time and double
precision mode was selected because of the high pressure simulation. Density-based and transient solver
was selected for the supersonic compressible flow (time-dependent). Roe-FDS with a Green-Gauss node
based was preferred for convective flux types and spatial discretization scheme, which is more accurate
and recommended for most cases by ANSYS FLUENT. Patch method updates the flow-field data based
on the input and allows to patch different values of flow variables into different cells. In this case,
pressure variable was used in patch panel to initiate the blast wave based on pressure input.

Figure 5: Boundary condition for blast loading on capsule

1206

Using Computational Fluid Dynamics for Blast Wave Propagation

Arif S. et al

4 Results
4.1 Free Air Blast
Result from Table 1 and Figure 6 shows that theoretical blast over-peak pressure value is in
agreement with the measured experimental data at 1.5 and 4.5 meter standoff distance. At 4.5 m distance,
the over-pressure largely differs and can be assumed the weakening of shock waves flow was due to the
condensation of humidity (Doerffer, 2000), which is predominant in tropic countries. The CFD
simulation result at 4.5 meter using the initial patch value of 413 kPa also shows a slightly 57% error
compared to the theoretical but a huge difference compared to the experimental value. This can be
assumed that due to CFD simulation was modelled in an ideal condition and no humidity parameter was
induced into the computed model.
Table 1: Results of peak overpressure in free air blast from various methods

Standoff Distance
Theoretical (Naumenko & Petrovskyi, 1956)
Experiment
CFD Simulation

1.5 m
432 kPa
413 kPa
413 kPa (initiate as Patch Value)

4.5 m
41.88 kPa
13.2 kPa
65.73 kPa

Figure 6: Free air blast results
Figure 7 shows the propagation of blast wave and interaction in computational domain. Blast
phenomenon can be seen from Figure 7, starting from 5 ms where it can be shown that the blast wave
expanded uniformly and at high speed.

1207

Using Computational Fluid Dynamics for Blast Wave Propagation

Arif S. et al

Figure 7: Pressure contour of free air-blast

4.2 Blast Loading response toward a structure
Figure 8 shows the pressure contour and propagation of blast wave and interaction with the capsule
model on a symmetry plane. Blast wave phenomenon started from 1 ms onwards. The blast wave start
to interact with the structure at t = 1 ms. When the blast wave hits the capsule wall, its start to reflect
the blast wave and decrease the pressure of the blast. The diffraction of blast wave can be seen from t =
1.5 ms until t = 9.5 ms. Pressure contour subjected to capsule model was shown in Figure 9. Blast wave
start to interact with capsule wall at t = 0.5 ms and start to propagate around the capsule wall. Figure 10
shows the blast loading under structure pressure-time monitored point data with three different locations;
front, bottom and top of the capsule. The highest pressure been recorded from ‘front’ monitored point
(Figure 12) is 63.76 kPa at 2.21 ms due to the position near from the blast source. For the ‘bottom’
monitored point (Figure 12) the highest pressure data been recorded is 33.87 kPa at 3.98 ms and lastly
for ‘top’ monitored point (Figure 11) is 6.61 kPa at 7.15 ms. ‘Top’ pressure lower than ‘bottom’ and
‘front’ because the blast wave start to decrease the pressure due to the diffraction and reflected wave
against the capsule wall. These results are helpful to better understand blast wave propagation and
effects against the structure wall.

1208

Using Computational Fluid Dynamics for Blast Wave Propagation

Arif S. et al

Figure 9: Pressure contour of blast loading under capsule

Figure 10: Pressure contour of the capsule

1209

Using Computational Fluid Dynamics for Blast Wave Propagation

Arif S. et al

Figure 11: Blast loading under structure pressure-time monitored point data; Front, bottom and top

5 Conclusion
Predicting blast wave propagation in a free field condition and its interaction on structures such as
a vehicle is important to understand the severity of its tenacious nature. CFD has advantages in accuracy,
saves time and is widely used since it can visualize the wave patterns from the explosive detonation. To
verify the capability of CFD in simulating blast wave, this research performed CFD simulations of free
field blast and blast loading subjected to capsule model. Based on the results on free field air blast
simulation using CFD, it is slightly different data on experimental result but moderately similar with the
theoretical data. Factors that affected the accuracy of these results are based on the mesh size and solver
settings. One of the major limitations of CFD when simulating blast waves, is CFD does not provide
explosive materials to be set up for initial blast pressure. With this setting, ANSYS FLUENT will be
more efficient and become one of tools to predict blast wave propagation.

6 Acknowledgement
The authors wish to acknowledge the research grant provided by Long Term Research Grant Scheme
(LRGS/B-U/2013/UPNM/DEFENCE&SECURITY-P3) from the Malaysian Ministry of Education that
lead to the realization of this work.

1210

Using Computational Fluid Dynamics for Blast Wave Propagation

Arif S. et al

References
Alpman, E., Long, L. N., Chen, C.-C., & Linzell, D. G. (2007). Prediction of Blast Loads on Deformable
Steel Plate Using Eular Equations. In 18th AIAA Computational Fluid Dynamics Conference.
ANSYS Inc. (2009). ANSYS FLUENT 12.0 User’s Guide.
Brode, H. L. (1959). Blast Wave from a Spherical Charge. Physics of Fluids, 2(2), 217–229.
Cong, Y. (2014). Use of Efficient Computational Fluid Dynamics ( CFD ) Techniques to Predict Blast
Loads on Structures.
Cranz, C. (1926). LIehrbuch der Ballistik. Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg.
Doerffer, P., Szumowski, A., & Yu, S. (2000). The Effect of Air Humidity on Shock Wave Induced
Incipient Separation. J. of Thermal Science, 9(1), 45–50.
G. E. Fairlie. (1998). The Numerical Simulation of High Explosives using AUTODYN-2D & 3D. Explo
98’, Institute of Explosive Engineers, 4th Biannual Symposium, England.
Grujicic, M., Snipes, J., & Chandrasekharan, N. (2013). Computational analysis of fluid-structure
interaction based blast-mitigation effects. Proceedings of the Institution of Mechanical Engineers,
Part L: Journal of Materials: Design and Applications, 227(2), 124–142.
Hansen, O. R., Hinze, P., Engel, D., & Davis, S. (2010). Using computational fluid dynamics (CFD) for
blast wave predictions. Journal of Loss Prevention in the Process Industries, 23(6), 885–906.
Hopkinson, B. (1915). British Ordnance Board Minutes 13565.
Lee, K. (2009). Local response of W-shaped steel columns under blast loading, 31(1), 25–38.
Naumenko, I. A., & Petrovskyi, I. G. (1956). The Shock Wave of a Nuclear Explosion.
Ngo, T., Mendis, P., Gupta, A., & Ramsay, J. (2007). Blast Loading and Blast Effects on Structures –
An Overview. eJSE International, (Special Issue : Loading on Structure), 76–91.
Ofengeim, D. K., & Drikakis, D. (1997). Simulation of blast wave propagation over a cylinder. Shock
Waves, 7, 305–317.
Sidik, U., & Risby, M. S. (2013). Experimental and Numerical Investigations of Free Field and
Underground Wave Propagations Subjected to Blast Loading.
Tulach, A., Mynarz, M., & Kozubková, M. (2015). CFD simulation of vented explosion and turbulent
flame propagation. In EPJ Web of Conferences (Vol. 1, pp. 1–6).
Yang, Y., Liou, W. W., Sheng, J., Gorsich, D., & Arepally, S. (2013). Shock wave impact simulation of
a vehicle occupant using fluid/structure/dynamics interactions. International Journal of Impact
Engineering, 52, 11–22.

1211

