Available online at www.sciencedirect.com

Procedia Computer Science 18 (2013) 2468 – 2471

International Conference on Computational Science, ICCS 2013

Research on Scheduling Scheme for Hadoop clusters
Jiong Xiea,b , FanJun Mengc , HaiLong Wangc , HongFang Panb ,
JinHong Chengb , Xiao Qina
a Inner

Mongolia Electric Power Information and Communication Center, Hohhot, China
of Computer Science and Software Engineering, Auburn University, Auburn, AL 36849-5347, USA
c Computer & Information Engineering College, Inner Mongolia Normal University, Hohhot, China

b Department

Abstract
In this paper, we import a prefetching mechanism into MapReduce model while retaining compatibility with the native Hadoop.
Given a data-intensive application running on a Hadoop MapReduce cluster, our approach estimates the execution time of each
task and adaptively preloads an amount of data to the memory before the new task is assigned to the computing node. We
implement a predictive schedule and prefetching (PSP) mechanism, which is integrated into the native MapReduce runtime
system. We also evaluate performance on a 10-node cluster using two popular benchmarks–grep and wordcount. The PSP
mechanism reduces the execution time of grep and wordcount up to 28 % with an average of 19%. Moreover, the PSP model
increases the overall throughput and improves the I/O utilization. Because of the limitation of length, we did not present the
experiment result detail in this paper.
Keywords: MapReduce; Prefetching; Schedule.

1. introduction
In the past decade, the MapReduce framework has been employed to develop a wide variety of data-intensive
applications in large-scale systems. In this paper, we observe the data movement and task process pattern of
MapReduce, and design a prefetching mechanism to solve this problem so as to improve the performance.
Four factors make predictive scheduling and prefetching desirable and possible:
1. the underutilization of CPU processes
2. the growing importance of MapReduce performance
3. the Hadoop ﬁle distribution model oﬀer data storage information
4. interaction between master node with slave nodes.
Our preliminary results [1] show that CPU and IO workload are underutilized while they are working on a dataintensive application. In MaReduce model, HDFS(Hadoop Distributed File System) is tuned to support large ﬁles,
typically ﬁle sizes in HDFS range from gigabytes to terabytes in size. HDFS spilt the big ﬁles to several partition
and distribute to hundreds of nodes in a single cluster, The HDFS center store the index information, called meta
data to manage several partition. These partition is the the basic data element in HDFS, the size of which by
∗ Jiong

Xie. Tel.: +86-186-7247-4088.
E-mail address: JZX0009@auburn.edu.

1877-0509 © 2013 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. Open access under CC BY-NC-ND license.
Selection and peer review under responsibility of the organizers of the 2013 International Conference on Computational Science
doi:10.1016/j.procs.2013.05.423

Jiong Xie et al. / Procedia Computer Science 18 (2013) 2468 – 2471

2469

default is 64MB. The big block size can hidden the seeking latencies. However, because of the big block size, the
transfer time of data access dominate the whole process time, and the stall for IO is also a signiﬁcant factor in the
process time. This suggests that prefetching are needed to boost IO performance and improve the performance.
The second factor encourage our prefetching mechanism is that ever-faster CPUs are processing data more
quickly than the data provided. Simply increasing the cache does not improving the IO-subsystem performance
and CPU performance [2]. In the MapReduce model, before a computing node launches a new task, it should
ask the master node to assign one, and then the master node let the computing node know what the next task
is and where the required data is located. The computing node does not gather the required data and process
until receiving these information. In this way, the CPU should wait a long period while the computing node
communicate with the master node. Prefetching strategies are need to parallelize these workloads so as to avoid
the idle point.
1.1. Contribution
In this paper, we present a predictive scheduling and prefetching mechanism that improving the performance
of MapReduce. We propose the predictive scheduling algorithm to arrange task. Prefetching manages the data
loading. The basic idea is to preload the data from local disk to cache as late as possible without any delaying on
the new task’s launching.
The novelty of this study lies in our new mechanism that integrates a prefetching scheme with a predictive
scheduling algorithm. The original Hadoop system randomly assigns tasks to computing nodes and loads data
from local or remote disks whenever the data sets are required. CPUs of the computing nodes will not process
new tasks until all the input data resources are loaded into the nodes’ main memory. The coordination between
CPUs and disks in terms of data I/O has a negative impact on Hadoop’s performance. In the design of our
mechanism, we change the order of the processing procedure, our prefetching scheme assists Hadoop clusters to
preload required input data prior to launching tasks on DataNodes. Our algorithms aim at
1. preloading the data from local disk a little early before the new task assigned
2. shortening the waiting period, the new task can be processed in time
3. improving the performance of MapReduce system
We have evaluated our solutions using diﬀerent benchmarks on Hadoop system. Evaluation results show that our
prefetching mechanism can achieve at least 10% reduction in execution time comparing with the original one.
2. Design and implementation
2.1. Predictive Scheduler
We design a predictive scheduler - a ﬂexible task scheduler - to predict the most appropriate task trackers to
which future tasks should be assigned. Once the scheduling decisions are predicted ahead of time, DataNodes
can immediately start loading < key, value > pairs. Our predictive scheduler allows DataNodes to explore the
underutilized disk bandwidth by preloading < key, value > pairs.
Let us start describing this scheudling mechanism by introducing the native Hadoop scheduler. The job tracker
includes a task scheduler module to assign tasks to diﬀerent task trackers. The task tracker periodically sends a
heartbeat to the job tracker. The job tracker checks heartbeat and assigns tasks to available task trackers. The
scheduler assigns each task to a node randomly via the same heartbeat message protocol. The algorithm for
predicting stragglers in the native Hadoop is inadequate, because the original algorithm uses a single heuristic
variable for prediction purpose. The native Hadoop randomly assigns tasks and mispredicts stragglers in many
cases.
To address the aforementioned problem, we develop a predictive scheduler by designing a prediction algorithm
integrated with the native Haddop. Our predictive scheduler seeks stragglers and predicts candidate data blocks.
The prediction results on the expected data are sent to corresponding tasks. The prediction decisions are made by
a prediction module during the prefetching stage.
We seamlessly integrate the predictive scheduler with the prefetching module. Below let us describe the
structure of the prefetching module, which consists of a single prefetching manager and multiple worker threads.
The role of the prefetching manager is to monitor the status of worker threads and to coordinate the prefetching

2470

Jiong Xie et al. / Procedia Computer Science 18 (2013) 2468 – 2471



	

	!


!
!


!
"

!








 


" !


	


	

 











	


	


 !


 !


Fig. 1. Three basic steps to launch a task in Hadoop.

process with tasks to be scheduled. When the job tracker receives a job request from a Hadoop application, the
job tracker places the job in an internal queue and initializes the job [3][4]. The job tracker divides a large input
ﬁle to several ﬁxed-size blocks and creates one map task for each block. Thus, the job tracker partitions the job
into multiple tasks to be processed by task trackers. When the job tracker receives a heartbeat message from an
idle task tracker, the job tracker retrieves a task from the queue and assigns the task to the idle task tracker. After
the task tracker obtains the task from the job tracker, the task is running on the task tracker.
Figure 1 shows that the Hadoop system applies the following three basic steps to launch a task. First, the job
tracker localizes the job JAR by copying the job from the shared ﬁle system to the task tracker’s ﬁle system. The
job tracker also copies any required ﬁles by the Hadoop application from the distributed cache to the local disk.
Second, the job tracker creates a local working directory for the task, and un-jars the contents of the JAR into this
directory. Last, an instance of TaskRunner is created to launch a new Java Virtual Machine to run the task.
In our design, the above task launching procedure is monitored by the prediction module. Speciﬁcally, the
prediction module in the scheduler predicts the following events. 1) ﬁnish times of tasks currently running on
nodes of a Hadoop cluster; 2) pending tasks to be assigned to task trackers; and 3) launch times of the pending
tasks.
2.2. Prefetching
Upon the arrival of a request from the Job tracker, the predictive scheduler triggers the prefetching module that
forces preload worker threads to start loading data to main memory. The following three issues must be addressed
in the prefetching module.
When to prefetch. The prefetching module controls how early to trigger prefetching actions. Before a block
ﬁnishes, the subsequent block will be loaded into the main memory of the node. The prediction module assists
the prefetching module to estimate the execution time of processing each block in a node. Please note that the
block processing time of an application on diﬀerent nodes may vary in a heterogeneous cluster. The estimates
are calculated by statistically measuring the processing times of blocks on all the nodes in a cluster. This statistic
measuring can be performed oﬄine.
What to prefech. The prefetching module must determine blocks to be prefetched. Initially, the predictive
scheduler assigns two tasks to each task tracker in a node. When the prefetching module is triggered, it proactively
contacts the job tracker to seek required information regarding data to be processed by subsequent tasks.
How much to prefetch. When the prefetching action is triggered, the prefetching module automatically fetches
data form disks. Due to the large block size in HDFS, we intend not to make our prefetching module very
aggressive. Thus, there is only one block being prefetched at a time.

Jiong Xie et al. / Procedia Computer Science 18 (2013) 2468 – 2471

The most important part of the prefetching work is to synchronize two resources in the MapReduce system:
the computing task and the data block. The scheduler in the MapReduce always collects all the running task
information and constructs a RunningTaskList. It separately caches the diﬀerent types of tasks in a map task list
and a reduce task list. The job tracker can manage the current task according to these lists [5]. The prefetching
manager in the master node constructs a list known as the data list, a collection of all the data block location
information. The worker thread in each running node can ﬁnish the data loading job all by itself before the task is
received.
3. Related work
Prefetching mechanism An array of prefetching techniques have been proposed to improve the performance
of main memory in computing systems [6]. Cache prefetching techniques used to improve eﬀectiveness of
cache-memory systems have been widely explored for a variety of hardware and software platforms. An increasing number of computing systems are built to support multimedia applications. A few studies were focused on
prefetching approaches to boosting I/O performance in computer systems .
Scheduling Algorithms Performance of Hadoop systems can be improved by eﬃciently scheduling tasks on
Hadoop clusters. Many scheduling algorithms might be adopted in Hadoop. For example, the FairScheduler and
Capacity Scheduler provide more opportunity for later jobs to get scheduled. Zaharia et al. [7] implemented a
new scheduling algorithm called LATE (i.e., Longest Approximation Time to End) in Hadoop to improve Hadoop
system performance by speculatively executing tasks that decrease response time the most.
4. conclusion
In this paper, we observed that the task processing procedure in Hadoop may introduce data transfer overhead
in a cluster. Realizing that the data transfer overhead is caused by the data locality problem in Hadoop, we
proposed a predictive scheduling and prefetching mechanism or PSP for short to hide data transfer overhead.
Our PSP mechanism seamlessly integrate a prefetching module and a prediction module with the Hadoop’s job
scheduler. The prediction module proactively predicts subsequent blocks to be accessed by computing nodes in a
cluster; whereas the prefetching module preloads these future blocks in the cache of the nodes. The proposed PSP
is able to avoid I/O stalls incurred by predicting and prefetching data blocks to be accessed in the future.
Acknowledgments
This research was supported by the U.S. National Science Foundation under Grants CCF-0845257 (CAREER),
CNS-0917137 (CSR), CNS-0757778 (CSR), CCF-0742187 (CPA), CNS-0831502(CyberTrust), CNS-0855251
(CRI), OCI-0753305 (CI-TEAM), DUE-0837341(CCLI), and DUE-0830831 (SFS), as well as Auburn University
under a startup grant, and a gift (No. 2005-04-070) from the Intel Corporation. This research was also supported
by Scientiﬁc Research Project of Higher Education of Inner Mongolia Autonomous Region,China (NJZY13052)
References
[1] J. Xie, S. Yin, X. Ruan, Z. Ding, Y. Tian, J. Majors, A. Manzanares, X. Qin, Improving mapreduce performance through data placement
in heterogeneous hadoop clusters, in: Parallel Distributed Processing, Workshops and Phd Forum (IPDPSW), 2010 IEEE International
Symposium on, April, pp. 1–9. doi:10.1109/IPDPSW.2010.5470880.
[2] R. H. Patterson, G. A. Gibson, E. Ginting, D. Stodolsky, J. Zelenka, Informed prefetching and caching, SIGOPS Oper. Syst. Rev. 29
(1995) 79–95.
[3] T. White, Hadoop The Deﬁnitive Guide, O’Reilly, 2009.
[4] J. Venner, Pro Hadoop, Apress, 2009.
[5] S. Seo, I. Jang, K. Woo, I. Kim, J.-S. Kim, S. Maeng, Hpmr: Prefetching and pre-shuﬄing in shared mapreduce computation environment,
in: Proceedings of 11th IEEE International Conference on Cluster Computing, ACM, 2009, pp. 16–20.
[6] A. J. Smith, Cache memories, ACM Comput. Surv. 14 (1982) 473–530.
[7] M.Zaharia, A.Konwinski, A.Joseph, Y.zatz, I.Stoica, Improving mapreduce performance in heterogeneous environments, In OSDI’08:
8th USENIX Symposium on Operating Systems Design and Implementation.

2471

