Available online at www.sciencedirect.com

Procedia Computer Science 18 (2013) 996 – 1005

International Conference on Computational Science, ICCS 2013

Spatial stabilization strategies applied to multiphysics modeling of
blood clotting using a modiﬁed PTT model
Julien Eggera , Ajit S. Mallikb , Dominik Szczerbac , Daniel A. Ruefenachtd,b , Gabor
Szekelya,∗, Sven Hirscha
a ETH, Department of Electrical Engineering, CH-8092 Zurich, Switzerland
of Zurich, Center of Applied Biotechnology and Molecular Medicine, CH-8057 Zurich, Switzerland
c IT’IS Foundation, CH-8004 Zurich, Switzerland
d Swiss Neuro Institute, Department of Neuroradiology, Hirslanden Clinic, CH-8032 Zurich, Switzerland

b University

Abstract
In the past years multiphysics computational models aiming at describing clot formation and growth have been developed
using diﬀerent constitutive equations. Most models were designed to investigate the interactions between many agents of the
so-called coagulation cascade but were based on simple assumptions to describe the complex interaction between the clot
and the ﬂow. The models integrating the more elaborate Phan-Thien-Tanner (PTT) model, able to describe the viscoelastic
behavior of the clot, have been successfully implemented to simple geometries but seem to be diﬃcult to control when applied
to complex ones. In aneurysm clot modeling, where complex geometry and sophisticated viscoelastic models are essential
to realistic simulation outcomes, its successful implementation appears as a necessity. The paper presented here focused on
a stabilization strategy to circumvent the numerical diﬃculties when applying the PTT-model to a more complex aneurysm
geometry with implanted ﬂow diverter.
Keywords: Clot; Model; PTT; Aneurysm

1. Introduction
1.1. Problem description
The blood clot is a main actor in most vascular pathologies. It is responsible for occlusions by forming a thick
plug but also, if attaching to the vessel wall, it will promote local inﬂammation and destabilization of the wall.
We are interested to simulate the formation of a blood clot and understand its interaction with hemodynamics
in mechanical and chemical terms after endovascular treatment with a ﬂow diverting device. The model has to
fulﬁll the main requirements dictated by the biological understanding and the observations made from real cases,
especially regarding its interactions with the ﬂowing blood:
• The clot is initiated by aberrant ﬂow conditions on the wall that may change the endothelium into a thrombogenic state.
∗ Corresponding

author. Tel.: +41-44-632-2588.
E-mail address: szekely@vision.ee.ethz.ch.

1877-0509 © 2013 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. Open access under CC BY-NC-ND license.
Selection and peer review under responsibility of the organizers of the 2013 International Conference on Computational Science
doi:10.1016/j.procs.2013.05.265

Julien Egger et al. / Procedia Computer Science 18 (2013) 996 – 1005

• The growing clot exerts a history dependent mechanical inﬂuence on the ﬂowing blood. Translated in
mechanical terms, the additional stress built by the growing clot has to have viscoelastic character.
• The clot must be dynamic, which means that the clot does not only grow but can also recede depending on
the ﬂow regime it is subjected to.
The model that best fulﬁlls these requirements is the so-called Phan-Thien-Tanner (PTT) model [1], a constitutive equation which describes how a ﬂuid can switch from a purely viscous to a purely elastic behavior. This
model is generally used for simulating polymerization and behave well for viscoelastic ﬂuids with low relaxation
time but are known to produce spurious oscillations when solved for long relaxation times, especially in complex
geometries. In the literature the dimensionless so called Deborah or Weissenberg numbers characterize the behavioral regime. Geometrical singularities such as reentrant corner and enclosed cylindrical objects are especially
prone to cause these oscillations and impede convergence of the simulations. Such singularities are by nature
present in the geometries we are interested in.
We will present a pragmatic approach based on spatial domain diﬀerentiation preventing such oscillations to
occur and thus enable the use of PTT models for describing the growth of a blood clot in idealized two-dimensional
aneurysmal geometries. Yet, this approach is in no way limited to clotting but may as well serve the wider use of
PTT models for other applications.
1.2. Biological background
An aneurysm is generally deﬁned as a bulging tissue sack protruding from a vessel, which eventually ruptures
due to its weakened wall. Aneurysms generally occur in peripheral arteries and in the descending aorta and
are particularly dangerous in the brain. Its genesis and development is a very complex process that involves
inﬂammation mechanisms leading to wall weakening and wall remodeling. Nowadays, due to the generalization
of the use of non-invasive brain imaging techniques, many asymptomatic intracranial aneurysms are discovered
by coincidence. As the rupture risk is diﬃcult to assess, the common practice is to treat a detected aneurysms by
surgery or by introducing endovascular devices. Endovascular treatments are of two categories: coiling and ﬂow
diverting stent (FD) implantation, both aim at promoting blood clotting in the aneurysm. In this article we will
only consider the FD treatment, which relies on a small porous tubular structure made of braided thin wires. The
implementation of a FD is realized by approaching the lesion site with a catheter from the femoral artery up to
the brain. When deployed inside the vessel, the FD conforms to the geometry of the adjacent parent vessel distal
and proximal to the aneurysm and covers its neck with its ﬁne mesh. After placement, the FD partially canalizes
the ﬂow over the aneurysm neck. In the cavity of the aneurysm it slows down the blood velocity and alters the
ﬂow pattern. Due to the partial ﬂow stasis the aneurysm will start to clot and progressively occlude. In successful
cases the clot continuously ﬁlls the entire cavity and constitutes the scaﬀold for enabling further remodeling
mechanisms, where smooth muscle cells will settle to build a strong matrix. This elegant treatment has proven
to be mostly very eﬀective, but has also shown catastrophic outcome in singular cases. Although controversially
discussed, this method is applied widely and with much success. Unfortunately there is no consensus or guidelines
what optimal post stenting conditions are. In the aneurysm both healing and destruction are caused by the new clot
and it is today not clear what the optimal healing conditions and the corresponding dynamics of clot formation
are. It is our interest to better understand the precise time course and balance of the events leading to clotting of
the cavity. The long-term vision is to achieve a prediction of clotting for a speciﬁc patient and to derive optimal
treatment strategies.
The primary structure that constitutes the clot is the so called platelet plug that is formed by aggregating
activated platelets. In our model, the intensity and location of the viscoelastic stress caused by the plug is strongly
linked to the aggregation process, which is governed by two main mechanisms:
• The originally inert, non-activated platelets activate when coming in contact with an thrombogenic portion
of the vessel wall (e.g. lacking endothelial coverage) or with a suﬃcient concentration of activating agent.
• Once activated, the platelets gain the ability to build links to the injured wall or to other activated platelets
and release adenosine diphosphate (ADP) contained in their granules, which is a potent activating factor for
further platelets.

997

998

Julien Egger et al. / Procedia Computer Science 18 (2013) 996 – 1005

The exact condition causing the inner lining of the vessel (endothelium) to lose its integrity and becoming
thrombogenic is not fully understood and subject to many hypotheses. Observations suggest that temporally or
spatially aberrant ﬂow patterns cause the endothelial layer to dysfunction or even to vanish, failing to fulﬁll their
main task of keeping blood platelets from adhering to the wall [2]. High Wall Shear Stress (WSS) and positive wall
shear stress gradient (WSSG) are believed to be able to cause endothelial cells to malfunction [3]. Endothelial cell
function may also deteriorate whenever WSS is too low [4]. Being a reasonable choice, in the model presented
here the thrombogenic region of the wall is determined based on the low WSS assumption.
1.3. Other approaches
The simulation and biology of blood clotting gained much attention in the last decade. Many very important
works focused on clot description particularly on the kinetics of the reactions and assume an ideally well mixed
domain (e.g. [5] and [6]). Most models from this category consist of ODEs and generally leave out the inﬂuence
of the ﬂow.
In 2D and 3D models targeting the spatial characteristics of the clot and its interaction with the ﬂow, two main
approaches prevail: micromodels, where the motion of each individual cell is followed over time and macromodels, where the evolution of the concentrations of selected biological agents are considered in a continuum, mostly
using a PDE formulation of reaction-diﬀusion-convection equations.
Micromodels allow a precise investigation of the key cell to cell interactions governing the clot growth for
instance the dynamic platelet adhesion [7], [8] and can be extended at a high calculation cost to describe small
scale aggregates [9]. Macromodels are generally used to describe the evolution of bigger size aggregates [10].
The group of Fogelson [11] has pioneered clot modeling for over two decades. They developed and calibrated its
macromodels based on the observations made on its micromodel including ﬂow. Pivkin et al. [9] developed a 3D
model describing the motion and the adhesion interaction of each platelet individually.
Recently, some groups simulated more and more agents engaged in the clotting cascade (e.g. Xu et al. [12]
include 22 agents, Bodnar et al. [10] uses 23 agents), where the gauging and stability of the simulation tends
to get very diﬃcult. The interaction between the clot and the clot-free ﬂow was also modeled using diﬀerent
assumptions like linking the ﬁbrin concentration to the blood viscosity [10] or describing the clotted domain as
a porous medium via Darcy’s law [12]. The PTT model we chose features constitutive equations that compute
the additional stress caused by the linked platelets and includes it in the regular Navier-Stokes equation [11].
The model we present here is largely based on the macromodel from Fogelson, extended to tackle the challenges
arising from more realistic domain geometries. This macromodel appears to be the most suited as it directly
includes the mechanical link between blood ﬂow and blood biology. Its strongest asset is the ability to describe
the viscoelastic behavior of the clot observed in clinical practice.
2. Model description
In our multi-physics model we simulate blood coagulation in 2D with a general ﬁnite element method that
spans over diﬀerent spatial scales. The aim is to couple hemodynamics and the resulting mechanical conditions of
the clot and the wall with the biochemical reactions of blood clotting. The transient model presented here explores
the conditions of the complex multi-physics interaction in a simpliﬁed but meaningful way rather than attempting
maximum realism. The mathematical approach is based on three kinds of equations:
• the incompressible Navier-Stokes equation for describing the velocity ﬁelds and pressure distribution of the
ﬂowing blood,
• sets of so called convection-reaction-diﬀusion equations describe the time evolution and interaction of the
concentrations of the biological agents in the domain,
• an adapted Phan-Thien-Tanner model for the description of the viscoelastic stresses created by platelet
aggregation.
The complex coagulation cascade has been reduced to its principal phenomenological agents and the complexity of its subprocesses reduced to a few reactions. The considered biological agents are activated platelets,
non-activated platelets, and the signaling molecule. This agent is an integral category that resembles all biological

999

Julien Egger et al. / Procedia Computer Science 18 (2013) 996 – 1005

agents responsible for platelets activation (e.g. ADP). The model describes how non-activated platelets, which are
transported passively in the blood stream, can activate through the mechanisms described in section 1.2 and how
they contribute to building viscoelastic stress. Flow and the clot have a mutual inﬂuence on one another. The ﬂow
causes the network of interlinked platelets to deform and its constituting bonds to stretch, whereas the ﬂow also is
perturbed by the presence of the aggregate.
2.1. Fluid ﬂow
For ﬂow computation we are using the Navier-Stokes equation for an incompressible ﬂuid with density ρ and
dynamic viscosity μ. This equation, solved together with (2) ensuring volume conservation, yields values for the
velocity ﬁeld u and the pressure p. The viscoelastic eﬀects of the stress created by platelet-wall bonds ∇σw and by
platelet-platelet bonds ∇σ p are integrated in (1) by means of the last two terms on the right side, the bold notation
denotes a tensor. For deﬁnition of the viscoelastic behavior see 2.3.
ρ

∂u
+ u = −∇p + μΔu + ∇σ p + ∇σw
∂t
∇·u=0

(1)
(2)

2.2. Platelet activation
A set of convection-reaction-diﬀusion equations describes the evolution and interaction of the concentration
of platelets φ and signaling agent c. Throughout the description, subscripts n and a deﬁne values used for nonactivated and activated platelets respectively. The left hand side of (3) and (4) deﬁne the evolution of the platelet
concentration over time, by ﬂuid convection u·∇φi and through diﬀusion Di ·Δφi . Di are the diﬀusion constants for
the various agents. The ﬁrst two terms on the right hand side of both equations list the reaction terms describing
how platelets are removed from the non-activated pool (3) to be added up to the activated pool (4), in both
equations the terms are identical, only with opposite sign:
D
• The term Ract
· step+cact (c) · φn accounts for activation of platelets through contact with a suﬃcient concentraD
. The function step+cact (c) is deﬁned so that step+cact (c < cact ) = 0 and
tion of activating agent cact at a rate Ract
+
stepcact (c >= cact ) = 1.
• The terms Rwact · w(x, y) · φn accounts for activation of platelet that are in the direct vicinity of the injured
portion of the wall w(x, y) at a rate Rwact .
D
· step−cact (c) ·φa deactivates platelets, when not being exposed
For activated platelets an additional reaction term Ract
to the required amount of activating agent. The function step−cact (c) is deﬁned so that step−cact (c < cact ) = 1 and
step−cact (c >= cact ) = 0.

∂φn
D
+ u · ∇φn − Dn · Δφn = −Ract
· step+cact (c) · φn − Rwact · w(x, y) · φn
∂t

(3)

∂φa
D
D
· step+cact (c) · φn + Rwact · w(x, y) · φn − Ract
· step−cact (c) · φa
(4)
+ u · ∇φa − Da · Δφa = Ract
∂t
Equation (5) describes the time evolution of the concentration of the activating agent c. As for the platelets
the transport phenomenon is modeled through the term u · ∇c with diﬀusion rate Dc . The reaction term on the
right hand side describes how the activating agent is produced at a rate that is proportional to the rate of platelet
activation with factor A.
∂c
D
· step+cact (c) · φn + Rwact · w(x, y) · φn
+ u · ∇c − Dc · Δc = A · Ract
∂t

(5)

1000

Julien Egger et al. / Procedia Computer Science 18 (2013) 996 – 1005

2.3. Viscoelastic stress
Equations (6) and (7) are the constitutive equations for the viscoelastic stress tensors produced by plateletwall-bonds (superscript w) and platelet-platelet-bonds respectively (superscript p). It is a variation of the PTT
model. (PTT). The terms of the left hand side deﬁne the convection and diﬀusion similarly to (4), (3) and (5).
The two terms of the form ∇u · σ + (σ · ∇u)T describe the “stretching eﬀect” that the ﬂow exerts on bonds,
aligning them with the direction of the velocity ﬁeld. The third term of both equations expresses the production of
bonds: wall-platelet-bonds are created at a rate aw2 proportionally to the activated platelets present in the near wall
region. I represents here the identity tensor. The platelet-platelet-bonds are created at a rate a2p , proportionally to
the squared concentration of activated platelets, because one bond can only be formed by two platelets. The last
term of both equations relates to the rupture of the bonds at constant rates βw and β p . In comparison with most
PTT models no shear-thinning eﬀect will appear as constant breaking rates are assumed. One can notice in these
equations that an equilibrium state balancing clot progression and clot dissolution can theoretically be achieved if
the function β p , dissolving the clot, exactly compensates for new bonds created by newly activated platelets.
∂σw
+ u · ∇σw − D s · Δσw = ∇u · σw + (σw · ∇u)T + aw2 · φa · w(x, y) · I − βw · σw
∂t

(6)

∂σ p
+ u · ∇σ p − D s · Δσ p = ∇u · σ p + (σ p · ∇u)T + a2p · φ2a · I − β p · σ p
∂t

(7)

2.4. Numerical consideration
When applying the described model on an idealized side wall aneurysm, we were confronted to numerical
instablities mainly due to the boundary eﬀect produced by our geometry. The origin of these diﬃculties of the
model will now be explained, along with modiﬁcations that help solving these. Considering the model from the
perspective of numerics, three dimensionless numbers characterize the viscoelastic ﬂow conditions: the Reynolds,
Peclet and Weissenberg numbers. The relative diﬃculty for the solver to ﬁnd the solution for one set of equations
depends on their degree of nonlinearity. In some cases, mathematical solution do not even exist.
Reynolds number. The Navier-Stokes equation is known to be numerically challenging for high Reynolds numbers
(>2500), which quantify the relative eﬀect of inertial forces over the eﬀect of viscous forces exerted on a ﬂuid.
In the geometry investigated in this study, the Reynolds number is not critical. As the vessel diameter is taken
to be Dvessel = 4[mm], the maximal velocity to be vmax = 0.5[m/s], the dynamic viscosity and density of blood
μ = 0.004[Pa · s] and ρ = 1000[kg/m3 ] the Reynolds number can reasonably be approximated using its deﬁnition
for ﬂow in pipe as
ρ · vmax · Dvessel
Re =
= 500,
μ
which characterizes the ﬂow as laminar.
Peclet number. The non-dimensional number characterizing the transport equations (4), (3) and (5) is the Peclet
number. It deﬁnes the rate of advection to the rate of diﬀusion. The Peclet number for transport phenomena is
deﬁned in literature as
Dvessel · vmax
,
Pe =
Di
Dvessel is the characteristic length of the geometry,
is the characteristic velocity,
vmax
Di
the diﬀusion constant of the transported species.
Local mesh reﬁnement was found in our case suﬃcient to ensure numerical stability although the Peclet
numbers of the model are very high (see Table 1).
where

Julien Egger et al. / Procedia Computer Science 18 (2013) 996 – 1005

Table 1. Peclet numbers
Species
Activated Platelets φa
Non-activated Platelets φn
Activating agent c

Diﬀusion coeﬃcient
5e-10
5e-10
5e-8

Dvessel · vmax
0.002
0.002
0.002

1001

Peclet Number
4e6
4e6
4e4

Weissenberg number. Most numerical complications in the presented model arise from the constitutive equations
for the viscoelastic stress (6) and (7). Their characteristic non-dimensional number, the Weissenberg number,
describes the viscoelastic relaxation time. In case of PTT equations, this number is deﬁned as
We =

2/3 · vmax
vmean
=
.
0.5 · Dvessel · β 0.5 · Dvessel · β

(8)

Simulation of viscoelastic ﬂow with high Weissenberg number is known to cause numerical instabilities in geometries presenting reentrant corners, enclosed cylinders and ﬂow contraction. These properties are present in our
model. It can be seen from the results that the problematic behavior is due to the term ∇u · σ + (σ · ∇u)T .
Several works in literature have been addressing the problems encountered with high Weissenberg numbers,
e.g. in case of ﬂow contraction [13] (We = 9), for ﬂow past cylinder like obstacles [14](We = 0.9), [15] (We = 2.9)
and in lid-driven cavity [16] (We = 5). Alves et al. even reported successful simulations on 4:1 contraction ﬂow
with We = 104 depending on the constitutive formulation [17]. Powerful computing allowing massive mesh
reﬁnement and sophisticated stabilization techniques pushed further the achieved maximal Weissenberg number.
In the case presented here with β = 10, according to the deﬁnition (8) we are facing We = 16, which is in the
upper range of the benchmark cases listed above.
3. Simulation
The 2D model was simulated with ﬁnite element method (FEM) on a mesh counting approximately 67k
elements with the commercially available program Comsol (v4.3). The Navier-Stokes equations were discretized
using second-order elements for the velocity components and linear elements for the pressure ﬁeld. All other
equations were discretized with linear elements. The numerical experiments presented here were performed on a
2D idealized geometry of a side wall aneurysm, with dimensions shown in Fig 1.
The left boundary is deﬁned as the inﬂow. A Dirichlet boundary condition (DBC) was imposed on the velocity
to represent a fully developed time-constant velocity proﬁle with a maximum velocity of 0.5[m/s]. DBCs were
also applied on the other concentrations to simulate constant inﬂow of unclotted blood, free of activated platelets
(φn = φn,0 , φa = 0, c = 0, σw = 0, σ p = 0). The right boundary condition is deﬁned as outﬂow, with constant zero
pressure and no viscous stress (p = 0, μ ∇u + ∇u T · n = 0). All wall boundary conditions are regarded as no
slip. As it is assumed that all concentrations are transported out of the domain through convection, the following
condition was applied on all transport equations: −n · Di ∇ci = 0, where n is the boundary normal vector and where
Di is the diﬀusion constant of the considered species ci . The initial conditions for ﬂow and pressure are obtained
by a steady state simulation for the Navier-Stokes equations without viscoelastic stress. At the beginning of the
simulation, only the concentration of non-activated platelets is non-zero (φn = φn,0 , φa = 0, c = 0, σw = 0 and
σ p = 0).
The domain of initiation was deﬁned for the case with FD as the domain where WSS was lower that the
smallest WSS on the model without FD. For consistency the same initiation area was then applied for the model
without FD (Fig 1). Prior to solving, all equations were non-dimensionalized and normalized to 1 for better
precision and eﬃciency. All simulations are realized in 2D, the third dimension is considered inﬁnite. Although no
formal mesh-sensitivity was realized, the mesh was reﬁned to reduce solution oscillations caused by progressing
fronts and around geometrical singularities. In the cases with implemented FD, each wire was represented by a
series of cylinders placed over the neck area of the aneurysm. Depending on the model a computational time of
36 to 40 hours was necessary to complete the simulation on Dual-Eight Core Intel Xeon X2665 machine, with
clock frequency of 2.4 GHz.

1002

Julien Egger et al. / Procedia Computer Science 18 (2013) 996 – 1005

Fig. 1. Geometry of the side wall aneurysm with its principal dimensions. The color coding represents the velocity ﬁeld. The arrows represent
the fully developed inﬂow velocity. The red area on the top of the dome of the aneurysm represents the initiation area w(x,y). The dots across
the aneurysm neck are the thin wires from the FD.

4. Implemented solution for high Weissenberg number
Solving of the model suﬀers from numerical instabilities related to high Weissenberg numbers. The rational of
our approach is the following: At the beginning of the simulation the entire clot-free domain only contains blood,
that is assumed to be incompressible, homogeneous and Newtonian. The clot ﬁrst develops around the initiation
area and propagates into the domain. This means that in our case the additional stress caused by the clot can only
be present in a deﬁned area, which is fundamentally diﬀerent to cases, where the simulated ﬂuid has viscoelastic
character over the whole domain from the beginning on. The principle of the method presented here is to disable
the artifact producing terms in the equations prior to each new time step dt away from the clot, where the terms
physically must not occur. This approach proved to eﬃciently suppress numerical instability without impacting
negatively on the computational time. The best results were achieved by adding a function
S i = S (x, y, φa (t ∈ [ti , ti + dt]) ∈ [0, 1]
to (6) and (7). This additional function acts as a switch to deactivate the problematic terms in the regions not
containing stress. The modiﬁed equations now read as:
∂σw
+ u · ∇σw = D s · Δσw + S i · ∇u · σw + (σw · ∇u)T + aw2 · φa · w(x, y) · I − βw · σw ,
∂t

(9)

∂σ p
+ u · ∇σ p = D s · Δσ p + S i · ∇u · σ p + (σ p · ∇u)T + a2p · φ2a · I − β p · σ p.
(10)
∂t
The above equations were solved with an iterative scheme with Comsol Multiphysics (4.3) using the MUMPS
solver. Each time step from t0 to t0 + dt was controlled by a Matlab routine. At the end of each time step the
domain function S (x, y, φa (t ∈ [ti , ti + dt]) was calculated within Matlab for the next period dt to be solved. The
function was deﬁned to enclose the area φa > φa,thresh with a deﬁned margin.
5. Application and Results
With the applied technique we can now successfully solve the model. A ﬁrst ﬂow analysis of the case presented
here shows a drastic diﬀerence in ﬂow pattern inside the aneurysm with and without FD. Looking at Fig 2 and
its coloring scheme representing the magnitude of ﬂow velocity, it is obvious that the velocity inside the cavity
was drastically reduced. The grey lines (ﬂow lines) and the arrows (ﬂow direction) plotted inside the domain also
indicate that the recirculation zone was pushed towards the apex of the dome of the aneurysm. We are well aware
that the 2 dimensional approach used here produces qualitatively diﬀerent ﬂow patterns than a 3 dimensional
model would. Still, these two drastically diﬀerent cases constitute a ideal test bench for testing our model and
evaluate the applicability of the PTT model for blood clotting.
The spurious behavior of the stress equations are always occurring in locations of high velocity gradient. In
our geometry these areas are located on the boundary on the neck of the aneurysm and around the FD wires where
ﬂow stagnation points are. These areas are labeled A and B in Fig 2. The detailed view representing the velocity

1003

Julien Egger et al. / Procedia Computer Science 18 (2013) 996 – 1005

(a)

(b)

Fig. 2. (a) Comparision of the ﬂow patterns without FD (left) and with FD (right). The color coding yields informations about the velocity
magnitude. The grey lines are the ﬂowlines. The normalized arrows indicate the local ﬂow direction; (b) The velocity gradient is much higher
around the geometrical singularities denoted by A and B, which causes most numerical diﬃculties when PTT models are applied.

gradient and the artifacts encountered during simulations without stabilization schemes are summarized in Fig
3. In such cases the physically incoherent stress σi is fed into (1), disturbing the velocity ﬁeld u in such a way
that the zone of high gradient extends. As a consequence the production of the incoherent stress due to the term
∇u · σi + (σi · ∇u)T involving the velocity gradient in (6) and (7) also creates a degenerative feedback over the
whole system. One can notice that not only stresses are produced in an area where there should logically be no
p
p
clot, but that the value is physically inconsistent as the diagonal elements of the stress tensor σ11
and σ22
should
never have negative values.
Velocity gradient

p
σ11

p
σ12

p
σ22

A

B
Fig. 3. The images in the ﬁrst column show in detail the velocity gradient peaks around reentrant corner (A) and stent strut (B). The images
p
p
p
from columns 2, 3 and 4 show the components of the symmetrical stress tensor σ p (σ11 , σ12 and σ22 respectively). Without stabilization
schemes the nature of the PTT model causes the small numerical errors made during calculations to be fed back to the next timestep and
ampliﬁed rapidly. This ﬂuctuation destabilizes the systems and inhibits convergence, causing the simulation to halt.

With our implemented method the simulation runs without creating artifacts around the critical areas for a
much longer time, allowing a comparative study between the cases with and without FD. This comparison is to be
seen in the sequences in Fig 4 (a) where the clot density is represented by the value of the trace of the additional
stress and in Fig 4 (b) showing how the clot modiﬁes the velocity inside the aneurysm. The clot’s growing potential
depends on the ﬂow regime inside the aneurysm and is interpreted the following way: In the case without stent,
the clot grows from the wall until reaching a maximum state, after which the signaling agent is carried away too
fast to allow recruiting of more platelets to aggregate to the existing clot. In the case with implanted FD, the higher
residency time of the signaling agent enables further clot growth, monitored by computing the clotted to aneurysm
surface ratio (Fig 5). We deﬁne an area as clotted as soon as the trace of the stress tensor σ p reaches a level that
noticeably inﬂuences the ﬂow. The surface ratio of the example without FD reaches a plateau, whereas the case
with FD increases steadily. For the non FD case this means a constant turnover of activation of platelets, which
maintains an inﬂammatory reaction of the wall. This chronic condition will lead to further wall degradation and
promotes growth and mechanical instability of the aneurysm.

1004

Julien Egger et al. / Procedia Computer Science 18 (2013) 996 – 1005

t=10s

t=20s

t=35s

No FD

(a) With FD

(b)

Fig. 4. (a) Clot growth comparison with and without FD. The colors represent values of the trace from the stress tensor, which is directly
related to the density of platelet links. (b) The impact of the clot on the velocity ﬁeld inside the aneurysm is best presented in the case with
implanted FD for t=0 (left) and t=35 (right).

Relative Clot Area [-]

0.6

Without FD
With FD

0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0
0

5

10

15

20

Time [s]

25

30

35

Fig. 5. The relative clotted to area reaches a maximum around 27s before diminishing in the case without ﬂow diverter (red) as the area keeps
on growing for the case with FD. We deﬁne any area as clotted as soon as the trace of the stress tensor σ p reaches a level that noticeably
inﬂuences the ﬂow.

6. Conclusion & Outlook
We have set up a 2D model to eﬃciently simulate platelet aggregation in a cerebral aneurysm treated with a
ﬂow diverter. The model integrates hemodynamics, blood thrombosis and wall reaction. In these simulations we
have encountered numerical instabilities in the viscoelastic terms that can be characterized with the dimensionless Weissenberg number. To avoid the initiation of these instabilities we propose disabling clotting where it is
physically unrealistic between consecutive simulation steps, thus preventing buildup of the distortions. With this
seemingly minor intervention we are now able to transiently simulate the formation of a blood clot after stenting
for an idealized 2D geometry. The simulations already exhibit qualitatively reasonable behavior when comparing
cases with and without ﬂow diverter. As an important property, the model exhibits mechanical stresses in the
clot itself. This unique feature justiﬁes the additional complexity using this model over other purely mechanistic
approaches. With this model in place we are now in the position to further analyse clot stability and include clot
maturation processes.
This model is obviously still a simpliﬁcation in regard to ﬂow dynamics, spatial representation, and complexity
of the clotting cascade process. It will be the next step to migrate to 3D, as 2D may never exhibit highly relevant
ﬂow conditions like impinging jets. 3D ﬂow simulations carried out on models of comparative size show that
such behavior only is possible for perfectly symmetrical vessel and aneurysm absolutely identical on both sides
of its middle plane. Otherwise more complex ﬂow patterns like impinging inﬂow jets will only appear in 3D
geometries. At the downside, the computational time required to solve a theoretically feasible full 3-dimensional
extension requires high performance computing. We intend to explore a hybrid approach linking conventional
3-dimensional ﬂow simulations with extrapolated 2 dimensional simulations of the clot model.
Changing the steady ﬂow in 2D to a pulsating inﬂow will produce more realistic ﬂow conditions, still these
will not resemble the complexity observed only in 3D. For these reasons we refrained from varying inﬂow in
the examples shown in our study. Furthermore, clotting occurs in a timescale of minutes to hours whereas the
timescale of the heartbeat is seconds. The mechanical interaction will depend on the pulsating ﬂow, which will

Julien Egger et al. / Procedia Computer Science 18 (2013) 996 – 1005

1005

then translate into a biological reaction. This asks for a further extension of the model to be able to span over
diﬀerent time scales. Interestingly enough, once the described mechanical coupling has been solved, increasing
the complexity of the clotting cascade is the lesser problem.
The ideal 2D cases shown here do already show reasonable clotting behavior when comparing them with
histological cuts of clotted aneurysms after stenting. The clot forms in concentric layers from the wall inward.
However, with the ideal geometry the aspired scenario of a completely ﬁlled aneurysm after stenting can not be
reached, mainly because of the presence of an ever recirculating ﬂow visible in both cases in Fig 2. As convection
only carries agents back into the circulating zone, their only way out is through diﬀusion, which is not suﬃcient to
give rise to further clotting. This is purely an artifact due to the 2D restriction that implicitely considers an ideally
symmetrical case without velocity in the third dimension.
Based on this initial work, we plan to make a systematic sensitivity analysis of the numerous parameters
governing this model, aiming at benchmarking the range of possible scenarios. With our clinical and biological
partners we continue to validate our assumptions and to correlate our simulation to their observations. This should
serve our ﬁnal goal to be able to predict clotting behavior for stented aneurysms.
Acknowledgements
This paper has been supported by the Swiss National Science Foundation grant number CR32I3-127008. We
would also like to thank Prof. Aaron Fogelson for fruitful discussions and advices for the implementation of this
model.
References
[1] N. P. Thien, R. I. Tanner, A new constitutive equation derived from network theory, Journal of Non-Newtonian Fluid Mechanics 2 (4)
(1977) 353–365.
URL http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/0377025777800219
[2] Z. Kulcsar, E. Houdart, A. Bonafe, G. Parker, J. Millar, A. J. P. Goddard, et al., Intra-aneurysmal thrombosis as a possible cause of
delayed aneurysm rupture after ﬂow-diversion treatment, American Journal of Neuroradiology 32 (1) (2011) 20–25.
[3] J. M. Dolan, H. Meng, S. Singh, R. Paluch, J. Kolega, High ﬂuid shear stress and spatial shear stress gradients aﬀect endothelial
proliferation, survival, and alignment, Annals of Biomedical Engineering 39 (6) (2011) 1620–1631.
[4] J. J. Chiu, S. Usami, S. Chien, Vascular endothelial responses to altered shear stress: pathologic implications for atherosclerosis, Annals
of Medicine 41 (1) (2009) 19–28.
[5] A. L. Kuharsky, A. L. Fogelson, Surface-mediated control of blood coagulation: The role of binding site densities and platelet deposition,
Biophysical Journal 80 (3) (2001) 1050–1074.
[6] K. Lo, W. S. Denney, S. L. Diamond, Stochastic modeling of blood coagulation initiation, Pathophysiology of Haemostasis and Thrombosis 34 (2-3) (2005) 80–90, 005NA Times Cited:21 Cited References Count:29.
[7] N. A. Mody, M. R. King, Inﬂuence of brownian motion on blood platelet ﬂow behavior and adhesive dynamics near a planar wall,
Langmuir 23 (11) (2007) 6321–6328.
[8] N. A. Mody, M. R. King, Platelet adhesive dynamics. part i: Characterization of platelet hydrodynamic collisions and wall eﬀects,
Biophysical Journal 95 (5) (2008) 2539–2555.
[9] I. V. Pivkin, P. D. Richardson, G. Karniadakis, Blood ﬂow velocity eﬀects and role of activation delay time on growth and form of platelet
thrombi, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 103 (46) (2006) 17164–17169.
[10] T. Bodnar, A. Sequeira, Numerical simulation of the coagulation dynamics of blood, Computational and Mathematical Methods in
Medicine 9 (2) (2008) 83–104.
[11] A. L. Fogelson, Cell-based models of blood clotting, in: A. A. Anderson, M. J. Chaplain, K. A. Rejniak (Eds.), Single-Cell-Based
Models in Biology and Medicine, Mathematics and Biosciences in Interaction, Birkhauser Basel, 2007, Ch. 11, pp. 243–269.
[12] Z. L. Xu, J. Lioi, J. Mu, M. M. Kamocka, X. M. Liu, D. Z. Chen, E. D. Rosen, M. Alber, A multiscale model of venous thrombus
formation with surface-mediated control of blood coagulation cascade, Biophysical Journal 98 (9) (2010) 1723–1732.
[13] J. M. Kim, C. Chung, K. H. Ahn, S. J. Lee, Time-weissenberg number superposition in 4 : 1 planar contraction ﬂow of a viscoelastic
ﬂuid, Nihon Reoroji Gakkaishi 33 (4) (2005) 191–197.
[14] Y. Fan, H. Yang, R. I. Tanner, Stress boundary layers in the viscoelastic ﬂow past a cylinder in a channel: limiting solutions, Acta
Mechanica Sinica 21 (4) (2005) 311–321.
[15] J. S. Sun, R. I. Tanner, Computation of steady ﬂow past a sphere in a tube using a ptt integral model, Journal of Non-Newtonian Fluid
Mechanics 54 (1994) 379–403.
[16] R. Fattal, R. Kupferman, Constitutive laws for the matrix-logarithm of the conformation tensor, Journal of Non-Newtonian Fluid Mechanics 123 (2-3) (2004) 281–285.
[17] M. A. Alves, P. J. Oliveira, F. T. Pinho, Benchmark solutions for the ﬂow of oldroyd-b and ptt ﬂuids in planar contractions, Journal of
Non-Newtonian Fluid Mechanics 110 (1) (2003) 45–75.

