Available online at www.sciencedirect.com

Procedia Computer Science 9 (2012) 1292 – 1298

International Conference on Computational Science, ICCS 2012

Impact of US financial crisis on different countries: based on the
method of functional analysis of variance
Wen Longa,b,*, Nan Lic, Huiwen Wangc, Siwei Chenga,b
a

b

Graduate University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100190, China
Research Center on Fictitious Economy & Data Science, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100190, China
c
School of Economics and Management, Beihang University, Beijing 100191, China

Abstract
During the entire period of the 2007-2009 global financial crisis, different types of countries showed different characteristics on
their economic development process. Comparing the economic development process between different types of countries
contributes a lot to get an in-depth understanding of the different impacts of the crisis on national economy. In this paper, the
method of Functional Analysis of Variance (FANOVA) is applied to make a comparative study on the economic development
process of different types of countries, including the differences on the economic growth rate, the time of the economy recession,
the extent of the recession and the recovery situation of the economy. Moreover, the paper performs a dynamic test on the
significance of the difference on the economic growth rate during the whole stage.

Keywords: financial crisis; developed countries; Emerging market countries; economic development; Functional Analysis of Variance

1. Introduction
The subprime mortgage crisis originated from the U.S. in 2007 finally evolved into financial crisis which is
regarded as the most serious and most widespread global financial crisis since second half of 20th century [1].
During this financial crisis, global economy has suffered, but the degree of regression varied. After second half of
2009, the global recession triggered by financial crisis was nearing completion, and economic recovery began to
appear, but the situation of recovery was different in various countries. January 2010 the report of IMF "World
Economic Outlook" noted that developed countries experienced a growth with 3.2% in 2009; after the recession, the
economic growth was expected in 2010 only 2.1%; yet this was in sharp contrast to the emerging economies, whose
growth as a whole in 2010 would reach 6.0% [2]. According to "World Economic Outlook" report of 2011, the real
economic growth rate of emerging and developing economies in 2010 has reached 7.1% [3].
Data show that there exist many differences in different types of countries during the financial crisis, due to their
initial conditions, extents of declination and governmental responses are not nearly same. Numbers of local and

* Corresponding author. Tel.: +86-10-8268-0927; fax: +86-10-8268-0698.
E-mail address: longwen@gucas.ac.cn.

1877-0509 © 2012 Published by Elsevier Ltd. Open access under CC BY-NC-ND license.
doi:10.1016/j.procs.2012.04.141

Wen Long et al. / Procedia Computer Science 9 (2012) 1292 – 1298

1293

foreign scholars have made deep research into this financial crisis. Klapper adopted panel data for 93 countries
shows that most countries experienced a sharp drop in new firm registration during the financial crisis. The decline
was more pronounced in countries with higher levels of financial development that were more affected by the crisis
[4]. Bijapur presented evidence from a panel investigation of OECD countries that inflationary pressures tend to be
stronger during recovery from financial crises compared to recovery from non-crisis economic downturns, indicating
impairment in productive potential [5]. However, these researches related to financial crisis are mainly focus on the
topics of the causes of the financial crisis [6], transmission mechanism [7], impact of crisis [8] or historical
comparison of this crisis with all the previous crises [9]. Though some paper discussed the comparative method
from the aspect of country risk [10], yet little literature has involved with the differences analysis of different
countries in this crisis. From this perspective, this paper will study the changes of the economic growth rate of
different countries for the whole process of the financial crisis through quantitative analysis, and further analyze and
compare the overall economic growth rate of these countries from 2006 to 2009 and the influence incurred by the
financial crisis.
2. Data source and composite indicator

2.1. Sample countries and their classification
Taking into account the restriction of availability and comparability of the economic data, we select 36 sample
countries and categorize them by referencing International Monetary Fund (see Table 1).
Table 1. Categories of sample countries

Class
Developed
countries(21)
Emerging
market
countries
(15)

Subclass
Major developed
countries(7)

Countries
United States, Japan, Germany,
United Kingdom, France, Canada, Italy

Other developed
countries(14)

Australia, Austria, Belgium, Denmark, Finland, Netherlands, New
Zealand, Norway, Sweden, Switzerland, Greece, Ireland, Portugal

Asian emerging market(4)
European emerging
market(6)
Other emerging market(5)

India, Indonesia, Korea, Malaysia
Poland, Czech Republic, Hungary,
Slovak Republic, Slovenia, Turkey
Mexico, Brazil, Chile, South Africa, Russian Federation

2.2. The composite indicator of economic development
To provide a comprehensive analysis of the impact of the US financial crisis on countries in different categories,
we select seven indicators: year-on-year growth rate of stock price, GDP, the industrial production index, gross
fixed capital formation, total consumption, total export, and total import, which depict the key aspects of economic
system. In addition, we adopt the Global Principal Component Analysis method for dimensional reduction in order
to find representative points to describe the changes in countries’ economies. The data comes from Organization for
Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD).
Table 2 shows PCA results of statistics in time sequence concerning the above indicators 2006-2009 for 36
sample countries.
Table 2. Variance explained of PCA

Initial Eigenvalues
Component
1
2

Total

% of variance

Cumulative %

5.21
0.65

74.44
9.23

74.44
83.67

1294

Wen Long et al. / Procedia Computer Science 9 (2012) 1292 – 1298

As Table 2 shows, the first principal component accounts for 77.44% of the total variation. Thus, we can reduce
the dimension of the original variable to one.
Figure 1 shows the correlation between the principal components and seven original variables. The first principal
component is positively correlated with all original variables; especially industrial production index, GDP, fixed
capital formation, total exports and total imports are strong positively correlated with the first principal component,
whose correlation coefficient are above 0.7. Therefore, the first principal component can comprehensively depict the
economic development speed in different countries.

Fig. 1. Component plot

3. Introduction to Functional Data Analysis

3.1. Obtaining the smooth function describing the changing process of economic development
Functional Data was first suggested as a type of data by the Canadian statistician Jim. O. Ramsay in 1991 [11].
Comparing with the discrete data, functional data contain more information and make it more convenient to use the
derivative information implied in the original data.
Usually, observation data are discrete. Therefore, the first step of FDA is usually to get functional data from the
raw discrete data. In present study, it is generally by some sort of mathematical transformation to turn the discrete
data into functional data. After obtaining the functional data, to eliminate the errors existed in the observations or to
enhance the change laws of the functional curve and so on, it often needs to smooth the functional curves. The
Roughness Penalty Smoothing method suggested by Silverman and Green is more widely applied for smoothing
functions [12].
3.2. Functional Analysis of Variance
Functional Analysis of Variance is used for significant test of means of two or more samples, which is similar
with classic ANOVA.
Given yij (t ) represents the ith observed function of the jth category classified by the effect of some certain factor
( j 1, 2,..., J ; i 1, 2,..., n ), we can build the following model:

1295

Wen Long et al. / Procedia Computer Science 9 (2012) 1292 – 1298
J

yij (t )

(t )

j

(t )

ij

(t )

s.t.

j

(t )

1

0, t

i 1

Here, (t ) depicts common mean function, j (t ) for the impact function of the jth category, and
function. In order to simplify these symbols, we define:
Y (t ) ( yij (t )) , (t ) ( ij (t ))
(t )

( 1 (t ),

Z ( Jn )

2

(t ),...,

J 1

(t ))

( (t ),

1

(t ),...,

1 1 0

0 0

1 0 1

0 0

J

ij

(t ) for error

(t ))

( J 1)

1 0 0
1 0 0

0
0

1 0
0 1

Then
Y (t )
The residual sum of squares is defined as follows:

Z (t )

LMSSE ( )

[ yij ( s)
i

2

(t )

( s)

2

j

( s)] ds

3

j

Demand equation (3) the minimum under the constraint of equation (1), we can obtain the estimation functions of
(t ), j (t ) which are denoted as ˆ (t ), ˆ j (t ) .
In order to further determine whether the impact of category j to the observation function is significant, we
denote
[ yij (t ) ˆ (t ) ˆ j (t )]2
SSE (t )
4
i

j

SSY (t )

[ yij (t )
i

ˆ (t )]2

5

j

And define
( SSY SSE ) df (reg )
6
SSE df (error )
In the above equation (6), df (reg ) is the amount of functions which are independent each other in
and
df (error ) Jn df (reg ) . Here Jn represents the amount of all the individuals in sample. According to the
methodology of FANOVA, that the value of F ratio is bigger indicates the impact of this classification factor is
more significant.
F ratio(t )

4. Result and discussions

On the basis of the results of Global Principal Component Analysis, we transform the discrete data of the first
component scores of 36 countries from the first quarter of 2006 to the fourth quarter of 2009 into smoothing
functions, with the b-spline functions as the basic functions and through the Roughness Penalty Smoothing method.
Then the 36 smoothing functions represent the dynamic changing process of the economic growth rate of 36
countries respectively.
According to the function data of economic growth rate in 36 countries, the paper applied the method of analysis
of variance introduced in section 3 to the economic growth rate of different types of countries.
Figure 2 shows the estimated value of economic growth rate functions of countries in five categories, represented
by solid lines, and the estimated value of their average economic growth rate functions, represented by dashed lines.

1296

Wen Long et al. / Procedia Computer Science 9 (2012) 1292 – 1298

a Emerging Asian economies

d

b

Emerging European economies

Major developed countries

c

Other emerging economies

e Other developed countries

Fig. 2. Comparison of the Economic Growth Rates for Five Categories of Countries with the Average Level

From the above figure, generally the economic growth rates of countries in all categories declined and rebounded
from 2006 to 2009. But specifically, there exist some differences among these countries.
In terms of the time when the economic growth rate started to decline, major developed countries started to fall in
the fourth quarter of 2007. In fact, Figure 2 shows that from the second half of 2006, the economic growth rate of
major developed countries had already gradually decreased with fluctuations. The economic growth rates of other
developed countries and emerging European economies also started to fall in the fourth quarter of 2007, and other
emerging economies and emerging Asian economies started to decline in the first quarter of 2008. However,
compared with that of developed countries and emerging European economies, the decrease in the economic growth
rate of other emerging economies and emerging Asian economies was relatively small. Furthermore, the economic
growth rate of emerging Asian economies was still higher than the level from the first quarter of 2006 to the fourth
quarter of 2007. The economic growth rates of other emerging economies and emerging Asian economies started to
fall dramatically in the fourth quarter of 2008.
In terms of the time when the economic growth rate dropped to its lowest level, major developed countries,
emerging Asian and European economies all decreased to their low points in the first quarter of 2009. Other
developed countries and other emerging economies touched bottom in the second quarter of 2009.
In terms of the decrease in economic growth rate in the financial crisis, major developed countries and other
developed countries were close to each other. Emerging European economies had the largest decrease. Before the
fourth quarter of 2007, the economic growth rate of emerging European economies was close to that of the other two
types of emerging economies, and much higher than that of developed countries. However, in the first quarter of
2009, the economic growth rate of these European countries dropped to the lowest among the five categories, with
large gaps between them and the other four. It is evident that the emerging European economies were seriously
affected by the financial crisis. Other emerging economies also had a considerable decline in their economic growth
rate, and their low point was close to that of major developed countries and much lower than that of other developed
countries. The decline of the economic growth rate of emerging Asian economies was smaller than that of the other

Wen Long et al. / Procedia Computer Science 9 (2012) 1292 – 1298

1297

two types of emerging economies. In addition, from the first quarter to the fourth in 2009, the economic growth rate
of emerging Asian economies was higher than that of the other four types of countries.
In terms of the recovery of the economic growth rate, emerging economies performed better than developed
countries. Major developed countries and emerging European economies all reached their lowest growth rates in the
first quarter of 2009. In comparison, the economic growth rate of emerging European economies was much lower
than that of major developed countries in the first quarter of 2009 but higher in the fourth. Similarly, other
developed countries and other emerging economies all reached their lowest economic growth rates in the second
quarter of 2009, and the economic growth rate of other emerging economies was much lower than that of other
developed countries in the first quarter but also higher in the fourth. Emerging Asian economies only suffered a
small decrease in their economic growth and had a strong capacity for recovery. In the fourth quarter of 2009, the
economic growth rate of emerging Asian economies was the highest, followed in order by other emerging
economies, emerging European economies, other developed countries, and major developed countries. Major
developed countries and other developed countries had very similar economic growth rates.
The solid line in Figure 3 is the value function to make a variance analysis on the economic growth rate of the 36
sample countries. If we set the confidence coefficient at 95%, then the critical value of statistic F remaining to be
verified is:
F0.05 (4, 31) = 2.6787.
Thus the dashed line in the figure represents y=2.6787.

Fig. 3. Function of Value F for Variance Analysis

According to the principles of FANOVA, whether F can pass the verification indicates whether country category
has a significant impact on the economic growth rate. The higher the Value F, the greater the impact.
Figure 3 shows that from the first quarter of 2006 to the fourth quarter of 2007, Value F all passed the
verification. Therefore, country category had a significant impact on the economic growth rate, which is to say that
the economic growth rates of countries in the different categories also differed to a large extent. From the third
quarter in 2006, the impact became even greater, and gaps between the economic growth rates of countries in
different categories further widened, while from the first quarter in 2008, the impact became less and the gap
narrowed. In the fourth quarter of 2008 and the first quarter of 2009 when the economy of all countries suffered a
sharp decline, F could not pass the verification, which means that country category did not have a significant impact
on the economic growth rate during that time, i.e. the economic growth rates of countries in different categories
were influenced by the financial crisis to the same extent. The gap between the economic growth rates of countries
in different categories was the smallest in history. From the second quarter of 2009, country category again began to
have an increasingly significant impact on the economic growth rate. Thus we can see that in the process of
economic recovery, the gaps between the economic growth rates of countries in different categories became larger
and larger.
5. Conclusions

1298

Wen Long et al. / Procedia Computer Science 9 (2012) 1292 – 1298

In this paper, by extracting the composite indicator, we made a comparative analysis on the economic
development process and the degrees crisis-affected in financial crisis of five categories countries.
As regards the time when the economy began to decline, major developed countries, other developed countries,
and emerging European economies were all earlier, in the fourth quarter of 2007. Emerging Asian economies and
other emerging economies started their decline in the first quarter of 2008 and continued afterwards, but their
sharpest decline began in the fourth quarter of that year. The economic growth rates of major developed countries,
emerging Asian and European economies all hit bottom in the first quarter of 2009 with other developed and
emerging economies reaching their lowest point in the second. Emerging European economies suffered the greatest
economic decline, and other emerging economies also had a sharp decline in their economies. At the same time, the
decrease in the economic growth rate of emerging Asian economies was much smaller. In the stage of economic
recovery, the three types of emerging economies performed better than the two types of developed countries.
Generally, the major developed countries and European emerging market countries influenced by the financial
crisis in the relatively earlier, and were affected relatively bigger. Asian emerging market countries in general
affected relative minimum.
Although the economic development of different countries showed some differences during the crisis, overall, a
country's economic growth rate was closely related to their stage of development, and countries in different
economic types have shown significant differences. However, under the impact of the global financial crisis, this
difference was obviously reduced, and the effect of economic type is no longer significant. That shows under the
circumstance of economic globalization, the impact of global financial crisis on the overall national economy
inclines to be identity. That means you expect to be an exception is very difficult, only all the countries act together
and make a positive response, it is possible to step out of the shadow of the crisis and the world economy can be
gradually restored. The facts of global response to crisis have indeed proved this point.

Acknowledgements

This research was supported in part by National Natural Science Foundation of China (No.71101146, 70921061)
and the President Fund of GUCAS.

References
1. S. Cheng, study on China's economic reform and development (Part 3), Renmin University of China, Beijing, 2009.
2. IMF. World Economic Outlook: A Policy-Driven, Multispeed Recovery, January 2010.
3. IMF. World Economic Outlook: Global Recovery Advances but Remains Uneven, January 2011.
4. L. Klapper, I. Love. The impact of the financial crisis on new firm registration, Economics Letters, 113 (2011) 1-4.
5. M. Bijapur, Do financial crises erode potential output? Evidence from OECD inflation responses. Economics Letters (2011),
doi:10.1016/j.econlet.2011.12.090
6. P. Zhang, et al. Global Imbalance , Financial Crisis and China’s Economic Recovery, Economic Research, 5(2009) 4-20.
7. M. Zhang and L. Fu. Transmission mechanism of the subprime mortgage crisis spread, Global Economics, 8 (2009) 14-28.
8. X. Li, The Financial Crisis’s Implications on International Trade and Finance Order, Economic Research, 11(2009) 47-54.
9. C. M. Reinhart and K. Rogoff. This Time is Different: A Panoramic View of Eight Centuries of Financial Crises, NBER Working Paper
No. 13882 (2008).
10. J. Li, X. Sun, W. He, et al. Modeling Dynanmic Correlations and Spillover Effects of Country Risk: Evidence from Russia and
Kazakhstan. International Journal of Information Technology & Decision Making, 8 (2009) 803-818.
11. Ramsay, J. O., Silverman, B. W. Functional Data Analysis. Springer, New York, 2005.
12. P. J.Green and B.W. Silverman, Nonparametric Regression and Generalized Linear Models: A Roughness Penalty Approach. Chapman
and Hall, London, 1994.

