Procedia Computer Science
Volume 51, 2015, Pages 1996–2005
ICCS 2015 International Conference On Computational Science

Education in Computational Sciences
Petra Poulova and Blanka Klimova
University of Hradec Kralove, Hradec Kralove, Czech Republic.
petra.poulova@uhk.cz, blanka.klimova@uhk.cz

Abstract
The last two decades have witnessed an enormously rapid development of computational technologies
which have undoubtedly affected all the fields of human activities, including education. In fact,
computational science is one of the most evolving profile study programmes at technical universities
nowadays. This article thus focuses on the description of the key content courses, curricula and
degrees offered within the study programmes at the Faculty of Informatics and Management of the
University of Hradec Kralove, Czech Republic. Moreover, this study characterizes teaching and
learning of university undergraduate computational professionals with a special focus on core
competences such as an ability to identify and solve problems, knowledge of analytical methods, or
operating systems, but also on active and passive knowledge of English since English as lingua franca
can help these professionals together with other core competences succeed in the job market after their
graduation.
Keywords: Computational education, key competences, study programmes

1 Introduction
The last two decades have witnessed an enormously rapid development of computational
technologies which have undoubtedly affected all the fields of human activities, including education.
In fact, computational science is one of the most evolving profile study programmes at technical
universities nowadays. One of such competitive schools is also the Faculty of Informatics and
Management (FIM) in Hradec Kralove.
Since during the past two decades university education has dramatically changed thanks to the
arrival of new information and communication technologies and their implementation into an
educational process, FIM pedagogues have had to redefine some of the strategies and concepts of
teaching and learning. This has been done in terms of enriching classroom activities, reorganizing
course structures, and providing learners with more autonomous as well as more learner-centered
opportunities for learning. Most of teaching and learning is now done online or blended, particularly at
a university level. The main reasons why online learning environment is widely used are as follows:

1996

Selection and peer-review under responsibility of the Scientiﬁc Programme Committee of ICCS 2015
c The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V.

doi:10.1016/j.procs.2015.05.464

Education in Computational Sciences

x
x
x
x
x

Petra Poulova and Blanka Klimova

it contributes to pedagogy because it supports more interactive strategies, not only faceto-face teaching (Graham, 2003); (Popelkova & Kovarova, 2013);
it thus encourages collaborative learning; students or educators can work together on
some projects from anywhere and at any time (Bruffee, 1993), (Cerna & Svobodova,
2013);
it deepens intercultural awareness since it puts together researchers, educators, and
students from anywhere in the world;
it reduces costs of teaching and learning since students do not have to undertake so many
frequent travels to complete their education (Graham, 2003); and
it might match students’ learning style although there is no clear consensus on this issue
(Coffield, 2004), (Gregorc, 1979), (Hubackova & Semradova, 2013), (Poulova &
Simonova, Reflection of Learning Preferences in IT and Managerial Fields of Study,
2013).

As Sarples, Taylor and Vavoula summarize, in this sense new learning is more personal, learner
centered, situated, collaborative, ubiquitous and lifelong (Sharples, Taylor , & Vavoula, 2005). In the
Czech Republic teachers have always tried to follow ever relevant classical principles of the Czech
teacher of nations - Jan Amos Komensky (respectively John Amos Comenius) to maintain and
increase the quality of their teaching. His principles advocate learning by doing. They can be used for
any form of instruction and they are particularly useful in designing courses. These principles can be
outlined as follows: to proceed from easier issues to more complicated/difficult ones; to be aware of
the meaning of subject matter not only memorize it thoughtlessly; to teach and learn things
thoroughly and systematically; to transfer subject matter into practice; to facilitate learning; to make
learning pleasure/fun; to engage students actively into the learning process; and to make instruction
universal. (Comenius, 1967)
The above principles are in fact thoroughly reflected in the electronic education run at FIM.
Although there is no particular pedagogical approach recommended for online courses, Komensky’s
principles are worth following. The whole course is divided into separate lessons, with the structure of
each lesson following these basic learning steps (Cerna, 2010): informing of objectives; presenting
content; assessing performance; and providing feedback.
Thus, the particular structure of each lesson possesses the following structure (Fig. 1):
x
x
x
x
x
x

Title;
Goal – a short statement motivating the participants to study the particular lesson;
Prerequisites – previous knowledge required to master the lesson;
Skills to be learnt – a description of the knowledge to be gained in the particular lesson;
Body – the content in the form of texts, exercises and questions;
Tasks, quizzes or assignments – ways in which understanding can be assessed in order to
provide feedback (cf. (Frydrychova Klimova & Cech, 2008)).

1997

Education in Computational Sciences

Petra Poulova and Blanka Klimova

Figure 1: A structure of e-subject lesson

Nowadays, at FIM more than 240 e-courses are run. They are exploited in different ways. They are
run purely as online courses or they are led as blended courses (see (Frydrychova Klimova, 2009) for
their definition) or they serve as an additional support for students after their regular, face-to-face
classes so that students can read once again the information already obtained during the lecture.
Several surveys and research performed at the faculty confirmed that students welcomed the
possibility to exploit online courses but mainly as blended learning courses (cf. (Frydrychova
Klimova, Hubackova, & Semradova, Blended learning in a foreign language learning, 2011) or
(Frydrychova Klimova & Poulova, 2013a).
The authors of this article also conducted research on e-learning study materials and students’
preferences (Frydrychova Klimova & Poulova, 2013b), (Frydrychova Klimova & Poulova, 2013c) in
which a majority of respondents stated that they welcomed a possibility of having their study materials
online. The most frequents reasons for their satisfaction with the online study materials were as
follows:
x
x
x
x

an opportunity to have an access the online study materials anywhere and at any time;
the accessible online study materials enable to check once more all the information
already given during face-to-face classes;
time saving - students do not have to waste their time on looking for the desired
information elsewhere; or
less stress during the lecture - if students do not understand everything or they do not
manage to take all notes because they can find them in the online course afterwards.

Much research was also done in the area of students’ learning styles in order to discover which
form of instruction matches best the corresponding student’s style (see, for example (Frydrychova
Klimova, 2014); (Frydrychova Klimova & Poulova, 2014); (Hubackova & Semradova, 2013); or
(Poulova & Simonova, 2012)). This research was performed for the purpose of an increase of
effectiveness and efficiency of students’ learning and is extensively described in Simonova and
Poulova study ( (Poulova, Simonova, Sokolova, & Bilek, 2014); (Poulova & Simonova, 2014a);
(Poulova & Simonova, 2014b); (Poulova & Simonova, Reflection of Learning Preferences in IT and
Managerial Fields of Study, 2013)).

1998

Education in Computational Sciences

Petra Poulova and Blanka Klimova

2 Key Competences of Computational Professionals
At FIM undergraduate students can be enrolled into three degree programmes: bachelor, master
and doctoral. The instruction covers three basic fields of study: Economics and Management, System
Engineering and Computer Science and Applied Computer Science. Within these fields of study there
exist five study programmes: Financial Management, Management of Tourism, Applied Computer
Science, Information Management and Information and Knowledge Management. The last three are
part of Computer Science.
Companies usually require the faculty graduates to possess the following abilities and skills:
x
x
x
x

Problem analysis: ability to approach the problem broadly and consider connections,
ability to structure the problem, its generalization or on the contrary, its specification.
System approach: ability of seeing all the important aspects of the project problem,
ability to identify and respect their connections within the course of the project.
Focus on the result: preference for a goal than for a way of achieving it, problem
solution, persistence and active approach.
Accuracy and consistency. Transformation of discovered expectations and specification
of client’s requirements into a practical proposal of the solution. The proposed solution in
form of models, diagrams and text specifications with the help of modelling languages.
Verification of the concord between the implemented task and the proposal.

Basics of these study programmes are the subjects which can be divided into five groups:
x
x
x
x
x

Data Engineering,
Computer Engineering,
Software Engineering,
Company Computer Sciences,
Knowledge Technologies.

Da
Data
D
EEngineering
ngin
neeeering

Company
ompany
y Software
ComputerC
Computer
C
omp
puter
t Engineering
Engineering
Sciences
Sci
Scie
iencces
es

K
Knowledge
Technolog.

Figure 2: Model of study program

1999

Education in Computational Sciences

Petra Poulova and Blanka Klimova

2.1 Data Engineering
Data Engineering includes four subjects: Database Systems I; II; Distributed and Object Relational
Databases; and Modern Information Systems.
Specifically in the subjects of Data Engineering graduates should possess the following abilities
and skills:
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.

Analytic modelling and creation of documents where the main output should be an analytical
model of application (AM) in notation UML, BPML, possibly text specifications.
Knowledge of UML notation, both for reading and modelling (with the tools such as
Enterprise Architect).
Knowledge of SQL databases - MySQL, PostgreSQL, Oracle, possibly others, database
administration.
Proposal and creation of the database structure.
Experience in some company’s IS.
Experience in proposed models at system level and solutions of specific situations.
Overview of trends and development.
Proposition of the methodology of testing applications – a proposal and preparation of testing
scenarios and testing environment.

2.2 Computer Networks
Computer Networks involves the following subjects:
x
x
x
x
x

Computer Architecture,
Data and Information Protection and Security,
Operating systems I, II,
Computer Principles,
Computer Networks I – IV.

Within these subjects students acquire an overview and knowledge in the area of computer
principles, hardware, operating systems, computer networks, security, and related technologies. The
subjects of Computer Networks prepare future graduates for the following job positions and skills:
x

x

2000

IT administrator
o He administers internal computer network (access rights or network discs); he
administers company’s HW and SW (license records or orders), he keeps
records of customers (configurations), he administers databases.
o He communicates with a customer (at technical level), makes installations into
customer’s environment, and actively seeks possible risks.
o He has excellent knowledge of operating systems (Windows or Linux), database
administration, web and e-mail servers.
o In addition, he has the following abilities: accuracy, consistency, stress
resistance, flexibility, fast reactions and excellent knowledge of English.
IT manager (visionary, analytic, strategist)
o He has an excellent overview of IT trends and development, knowledge of
analytical methods, both structured and object, excellent knowledge of office
SW, presentation tools, tools for mind maps, processes and metainformation
(e.g., MS Visio or CASE tools for analyses).

Education in Computational Sciences

Petra Poulova and Blanka Klimova

He is able to analyze customer’s problems, generalize their requirements, his
English is very good.
IT consultant
o He is experienced in economic, production, business or logistics processes.
o He has general knowledge of IT environment, good knowledge of office SW,
SQL databases, experience in some company’s IS.
o He masters legal and economic minimum, he possesses communication skills,
he is assertive, flexible and he is able to cope with stress situations.
IT businessman
o He has a general overview of IT, good knowledge of office SW.
o He is communicative, assertive, he has presentation skills and he is willing to
study and master the English language.
o

x

x

2.3 Software Engineering
Software Engineering includes the following subjects:
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x

Algorithms and Data Structures,
Introduction into Object Modelling,
Programming I – III,
System Programming,
Advanced Programming,
Logic Programming,
Optimization of Web Applications,
Computer Graphics I – III,
Mobile Technologies,
Theoretical Computer Science.

The required abilities for the area of SW development:
1.
2.

analytical and system thinking,
knowledge of UML notation, both for reading and modelling (in tools such as Enterprise
Architect),
3. knowledge of object programming and Java language (knowledge of other languages is an
advantage - Scala, Groovy, Ruby, Python, JavaFX)
4. knowledge C++, knowledge of Linux platform,
5. mastering Java/J2EE-based technologies – Servlets, JSP, JDBC, Log4j, ORM (Hibernate /
iBatis),
6. knowledge of architecture and issues of web applications,
7. work with web frameworks (Spring MVC / Stripes / JSF / other),
8. knowledge of SQL, relational databases – MySQL, PostgreSQL, Oracle, possible other,
9. knowledge of web front ends technologies – HTML, CSS, JavaScript,
10. independence, responsibility, technical knowledge of the English language
11. creative thinking and graphic awareness, ability to create the required functionality for the
corresponding design.

2.4 Company Computer
Company Computer Science includes the following subjects:
x
x

Introduction into Company Computer Science,
Company Computer Science I, II

2001

Education in Computational Sciences

x
x
x
x
x
x

Petra Poulova and Blanka Klimova

Systems for Management Support I, II
Applied Information Technologies,
E-technologies in Business and Entrepreneurship,
Project Management,
Art of Presentations,
Production of Scientific Texts.

After passing these subjects the graduates are able to:
x
x
x
x

understand multidisciplinary character of company computer science and apply it across
a wide range of business entities,
see company activities from the process point of view with respect to a possible IT
support,
realize strategic potential of information technologies,
sense ethical dimensions of company computer science.

2.5 Knowledge Technologies
Knowledge Technologies comprises the following subjects:
x
x
x
x
x
x
x

System Theory I, II
Principles of Programming I
Introduction into Artificial Intelligence
Knowledge Technologies I - IV
Cognitive Science
Seminar of Knowledge Management
Computational Intelligence I - II

According to company experts, this group of subjects is very difficult to assess because it is in its
nature the most academic out of all the groups of subjects mentioned above. Nevertheless, this is
positive since universities must also have its scientific basis and the subjects which with their content
exceed the common IT practice. Otherwise, these types of schools would become mere training
schools.
The theoretical bases of computer science are appropriately combined with some practical subjects
in which students can test less common procedures and tools (fuzzy logics, neuron networks, expert
systems, thematic maps, Matlab system), which will be probably more and more frequent in practice.
The structure of the subjects and their focus are quite balanced but their syllabuses seem to be more
specifically described.

2.6 Professional English
As it has been several times mentioned above, knowledge of English is a necessary competence of
these specialists. Therefore also FIM pays a close attention to the development of English learning.
The tuition is provided by ESP (English for Specific Purposes) teachers from the Department of
Applied Linguistics at the faculty. Compulsory English courses, which are run in winter and summer
semester for 90 minutes each week over the period of two years (in their second and third year of
study), especially focus on the development of key strategic skills that are necessary to master when
doing business in the English language. In order to help them succeed in job market, ESP teachers try
to meet their language needs. In fact, identifying their specific language needs is a basic characteristic
which distinguishes ESP from general English teaching (Hutchinson & Waters, 1987). As Robinson
adds, ESP first arose, and has continued to develop, in response to a need; the need of non-native
speakers of the language to use it for some clearly defined practical purpose (Robinson, 1989). As

2002

Education in Computational Sciences

Petra Poulova and Blanka Klimova

research shows (Frydrychova Klimova, 2013), ESP teachers of these non-native speaking students of
computational science should pay attention to the following students’ needs:
x
x
x
x

development of formal writing skills (e.g. professional essays, formal business
correspondence, C.V. or A Letter of Motivation);
development of listening skills focused on listening to different native speakers accents;
enhancement of students’ discipline-specific vocabulary; and
development of students’ general English to prepare them for everyday life, which
includes socializing skills, in particular.

Apart from the above mentioned compulsory course, students have an opportunity to attend
optional course which can help them increase further their language proficiency. Among these courses
are:
x
x
x

x

English conversation with a native speaker concentrating on the development of social
English and debating skills (a course which can be attended for six semesters);
Academic Writing, a one-semester course, focuses on the development of formal writing
in English. In addition, it concentrates on those features which are different in English
and Czech such as citations, compiling a bibliography or using appropriate English;
Business English, a two-semester course, develops business language skills such as
telephoning, socializing, meeting and negotiating skills, but also business terminology,
for instance, banking, company structure. Furthermore, it also teaches business
correspondence and relevant grammar structures.
Seminar in the English Language, a four-semester course, develops students’ general
English with a focus on the development of all four language skills, i.e. listening,
reading, speaking and writing. Moreover, it also prepares students for taking Cambridge
exams.

3 Conclusion
Thus, as it has been discussed in the previous sections, the FIM specialists in compliance with their
future career should possess the following key competences: problem analysis, system approach, focus
on the result, accuracy and consistency, independence and responsibility, creative thinking,
understanding of multidisciplinary character of computer science, realization of strategic potential of
information technologies, good knowledge of the English language, analytic modelling, knowledge of
UML notation , knowledge of SQL databases, knowledge of object programming and Java language,
knowledge of architecture of web applications and web front ends technologies, and proposition of the
methodology of testing applications.

2003

Education in Computational Sciences

Petra Poulova and Blanka Klimova

Realization of strategic
potential of IT
Web applications architecture and technologies, testing
applications, Understand multidisciplinary of CS
Analytic modelling , UML, SQL databases, object programming,
Java and other languages
Problem analysis, system approach, creative thinking, English
Focus on the result, accuracy and consistency, independence, responsibility

Figure 3: Key competences of the FIM specialists

All the competences introduced above should be mutually interrelated. In addition, all the
computer science subjects should be constantly modified according to companies’ demands in order to
prepare FIM graduates for their future job careers in the best possible way.

Acknowledgement
The article is supported by SPEV project no. 2108.

Reference
Bruffee, K. (1993). Collaborative learning. Baltimore: The John Hopkins University Press.
Cerna, M. (2010). Reflection of J. A. Comenius Didactic Principles in a Blended Way of Language
Teaching/Learning Process. In I. Semradova, Reflections on the Exploitation of a Virtual
Study Environment,. Hradec Kralove: MILOS VOGNAR Publishing House.
Cerna, M., & Svobodova, L. (2013). Current social media landscape. Proceedings of the 10th
International Conference on Efficiency and Responsibility in Education (ERIE 2013) (pp. 8086). Prague: CZU.
Coffield, F. (2004). Learning styles and pedagogy in post-16 learning. A systematic and critical
review. Newcatle University report on learning styles.
Comenius, J. A. (1967). The Great Didactic [Didactica Magna]. Translated into English and edited
with biographical, historical and critical introductions by M.W. Keatinge. New York: Russell
& Russell .
Frydrychova Klimova, B. (2009). Blended learning. V A. M. al., Research, Reflections and
Innovations in Integrating ICT in Education, vol. 2 (pp. 705-708). Spain: FORMATEX.
Frydrychova Klimova, B. (2013). English for Academic Purposes: Developments in Theory and
Pedagogy. Hradec Kralove: Gaudeamus.
Frydrychova Klimova, B. (2014). Traditional versus online teaching and learning. Proceedings of the
11th International Conference: Efficiency and Responsibility in Education 2014 (pp. 132138). Prague: Czech University of Life Sciences.

2004

Education in Computational Sciences

Petra Poulova and Blanka Klimova

Frydrychova Klimova, B., & Cech, P. (2008). E-learning in Teaching Business English. Sbornik
prispevku ze seminare a souteze eLearning 2008. Hradec Kralove: Gaudeamus.
Frydrychova Klimova, B., & Poulova, P. (2013a). ICT in the teaching of academic writing. Lectures
Notes in Management Science, vol. 11. Fourth International Conference on Education and
Sports Education ESE 2013 (pp. 33-38). Hong Kong: Singapore Management and Sports
Science Institute.
Frydrychova Klimova, B., & Poulova, P. (2013b). Designing web-based learning materials.
Proceedings of the 2013 International Conference on Education and Educational
Technologies (EET 2013), (pp. 227-230). Rhodes.
Frydrychova Klimova, B., & Poulova, P. (2013c). Analysis of online materials and their impact on
learning. The Third International Conference on Digital Information Processing (ICDIPC
2013)T (pp. 564-568). USA: The Society of Digital Information and Wireless
Communications (SDIWC).
Frydrychova Klimova, B., & Poulova, P. (2014). Forms of instructions and students´preferences – a
comparative study. Hybrid Learning. Theory and Practice. Proceedings of the 7th
International Conference, ICHL 2014 (pp. 220-231). Springer.
Frydrychova Klimova, B., Hubackova, S., & Semradova, I. (2011). Blended learning in a foreign
language learning. Procedia – Social and Behavioral Sciences, vol. 28, 281-285.
Graham, C. (2003). Benefits and Challenges of Blended Learning Environments. In M. KhosrowPour, Encyclopedia of Information Science and Technology I-V. Hershey: idea Group Inc.
Gregorc, A. F. (1979). Learning/teaching styles: potent forces behind them. Educational Leadership,
36, 234-238.
Hubackova, S., & Semradova, I. (2013). Comparison of on-line teaching and face-to-face teaching.
Procedia – Social and Behavioral Sciences, 89, 445-449.
Hutchinson , T., & Waters, A. (1987). English for Specific Purposes: A Learning-Centered Approach.
Cambridge: CUP.
Popelkova, K., & Kovarova, K., (2013). Impact of e-learning on students’ study results. Proceedings
of the 10th International Conference on Efficiency and Responsibility in Education (ERIE
2013) (pp. 510-515). Prague: CZU.
Poulova, P., & Simonova, I. (2012). Flexible e-learning: online courses tailored to student’s Needs.
Proceedings of the 9th International Scientific Conference on Distance Learning in Applied
Informatics (DIVAI 2012) (pp. 251-260). Nitra: UKF.
Poulova, P., & Simonova, I. (2013). Reflection of Learning Preferences in IT and Managerial Fields of
Study. 12th International conference on information technology based higher education and
training (ITHET 2013). Antalya: IEEE.
Poulova, P., & Simonova, I. (2014a). Personalized learning and assessment. Lecture Notes in
Computer Science (including subseries Lecture Notes in Artificial Intelligence and Lecture
Notes in Bioinformatics), 8613, 159-165.
Poulova, P., & Simonova, I. (2014b). Study materials in online courses analysis reflecting individual
learning styles. IEEE Global Engineering Education Conference, EDUCON. Istanbul: IEEE.
Poulova, P., Simonova, I., Sokolova, M., & Bilek, M. (2014). On forming key competences within the
ICT-supported instruction in higher education. New Educational Review, 35(1), 134-147.
Robinson, P. C. (1989). An overview of English for specific purposes. V H. Coleman , Working with
Language: A Multidisciplinary Consideration of Language Use in Work Contexts (stránky
395-428). Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter.
Sharples, M., Taylor , J., & Vavoula, G. (2005). Towards a theory of mobile learning. Retrieved from
http://www.mlearn.org/mlearn2005/CD/papers/Sharples-%20Theory%20of%20Mobile.pdf

2005

