Available online at www.sciencedirect.com

Procedia Computer Science 9 (2012) 266 – 275

International Conference on Computational Science, ICCS 2012

A Hybrid Simulation Model to Test Behaviour Designs in an
Emergency Evacuation
Pablo Cristian Tisseraa , A. Marcela Printistaa , Emilio Luqueb
a Laboratorio

de Investigaci´on y Desarrollo en Inteligencia Computacional
Universidad Nacional de San Luis -Argentina
b Departamento de Arquitectura de Computadores y Sistemas Operativos
Universidad Aut´onoma de Barcelona - Espa˜na

Abstract
The paper shows a computer simulation in order to specify and implement a simulation model that allows to
investigate behavioural dynamics for pedestrians in an emergency evacuation. We present a hybrid model where
the dynamics of ﬁre and smoke propagation are modelled by means of Cellular Automata and for simulating people
behaviour we are using goal oriented Intelligent Agents. The model consists of two sub-models, called environmental
and pedestrian. We have prototyped a methodology that is able to model some of the frequently observed human
behaviours in evacuation exercises. The decision making-process is determined by the current behaviour. The set
of behaviours are included in an engine of behaviour associated to each agent. This hybrid model along with the
computational methodology allows us building an artiﬁcial environment populated with autonomous agents, which
are capable of interacting with each other. Furthermore, in order to test some human behaviours, we developed simple
exercises where the model is applied to the simulation of evacuation processes.
Keywords: Evacuation Simulation, Crowd Behaviours, Cellular Automata, Intelligent Agents

1. Introduction
Shopping centres, schools and dance halls are some examples of buildings commonly used in diﬀerent daily
activities that involve the meeting of a large number of people within a closed area. The designers of these types of
building usually attempt to maximise the productivity of the available space, but also it is necessary to consider a
suitable planning for assuring people safety when an unusual behaviour of the crowd occurs. One of the most frequent
causes of this kind of behaviour is the emergency evacuation due to the threat of ﬁre. In such situation, a closed area,
with a relatively small number of ﬁxed exits, must be evacuated for a large number of people.
In the last years, the interest in models of emergency evacuation processes and pedestrian dynamics has increased.
The model resolution is the level of detail regarding the representation of space [1]. Models used for evaluating the
evacuation processes can broadly be categorised in microscopic (high resolution) and macroscopic approaches (low
Email addresses: ptissera@gmail.com (Pablo Cristian Tissera), mprinti@unsl.edu.ar (A. Marcela Printista), emilio.luque@uab.es
(Emilio Luque)

1877-0509 © 2012 Published by Elsevier Ltd. Open access under CC BY-NC-ND license.
doi:10.1016/j.procs.2012.04.028

Pablo Cristian Tissera et al. / Procedia Computer Science 9 (2012) 266 – 275

267

resolution). The macroscopic approaches are based on diﬀerential equations that take into account the similarities
with systems previously studied like dynamics of ﬂuids [2, 3, 4]. By its nature, this type of model does not consider
individual characteristics and neither local coordination problems (eg collisions). This implies that the resulting
models are often not ﬂexible enough to fully understand the dynamics that arise in a pedestrian evacuation process.
On the other hand, the microscopic approaches allow to consider how the system state evolves during the model
running. Within this category there is a diversity of models, including perhaps the best known are those based on
the Social Forces Model(SFM) [5], Cellular Automata (CA) [6, 7, 8, 9] and Intelligent Agents (IA) [10, 11]. Models
based on the concept of social forces and cellular automata, can represent individuals as basic units of the system but
have the limitation of assuming that the individuals depicted are homogeneous, ie that the behavior of all of them will
be governed by the same rules [12].
Our research considers a microscopic model. The model uses the concept of CA for modeling the characteristics
of the environment [13, 14, 15] and for the exposed above we use the concept of IA to represent individuals. In the
model, the connection between the space (its geometry), population and the propagation of ﬁre and smoke is made
via the rules or equations.
A high ﬁdelity model is one with many parameters that directly takes into account all the diﬀerent inﬂuences
(e.g., parameters like age, training, weight, etc. in the case of pedestrians). CA allow us to generate “local” and
“uniform” behaviours that resemble the dynamics observed in real processes of ﬁre and smoke propagation. However,
these local features were not suitable for representing certain aspects of people behaviour that require a more speciﬁc
and diﬀerentiated perspective. We developed a hybrid model where the dynamics of ﬁre and smoke propagation are
modelled by means of CA and for simulating people behaviour we are using goal oriented intelligent agent (IA).
In the Model, each individual or pedestrian is an agent that, will have its own thread of control and be able to run
independently appropiate actions according to their own state, the perceived environment and the messages provided
by the system (external stimuli). Through interaction and coordinated evolution of these two sub-models, CA and IA,
it is possible to obtain a model capable of simulating indoor environments with a ﬁnite number of exits that must be
evacuated by a group of people due to the threat of ﬁre. The proposed simulation systems allows to specify diﬀerent
scenes with a large number of people and environmental features, making easier the study of the complex behaviours
that arise when the people interact. Our proposal could be used by architects, government agencies, foundations, etc.
in order to know the security threats of a possible disaster, help with appropriate actions of prevention for in a quick
and eﬃcient way to evacuate a building through the design of active policies that minimize the evacuation time when
circumstances require it.
In section 2 we present the Hybrid Model for the Evacuation Simulation. In sub-sections 2.1 and 2.2 we explain
the two sub-models, called environmental (EsM) and pedestrian (PsM) respectively. The section 3 addresses two
behaviours commonly observed in emergency evacuation. In section 4 we developed new features that are needed
to adequately represent the dynamics of a crowd. In section 5 we describe our work with diﬀerent instances of the
problem at hand and report the performance analysis of each case. This section also includes a few commentaries on
the operation of the EVAC simulation systems that support the proposed models. Finally, the section 6 presents the
conclusions.
2. Hybrid Model
The use of cellular automata (CA) are attractive because it is a simple model and extremely eﬃcient for computer
simulation [16]. Unfortunately, these models impose certain limitations that make it diﬃcult the emergence of diﬀerent
social behaviours, from the interaction of a heterogeneous group of individuals with their perceived environment. Our
proposal is to obtain a hybrid simulation model that is able to take advantage of both cellular automata and intelligent
agents.
The model consists of two sub-models, called environmental (EsM) and pedestrian (PsM). This model along with
the computational methodology allows us building an artiﬁcial environment populated with autonomous agents, which
are capable of interacting with each other. The Fig. 1 shows the hybrid model.
The EsM is based on CA, describes the spatial conﬁguration of the environment (geometry of space, exit doors,
internal barriers, etc.) and models the processes of diﬀusion of smoke and ﬁre, while the PsM uses the concept of
intelligent agents to describe the cognitive processes of individual agents and interactions among multiple agents in a

268

Pablo Cristian Tissera et al. / Procedia Computer Science 9 (2012) 266 – 275

Figure 1: Hybrid Model consisting of environmental and pedestrian sub-models

speciﬁc environment. Through interaction and coordinated evolution of these two sub-models it is possible to obtain
a model capable of simulating indoor environments with a ﬁnite number of outputs that must be evacuated by a group
of people due to the threat of ﬁre and the eﬀect of the smoke.
2.1. CA Model for Environmental Simulation
The cellular automata (CA) are discrete dynamic systems that oﬀer an appealing alternative to deal with this kind
of situations due to their capacity to develop complex behaviours from a simple set of rules . Basically, these rules
allow to specify the new state of a cell based on the state of the neighbouring cells. In this way, it is possible to model
complex dynamic systems from the speciﬁcation of the local dynamics of its components.
Below, we describe the main features of the proposed model:
Cellular Space: it is a ﬁnite bi-dimensional array (grid) with closed boundaries. Each cell of the cellular space
represents 40 × 40 cm2 . This is the space usually occupied by a person in a crowd with maximal density [9, 17, 18].
The dimensions of the cellular space are speciﬁed in meters. So, one grid of 10 × 10 m2 will contain 25 cells by side.
States: a cell can be in one of the states of the set Q = {W, E, P, O, S , S F, PS } where:
W : External wall cell.
E : Empty cell.
P : Cell with a person.
O : Internal obstacle cell.

S F : Cell with smoke and ﬁre.
PS : Cell with a person
and smoke.
S : Cell with smoke.

Neighbourhood: the neighbourhood considered in the model is Moore’s Neighbourhood, that includes the eight cells
surrounding the central cell. With this choice we aim to provide to each individual in the system with all possible
movement directions.
Initial Conﬁguration: before the simulation starts diverse information related to the outer walls, inner obstacles,
individuals, combustible locations, cell with ﬁre and arrangement of the exits must be speciﬁed.
Virtual clock: taking into account recent studies [19, 9], an updating time of 0.3 seconds by time-step was speciﬁed
for our model. This value is the estimated time required by a pedestrian for walking 0.4 m (size of a cell side).
Model Evolution Rules [20]: a cell in state W or O (outer wall or obstacle) will not change its state throughout the
simulation (Rules about the building). A cell with smoke (S , S F or PS ) at time t, also will have smoke in time
t + 1. If at time t the central cell does not have smoke, but some of its adjacent cells have smoke, the central cell
also will have smoke at time t + 1 with a probability proportional to the number of adjacent cells with smoke. The
rules about ﬁre propagation are analogous to the rules about smoke propagation. If a cell has smoke or ﬁre, it will
change its status from a min − value that indicates the recent emergence of the element (smoke or ﬁre) in the cell, to
a max − value indicating that the cell has been fully saturated by the spread element (smoke or ﬁre). At present the
propagation model of smoke and ﬁre is deliberately simple, because the goal is to observe how the occurrence of these
elements interact with the ﬂow of the pedestrian evacuation. However, the tool supports any propagation model based
on cellular automata, it is only necessary to incorporate the new set of rules of smoke and ﬁre propagation.

Pablo Cristian Tissera et al. / Procedia Computer Science 9 (2012) 266 – 275

269

2.2. Pedestrian Model
Intelligent agents (IA) have been used successfully in a wide range of applications. In artiﬁcial intelligence, an
intelligent agent is an autonomous entity which observes and acts upon an environment (i.e. it is an agent) and directs
its activity towards achieving goals.
A simple agent program can be deﬁned mathematically as an agent function which maps every possible state to a
possible action the agent can perform or to a coeﬃcient, feedback element, function or constant that aﬀects eventual
actions: Ag : S → A. In the proposed model we set S=Q; A={move Ei , no−move} and the function Ag represents
the agent capability to decide about its desire to move to the cell depending on its environment and the selected exit
(Ei ). For this work we have deﬁned a simple reﬂex agent, but the model (and the software that implements it) supports
many more complex behaviour.
The PsM is the part of the hybrid model focuses on representing the human behaviours. Each agent has a set
of static characteristics (such as sex, age and level of stress tolerance) and dynamic (such as current stress level and
speed). In addition, because the crowd behaviours are complex phenomena, it is necessary focuses on the various
factors that determine the human behaviour and that may contribute to crowd behaviours. As noted by Pan et al.
[10] crowd behaviours may better be examined at diﬀerent level: a) individual level: behaviours can be viewed
as the outcomes of his/her decision making-process and b) the interaction among individuals level: individuals’s
social behaviours are shaped by social structures through following social identities. Also, Pan et al. noted that by
viewing a crowd or a group within a crowd as an entity, we can identify many signiﬁcant factors that may contribute
to crowd behaviours. Examples of such factors may include: crowd density, environmental constrains and mental
stresses imposed by others individuals of the group. In any of these levels, unexpected behaviours may arise from the
decision-making process of an individual under stress when perceiving a situation of danger. A typical situation is
that as uncertainty or danger grows, the behaviour of an individual can change from individual to collective behaviour
(or vice versa) or apply a combination of them. The decision making-process is determined by the current behaviour.
In the proposed model, each individual has an engine of behaviour that manages decision-making processes. As can
be seen in Fig. 2, the engine of behaviours of the individual is a non-deterministic ﬁnite automaton, where each node
represents the implementation of a behaviour while the transitions represent the event for which the individual can
change their behaviour. Now, the decision-making concerns with combining new facts with existing knowledge for
solving diﬀerent situations.

Figure 2: Engine of Behaviours

3. Simulation
A full understanding of crowd behaviours in emergencies normally requires exposing real people to dangerous
situations. The simulations are the useful alternative that can provide valuable information to evaluate a design, to
help planning process, and for dealing with emergencies.
The simulation adopts basically a CA model for advancing the time and for the applying the rules of diﬀusion of
smoke and ﬁre. These rules can be applied independently to the decision making-process of agents.
To simulate the behaviour of humans, we represent each individual as an intelligent agent, located in a speciﬁc
position in the bi-dimensional grid that implements the CA. In each time step, each agent must make a decision.
The process typically follows three basic steps: (1) recognise the situation; (2) take a decision; and (3) carry out the

270

Pablo Cristian Tissera et al. / Procedia Computer Science 9 (2012) 266 – 275

speciﬁc action. Sections 3.1 and 3.2 explain this process for two types of individual behaviours implemented so far.
In the ﬁrst behaviour, called the Nearest Exit, the agent will try to get out the exit closest to its current position. In this
behaviour the decision process will take into account the position of the agent, the direction toward the nearest exit,
the state of its environment in relation to the progress of ﬁre and smoke, but ignore information from other alternative
solutions, the behaviour of other agents and will not take unexpected or altruistic decisions. In the second behaviour,
the agent will analyse diﬀerent exits and choose one that it predicts the fastest exit to evacuate. In this behaviour,
called the Best Predicted Exit, the decision process will take into account the position of the agent, the state of its
environment in relation to the progress of ﬁre and smoke, the distance to alternative exits, the density of crowd trying
to evacuate for each exit (only if the agent can see the exit) and the stress level in relation to its tolerance to it. Under
this behaviour, the agent does not follow the actions of others, i.e. remains in the category of individual behaviour but
it only checks the orientation of the other agents to choose its way toward the best exit.
3.1. The Nearest Exit (NEx) Behaviour
In this behaviour, the agent will always seek evacuate through the exit which is physically closer to its position at
the time of emergency. Each agent knows this door and based on the perception of its environment must select at each
time step, a position on the path to its exit.
If in the neighbourhood there are free cells that come near the exit, the agent will choose the one that most beneﬁts
granted (leave it closer). If there are more than one, the choice of the position is random. If in the neighbourhood
there is no free cell, following the approach described above, the agent will select a cell that is currently occupied
by another agent. This can cause multiple agents try to occupy the same physical location belonging to an exit way.
To solve the problem, after the agents expressed their desire to move to the nominated cell, they should delay their
movement until a conﬂict resolution process is executed. To solve the collisions we changed the approach commonly
used in other works. Instead of being the agents who decide, the selected cell is carrying out the agents competition
process. The hosting decision is concentrated in each nominated cell.
The conﬂict resolution process must solve two types of situations:
The conﬂict occurred when multiple agents chose the same free cell. In this case the process gives priority to the selection of
agents with greater speed and fewer points of damage (parameter speciﬁed in the environment). If the conﬂict persists, the
selection will be random.
The conﬂict occurred when multiple agents requested a cell occupied by another agent. The process must check if the cell will
be free in the next time step. If it will be free, the procedure of the same free cell is executed. Otherwise, the agent will not
move of its current cell.

Finally, it is important to point out that after a prudential time, if an agent remains without advancing, it will try
to change its neighbourhood. In spite of failing to advance in the desired direction, it is reasonable to want to keep
moving until to ﬁnding a way towards the exit.
3.2. The Best Predicted Exit (BPEx) Behaviour
In this behaviour, the agent will analyse diﬀerent exits and choose one that it predicts the fastest exit to evacuate
or at least better than the Nearest Exit policy. As the evacuation progresses, the agent is predicting the cost (in time)
to evacuate by each of the exits that are available in the environment. The inferred lower cost will indicate the best
exit and according to this evaluation, the agent will choose the cell to which to move in the next time step.
The decision making-process evaluates the following cost function:

Cost j =

MinPredT ime.T o j ∗ PredDist j ∗ I j
EvacPredT ime j ∗ MinPredT ime.T o j ∗ PredDist j ∗ I j

if MinPredT ime.T o j >= EvacPredT ime j
if MinPredT ime.T o j < EvacPredT ime j

where:
I j represents the estimated number of agents who intend to evacuate through the exit j;
EvacPredT ime j represents the evacuation estimated time of exit j. This factor takes into account the intentions of
other agents to escape by the door j;

Pablo Cristian Tissera et al. / Procedia Computer Science 9 (2012) 266 – 275

271

MinPredT ime.T o j represents the minimum estimated time needed by the agent to reach the exit j considering a free
path (unobstructed) and
PredDist represents the estimated distance from current position to the exit j. This calculus is made using the
Dijkstra algorithm.
Note that for the case where MinPredT ime.T o j >= EvacPredT ime j it does not take into account the value of
EvacPredT ime j , because if the spent time by the agent to reach the door ” j” is greater than the time taken to dislodge
the door, then when the agent arrives at the door, it would ﬁnd it empty.
The resulting procedure instructs the agent to which exit to go. In addition, the procedure involves a dynamic
factor used to adjust the number of times the agent executes the action to evaluate the exits. This factor limits the
eﬀect of indecision of the agents that occurs when simultaneously multiple agents make the same prediction of fastest
exit to evacuate. As a result, as time goes on, agents can questioning the decision taken by themselves and try to
execute the evaluation process again (the agent comes and goes). This factor depends of a environment size and it is
dynamically adjusted according the time elapsed since the start of the evacuation.
4. Implications of the Hybrid Model Implementation
Whether to use a discrete or continuous representation of space is closely connected to the implementation. A
strong argument in favour of discrete models is that they are simple and can be used for large scale simulations.
Additionally, for pedestrian motion there is a ﬁnite reaction time, which introduces a time scale. The time is chosen
to be discrete in the model and this naturally leads to a discrete representation of space.

Figure 3: Evacuation Simulation

It is possible to discretize the progress of an individual pedestrian, however the movement of a crowd should
appear as a continuous phenomenon. Consider the situation in Fig. 3, which shows a mass of people around the exit
is competing to quickly leave the building. Graphically, it is possible to observe the formation of holes (empty cells)
both around the exit and mixed in the crowd.
In order to analyse this phenomenon, the Fig. 4 (top) examines in detail the progress of two people who are in
adjacent cells following the classical CA models. The time-step 0, only B can move a cell towards the exit. At the
same time-step, A must remain in place because no rule can move it a cell forward. This is because A, based on
their environment, can not determine that the cell will be abandoned by the current individual. At this point a hole is
formed which propagate back across the crowd.
In the time-step 1, A can move one cell forward, and the time-step 2 it will exit of building. Although both
individuals were in adjacent cells (and more generally belong to a crowd), they could not evacuate in consecutive
time-steps. The Fig. 4 (bottom) shows the eﬀect of continuity should be seen in an evacuation of a crowd.
This simultaneous time interval update (inherent in CA) leads to blocking of cells used during one time-step [21].
An alternative is the introduction of sub steps among two consecutive time-steps of CA, as you can see Fig. 5 (top).
Clearly in the case of more than two individuals, we only need to process more than one sub step to resolve the
situation. The Fig. 5 (bottom) shows that the procedure is similar to shift all the elements of an array one position
forward. In this case, with 3 pedestrian, it is necessary 2 sub steps.
It is important to note that the implementation allows us to associate diﬀerent speeds to individuals. Suppose the
evacuation of Fig. 6 in a one-dimensional environment. Consider that the individuals A, C and D have an associated
speed of 1.2m/s (3 cells per s.) and individual B of 0.8m/s (2 cells per s.). Individuals A and D were able to move

272

Pablo Cristian Tissera et al. / Procedia Computer Science 9 (2012) 266 – 275

Figure 4: Advance of two adjacent agents in a CA Model (top). Advance in a Real Evolution (bottom)

3 cells (maximum speed / time-step), B advanced 2 cells (maximum velocity / time-step) and C was blocked by the
individual B, being able to move only 2 cells. Note that in the two-dimensional cellular space, the individual C might
then have found an alternative path and achieves at some point move to 3 cells per time-step.
In this work, the parameter sub steps/time-step has been established empirically. However the Figs. 5 and 6 give
an indication of how complex it can be dynamically determine this parameter.

Figure 5: Sub Steps among two consecutive Time-Step

Figure 6: Evacuation of 4 individuals with diﬀerent speeds

5. Test-Case Scenarios and Results
The experiments were carried out with EVAC Simulator [20, 6], an integrated simulation system based on cellular
automata. EVAC is a system developed in Java that allows the design and simulation of spatial environments in an
explicit way. EVAC simulator oﬀers a friendly graphical interface which can be easily used by non expert users.
EVAC can be used in two diﬀerent modes: edition mode and execution mode. In edition mode, it is possible to
create a new environment or to modify an already existent environment. The general parameters can be set and the
main features of the building to be used during the simulation can be graphically speciﬁed. In execution mode in
turn, an animation of the evacuation process is displayed to the user using the model previously deﬁned in the edition
mode. This mode also generates a report with statistical information gathered during the simulation of the evacuation
process. These facilities are introduced in EVAC as useful tools that allow the user a better comprehension, design
and analysis of the study case under consideration.
We performed a series of experiments in order to test the behaviors under study focusing on showing the results
of the interaction of the two submodels. For that, no experiments have been conducted involving the smoke or ﬁre
elements. The ﬁrst test-case, considers two environment conﬁgurations of the building to be evacuated (A,B) that
diﬀer in the size of the exits. Both environments consider two exits located on opposite ends of the building:

273

Pablo Cristian Tissera et al. / Procedia Computer Science 9 (2012) 266 – 275

• A, 20 × 20 m2 , two exits (E1 and E2 ) of 1.2 m. each, 670 individuals distributed evenly.
• B, 20 × 20 m2 , two exits: E1 of 1.2 m. and E2 of 2.4 m., 670 individuals distributed evenly.
This serie of experiments checks the following situation. When beginning the evacuation, an alert system broadcasts announcements or signs indicating the exit doors. The experiment 100% NEx recreates the situation where no
agent hears, sees or receives this indication, so only managed to leave by the nearest door. The experiment 100%
BPEx checks the extreme situation where all agents, taking the signs, try to evaluate between all the doors, one which
considers the fastest to escape. Finally, the experiment 50% NEx-50% BPEx tests an intermediate situation. With the
purpose of obtaining acceptable statistical data, the results shown in Table 1 correspond to the average of 100 independent replications of each experiment. The corresponding conﬁdence intervals were obtained, for the total evacuation
time (T ET ) (seconds), mean evacuation time (MET xI) (seconds) and mean travelled distance (MDxI) (meters) per
individual to the exit. #Ei indicates the number or pedestrian exiting door Ei .
Environment
A1
A2
A3
B1
B2
B3

100%
NEx
X

50% BPEx
50% NEx

100%
BPEx

X
X
X
X
X

#E1

#E2

TET (sec)

METxI (m)

MDxI (m)

330,9
332,5
332,5
332,9
261,9
258,2

339,1
342,4
337,5
337,1
408,1
411,8

35,33-35,46
35,46-36,49
34,95-35,01
35,55-35,66
29,25-29,78
29,63-30,19

9,58-9,59
9,77-978
9,89-9,90
8,66-8,67
9,60-9,61
10,18-10,19

12,78-12,79
13,03-13,04
13,18-13,19
11,55-11,56
12,80-12,81
13,58-13,59

Table 1: 670 individuals distributed evenly in the building. 2 Exits. #Ei indicates the number of pedestrian exiting door Ei .

The experimental results Ai are similar, it was expected, since on the one hand, the individuals are distributed
uniformly throughout the building and secondly, the doors are the same width. While in the experimental results Bi ,
the following is observed: in the experiment B1 , each exit was chosen by 50% of individuals (they chose the nearest
exit), which synchronised the TET to evacuation time of the smaller door (where it evacuated 332 individuals); in the
experiments B2 and B3 the TET was favored, as the agents responded to the stimulus to evaluate the door to escape
from the building. In these cases, less than 40% of individuals chose the E1 and the rest, although with greater traveled
distances (MDxI), chose the E2 .
The second test-case considers only just one environment conﬁguration (C), varying the diﬀerent occupation
densities of the environment (number of individuals). This environment considers two exits located on opposite ends
of the building:
• C, 10 × 25 m2 , two exits (E1 and E2 ) of 1.6 m. each.
The purpose of this serie is to check a situation where all agents are no longer uniformly distributed throughout
the building, but they are occupying a space close to the E2 . As can be seen in the subsequent experiments Ci , which
are shown in Table 2, as the estimated density on E2 grows (from 60 to 130 pedestrian), the percentage of agents who
choose E1 increases (8% in C1 , 10% in C2 , 11% in C3 and 13.9% in C4 ). This phenomenon produces a deceleration
in the TET. The Fig. 7(a) shows the performance of the test.
Environment
C1
C2
C3
C4

#NEx
30
40
60
100

#BPEx
30
30
30
30

#E1
5
7,14
10,7
16,7

#E2
55
62,86
79,3
113,3

TET (sec)
7,76-7,95
7,99-8,32
8,82-9,40
11,36-11,79

METxI (m)
5,08-5,13
5,50-5,64
5,95-5,99
6,18-6,20

MDxI (m)
6,77-6,85
7,30-7,55
7,93-8,01
8,24-8,27

Table 2: The agents are located evenly in a space around the E2 . #NEx and #BPEx indicate the number of pedestrians who will take the NEx or
BPEx behaviour respectively (input parameters)

The third test-case, considers four environment conﬁgurations of the building to be evacuated (D,E, F,G) that
diﬀer in the size of the exits. All environments consider two exits located on opposite ends of the building:
• D, 10 × 25 m2 , two exits (E1 and E2 ) of 1.6 m. each.

274

Pablo Cristian Tissera et al. / Procedia Computer Science 9 (2012) 266 – 275

• E, 10 × 25 m2 , two exits: E1 of 2.4 m. and E2 of 1.6 m.
• F, 10 × 25 m2 , two exits: E1 of 4 m. and E2 of 1.6 m.
• G, 10 × 25 m2 , two exits: E1 of 6 m. and E2 of 1.6 m.
Similar to the previous case, the purpose of this serie is to check a situation where all agents are located in a space
around the E2 . In an environment of 2520 cells (10 × 25 m2 ), 130 individuals are occupying a space (130 cells) close
to E2 (and therefore individuals are far away from the door E1 ). The Table 3 and the Fig. 7(b) show the performance
of the test. While there is greater reward in leaving the building through the E1 , the distance to this door persuades to
the agents to choose it as an alternative exit.
Environment
D
E
F
G

#NEx
100
100
100
100

#BPEx
30
30
30
30

#E1
16,70
17,46
19,16
20,24

#E2
113,30
112,54
110,84
109,76

TET (sec)
11,36-11,79
11,23-11,62
11,71-11,86
11,73-12,00

METxI (m)
6,18-6,20
6,21-6,25
6,38-6,42
6,31-6,35

MDxI (m)
8,24-8,27
8,27-8,34
8,50-8,58
8,41-8,48

Table 3: 130 individuals are located evenly in a space around the E2

12

12
Total E. Time (TET)
Mean E. Time per individual (METxI)
Mean Traveled Distance per individual (MDxI)

11

Total E. Time (TET)
Mean E. Time per individual (METxI)
Mean Traveled Distance per individual (MDxI)

11

10
10

time (secs)

time (secs)

9
9

8

7

8

7

6

6

5

5

4

4

3

C1

C2

C3

(a) 10x25 m2, two exits of 1.6 m. each

C4

D

E

F

G

(b) 10x25 m2, two exits of diﬀerent sizes

Figure 7: Performance of both behaviours by changing environmental conditions

We performed a series of preliminary experiments in order to assess the quality of the results obtained by our
model. It was found that the empirical results obtained in these experiments are comparable to those obtained by
other implementations, which validate its results against real evacuation exercises. The details of these experiences
can be found in [22, 21]. Our project is still in development, so in the future we must submit the model to a more
rigorous validation process.
6. Conclusions
In this paper we have presented a hybrid simulation model to test behaviour designs in an emergency evacuation.
The model consists of two sub-models, called environmental (EsM) and pedestrian (PsM). This model along with the
computational methodology allows us building an artiﬁcial environment populated with autonomous agents, which
are capable of interacting with each other.
The paper develops a series of experiments. First we set up a test environment for an evacuation of individuals
whose behaviour is out for the ”nearest door.” Then we test the impact of introducing into the environment, external
stimuli instructing the people of other possible escape exits. The behaviour of individuals responding to this stimulus
is intended to ”get out the door faster.” Both behaviours are simulated by several test cases. The experiments not only
to check the impact of individual behaviour in the time of evacuation, but also analyses the impact of the parameters

Pablo Cristian Tissera et al. / Procedia Computer Science 9 (2012) 266 – 275

275

that are included in the cost function evaluated by the decision making-process. Among others, we examined the
impact of distance, population density and width of the exits.
One of the main advantages of the proposed model with respect to current CA models, is that we can describe a
set of individuals with heterogeneous behaviours and provide a framework that will allow us to enhance and add new
behaviours to existing ones.
We believe that the EVAC system is a good start point for designing and analysing new behaviors and to explore
new actions to help create preventive safety policies in building.
Acknowledgements
We thank the National University of San Luis, the ANPCYT and the AECID for their unstinting support. This
research has been supported by the MICINN Spain under contract TIN2007-64974 and the MINECO (MICINN)
Spain under contract TIN2011-24384.
References
[1]
[2]
[3]
[4]
[5]
[6]
[7]
[8]

[9]
[10]
[11]

[12]
[13]
[14]
[15]
[16]
[17]
[18]
[19]
[20]
[21]
[22]

N. Kai, Particle hopping models and traﬃc ﬂow theory, Phys. Rev. E 53 (5) (1996) 4655–4672.
L.F., Henderson, On the ﬂuid mechanics of human crowd motion, Transportation Research 8 (6) (1974) 509–515.
D. Helbing, A ﬂuid dynamic model for the movement of pedestrians, Complex Systems 6 (1992) 391–415.
S. Hoogendoorn, P. H. L. Bovy, Gas-kinetic modeling and simulation of pedestrian ﬂows, Transportation Research Record: Journal of the
Transportation Research Board 1710 (2000) 28–36.
D. Helbing, P. Moln´ar, Social force model for pedestrian dynamics, Phys. Rev. E 51 (1995) 4282–4286.
P. C. Tissera, A. M. Printista, M. Errecalde, Evacuation simulations using cellular automata, Journal of Computer Science & Technology 7 (1)
(2007) 14–20.
V. J. Blue, J. L. Adler, Emergent fundamental pedestrian ﬂows from cellular automata microsimulation, Transportation Research Record 1644
(1998) 29–36.
H. Kl¨upfel, T. Meyer-K¨onig, J. Wahle, M. Schreckenberg, Microscopic simulation of evacuation processes on passenger ships, in: Proceedings of the Fourth International Conference on Cellular Automata for Research and Industry: Theoretical and Practical Issues on Cellular
Automata, Springer-Verlag, London, UK, 2000, pp. 63–71.
C. Burstedde, K. Klauck, A. Schadschneider, J. Zittartz, Simulation of pedestrian dynamics using a 2-dimensional cellular automaton, Physica
A: Statistical Mechanics and its Applications 295 (3-4) (2001) 507–525.
N. K. Pan, C. S. Han, K. Dauber, K. H. Law, A multi-agent based framework for the simulation of human and social behaviors during
emergency evacuations, AI and Society. The Journal of Human-Centred Systems 22 (2) (2007) 113–132.
S. Sarmady, F. Haron, A. Z. H. Talib, Multi-agent simulation of circular pedestrian movements using cellular automata, in: Proceedings of
the 2008 Second Asia International Conference on Modelling & Simulation (AMS), IEEE Computer Society, Washington, DC, USA, 2008,
pp. 654–659.
D. Helbing, A. Johansson, Pedestrian, crowd and evacuation dynamics, in: R. A. Meyers (Ed.), Encyclopedia of Complexity and Systems
Science, Springer, 2009, pp. 6476–6495.
J. V. Neumann, The Theory of Self-reproducing Automata, Univ. of Illinois Press, Urbana, IL, 1966.
G. Martin, Mathematical Games: The fantastic combinations of John Conway’s new solitaire game ”Life”, Scientiﬁc American, 1970.
W. Stephen, Cellular Automata and Complexity, Addison Wesley, USA, 1994.
P. C. Tissera, A. M. Printista, M. Errecalde, Multi-column partitioning for agent-based c.a. model, in: Proceeding of High-Performance
Computing Symposium, SADIO-Argentina, 2011, pp. 89–104.
M. Schreckenberg, T. Meyer-K¨onig, H. Kl¨upfel, Simulating mustering and evacuation processes onboard passenger vessels: Model and
applications, in: In The 2nd International Symposium on Human Factors On Board (ISHFOB), 2001.
H. Timmermans, Pedestrian Behavior: Data Collection and Applications, Emerald Group Publishing Limited, 2009.
H. Kl¨upfel, M. Schreckenberg, T. Meyer-K¨onig, Models for crowd movement and egress simulation, in: S. P. Hoogendoorn, S. Luding,
P. H. L. Bovy, M. Schreckenberg, D. E. Wolf (Eds.), Traﬃc and Granular Flow 03, Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2005, pp. 357–372.
P. C. Tissera, Simulador de evacuaciones basado en automatas celulares, degree thesis, UNSL (Julio 2006).
H. L. Kl¨upfel, A cellular automaton model for crowd movement and egress simulation, Ph.D. thesis, Universitat Duisburg-Essen (2003).
L. E. Aik, Exit-selection behaviors during a classroom evacuation, International Journal of the Physical Sciences 6(13) (2011) 3218–3231.

