Available online at www.sciencedirect.com

Procedia Computer Science 9 (2012) 302 – 311

International Conference on Computational Science, ICCS 2012

Post-frontal combustion heat modeling in DEVS-FIRE for coupled
atmosphere-fire simulation
Haidong Xuea,*, Xiaolin Hua, Nathan Dahlb, Ming Xueb
a
Department of Computer Science, Georgia State University, Atlanta 30303, USA
University of Oklahoma/Center for Analysis and Prediction of Storms, Norman 73072, USA

b

Abstract
Modeling the heat released from a burning wildfire is essential to support coupled atmosphere-fire simulation. This paper
presents post-frontal combustion heat modeling in the wildfire spread model of DEVS-FIRE. The developed heat model
integrates features from both the BURNUP model and the heat model of WRF-Fire to compute the heat flux of wildfire. To
model fuel consumption, it uses the BURNUP model to calculate the burning time and employs an exponentially decreasing fuel
mass loss curve to derive the fuel consumption rate. Experiment results are presented and compared with those from the heat
model of WRF-Fire. Using the developed heat model, a coupled atmosphere-fire simulation based on DEVS-FIRE and the ARPS
atmospheric model is run to demonstrate the impact of the mutual interaction between wildfire and weather on wildfire spread.
Keywords: wildfire; coupled atomosphere-fire simulation; heat model, DEVS-FIRE, ARPS

1. Introduction
Simulation of wildfire spread plays important roles in wildfire management. Reliable modeling of wildfire spread
requires not only an accurate portrayal of the fuels and topography at ground level, but also an accurate
representation of the manner in which the fire and the atmosphere above it affect one another. In an effort to
achieve more accurate simulations of wildfire spread, a two-way coupling between the discrete event wildfire spread
model DEVS-FIRE [1, 2] and the Advanced Regional Prediction System atmospheric model (ARPS) [3, 4] is
currently being developed to capture the fire-atmosphere feedbacks. To support coupled atmosphere-fire simulation,
the DEVS-FIRE model needs to be extended to compute the heat release of post-frontal combustion of the wildfire.
A post-frontal combustion heat model is essential for coupled atmosphere-fire simulation because the heat flux of
a wildfire constantly affects weather conditions, which in turn continuously influences the fire spread behavior.
Wildfire is a complex process combined by procedures of energy releasing in chemical reactions and the transport of
that energy [5]. As a consequence, all the factors associated with those chemical or physical procedures in turn have
a strong influence on fire growth. Weather conditions as one of the factors are also significantly affected by the heat
flux released from a fire. Therefore, in order to predict the spread of a wildfire, one needs to calculate the heat flux
and thus requires accurate heat models.

*

Corresponding author. E-mail address: hxue@cs.gsu.edu.

1877-0509 © 2012 Published by Elsevier Ltd. Open access under CC BY-NC-ND license.
doi:10.1016/j.procs.2012.04.032

Haidong Xue et al. / Procedia Computer Science 9 (2012) 302 – 311

303

In most three-dimensional physics-based fire propagation models, like FIRETEC [6] or ForeFire [7], heat
formulation is an inherent part of the fire spread computation. However, for empirical-based fire spread models such
[8], a separated heat release model needs to be developed.
as DEVS-FIRE that
a certain fuel, the heat flux can be technically calculated from the reaction rate, but this reaction rate is only valid on
the fire fronts and thus cannot be used to calculate the heat release for post-frontal combustion. For post-frontal
combustion, Albini and Reinhardt in [9] propose a more accurate model that is usually referred to as BURNUP,
where fire is assumed to sublime fuels, and heat is transferred into fuels by both convection and radiation. In this
way, BURNUP simulates the fuel combustion process from which heat production of a wildfire can be derived. This
model is adopted by FARSITE to calculate smoke and heat output for post-frontal fire behavior [10]. Clark, Coen et
as exponentially decreasing curves, and use only one parameter
al. in [11]
(referred to as the
weighting factor expressing the rate of mass loss, and with this rate the heat flux is modeled as a function of fuel
mass loss in a given period. In our work,
known, but instead of using an invariable mass loss curve for a given type of fuel we employ a method similar to
BURNUP to model the mass loss curve. The resulting heat flux model is more realistic in the sense that it
incorporates environmental factors such as wind speed and fire intensity.
The coupled atmosphere-fire simulation in our work is based on the DEVS-FIRE model and the ARPS model.
DEVS-FIRE, built on Discrete Event System Specification (DEVS) formalism [12], is a two-dimensional wildfire
spread and suppression simulation model. DEVS-FIRE models a wildfire area as a cellular space containing
individual cells, and they are coupled together according to the Moore neighborhood. Each cell is approximated to
[8] is implemented on each of the cells for
calculating the maximum fire spread direction and rate, and an elliptical expanding curve is then employed to
calculate when to send ignition signals to neighboring cells. Fire spread simulation in DEVS-FIRE is partially
validated in [13] by comparing simulation results with those from FARSITE [14]. Besides fire spread simulation,
DEVS-FIRE also supports fire suppression simulation with realistic firefighting tactics. More details on this aspect
can be found in [15].
ARPS is a nonhydrostatic three-dimensional model system developed by the Center for Analysis and Prediction
of Storms; while the primary motivation is storm-scale modeling, the model contains a wide variety of
formulations/parameterizations that suit it for weather modeling over a wide range of scale. The model equations
are integrated over a staggered Arakawa C-grid mapped on a curvilinear, terrain-following coordinate system to
account for orographic effects. The system also includes self-contained routines for data assimilation and
preprocessing, as well as software for plotting and viewing the simulation results. The scale flexibility of ARPS is
well-suited to the demands of simulating atmospheric response to the complex regions of intense surface heat flux
found in wildfires. Previous research, e.g. [16], indicates that this response is highly dependent on the large-scale
atmospheric conditions ranging from the surface to several kilometers above ground level. Thus, an accurate
prediction of wildfire spread spanning several hours must reliably capture the temporal evolution of these conditions
as well as the small-scale phenomena generated near the fire. ARPS can accomplish this by capturing the largescale conditions in a relatively inexpensive coarse-grid simulation and then using the results to provide initial and
boundary conditions for a high-resolution simulation containing the region of fire spread.
Coupled atmosphere-fire simulation has been researched in several previous works. Clark, Coen et al. in [11]
coupled a nonhydrostatic numerical mesoscale atmosphere model with a BURNUP based fire spread model.
Mandel, Beezley et al. in [17] developed WRF-Fire, which improved
atmosphere model with WRF (Weather Research and Forecasting Model) due to the
serial and
. WRF also uses a level-set-based method instead of the tracer-based method in its fire
model to enhance flexibility. Coupled atmosphere-fire simulations were also developed using physical-based fire
models. Examples include HIGRAD/FIRETEC [18] and MesoNH-ForeFire [19].

304

Haidong Xue et al. / Procedia Computer Science 9 (2012) 302 – 311

2. The heat model in DEVS-FIRE
The developed heat model in DEVS-FIRE is built on several existing models in literature. Thus before presenting
the heat model in DEVS-FIRE, we describe those models on which our work is based.
2.1.
DEVS-FIRE
intensi
DEVS-FIRE
model, before the calculation of fire spread rate, the reaction intensity is first calculated as:
,

(1)

is the net fuel load, is the fuel particle low heat content,
is the
where is the optimum reaction velocity,
is the mineral damping coefficient. Assuming all the heat is released into
moisture damping coefficient and
as the heat flux. However, fuel load quickly decreases with time, so this reaction rate is
atmosphere, one can use
only valid in the beginning period of a fire. Also, this rate is independent of many important factors such as weather
conditions
rate of fire spread, the intermediate reaction intensity is invalid when calculating heat released from a fire.
2.2. Burning rate in BURNUP
BURNUP is an empirical burning rate model where the assumption for heat transfer is that the fuel consumption
process is similar to a sublimation process. With this assumption, BURNUP has an excellent feature that a fuel
[20]. As a result, many
environmental factors become the inputs of BURNUP (like summarized in [21]), including fire intensity, wind
speed and air temperature.
Although sublimation is not the real burning process, by applying parameter determination, this model can still
produce a comparatively precise burning rate. The fuel diameter reduction rate in BURNUP is:
,

(2)

is the heat transfer coefficient,
is the temperature of fireǡ is the temperature
where D is the fuel diameter,
of fire in BURNUP experiments (928K), is the sublimation temperature,
is the sublimation temperature in
is the oven dry fuel mass density in BURNUP
BURNUP experiment (673K), is the oven dry fuel mass density,
experiments (466 kg m-3), is the fuel moisture fraction, and are the coefficients determined by experiments.
that consists of a convective heat transfer coefficient and a
Wind speeds contribute to this reduction rate via
radioactive heat transfer coefficient, and wind speeds are used to determine the convective heat transfer coefficient.
Moreover, the fuel diameter function is models as:
,

(3)

is the fuel diameter at time (assuming the fuel is ignited at time 0), is the burning time (at which,
where
is the initial fuel diameter. From these assumptions, the fractional mass
the fuel burns down to 0), and
remaining can be derived as:
,

(4)

305

Haidong Xue et al. / Procedia Computer Science 9 (2012) 302 – 311

,

(5)

where
is the fuel mass at time , and
is the initial fuel mass.
In this model, the fuel mass loss curve (the curve of fractional fuel mass remaining) is consistent with experiment
results after and are decided, and the curve is a decreasing quadratic curve. Moreover, this burning rate is
reasonably affected by many factors like fire temperature, fuel moisture, fuel mass density and wind speed, although
the importance of wind could be underestimated as described on page 175 in [20].
2.3. Heat flux in WRF-Fire
Clark, Coen et al. simplify the mass loss curve in BURNUP to an exponentially decreasing function with only
one coefficient W (named weighting factor) [11]. For each fuel type, a weighting factor is specified by the same
empirical method as in BURNUP. Then the weighting factor of a fuel represents its fuel mass loss curve; for
example, W is 7 for tall grass and W is 180 for chaparral. This model is adopted by WRF-Fire [17]. Since our heat
model is closely related to that of WRF-Fire, below we present the heat model in WRF-Fire. In section 3, we also
compare the results of the two models. According to the model in WRF-Fire, the fractional fuel mass remaining is
then modeled as:
,

(6)

,

(7)

of the original quantity. After that,
where is the number of seconds for the fuel to burn down to
each weighting factor decides the fuel mass loss curve of a type of fuel. Heat flux is then modeled as:
,

(8)

where
is the fuel load, is the heat content, and
is the fuel particle moisture content. The weakness of this
model is that the heat flux is not influenced by wind speed, fire temperature and some other important factors. Also,
this model implies that a fuel will burn down to a quantity that is close to zero since the mass loss curve is
exponentially decreasing, and it is contradicted by the findings of [21] indicating that woody fuel consumption is
variable from 9.1% to 89.9%.
2.4. Heat model of DEVS-FIRE
To retain the simplicity and to model the partial fuel consumption, the same as in WRF-Fire, we model the
fractional fuel mass remaining as an exponentially decreasing function before the burning time in BURNUP is
arrived at. Moreover, after that burning time is reached, we model the fuel to stop losing weight, and use a parameter
. The resulting fuel mass loss fraction is shown as in equations (9).
( ) to specify the final fraction as

.

(9)

306

Haidong Xue et al. / Procedia Computer Science 9 (2012) 302 – 311

Furthermore, considering that the fuel load, moisture, and heat content are specifically
model, we employ those to calculate the heat flux:
,

(10)

where
is the net fuel load, is the fuel particle low heat content,
is the moisture damping coefficient, and
is the mineral damping coefficient.
As can be seen, the major difference between this model and the heat model in WRF-Fire is the different mass
loss curves and the different resulting fuel mass remaining fractions. In the heat model of WRF-Fire, the mass loss
curve for a burning fuel is determined by a single weighting factor, whereas in our proposed heat model it depends
on many characteristics of the fuel and the environment around the fire. In WRF-Fire, a fuel is finally all consumed,
whereas in our model a certain fuel fraction more practically remains when a fire is self-extinguished.
With our proposed heat model, the combustion history can be more realistically simulated. However, for each
type of fuel, instead of a single weighting factor, two parameters ( and ) as shown in equation (5) have to be
determined using the empirical method in [9], which increases the difficulty of applying this model.
2.5. Heat Release Computation in DEVS-FIRE
In DEVFIRE, the heat flux of a wildfire is calculated by an atomic DEVS model coupled with the fire spread
,a
model. At any time, when the state of a cell in the fire spread model switc
message including the current time and the reference of this cell is sent to the heat model. The heat model records
the information it receives and remains passive if there is no message except in the updating time points, which are
the time points for DEVS-FIRE to output heat flux for each of the ignited cells.
In an updating time point, equation (10) is applied to calculate the heat flux. For each of the cell received, the
burning time at the beginning of the last simulation step is calculated as:
.
The increment of the burning time at the end of the last simulation step is calculated as:
.
Other inputs of equation (10) (such as fuel moisture fraction or heat content) are read in from the cell reference.
The reason that DEVS-FIRE directly applies equation (10) to calculate the heat flux is the assumption (introduced in
section 1) that each cell is considered to have a uniform fire behavior; thus, the burning area of a cell is always the
entire area of that cell after it is ignited.
3. Experiments
3.1. Mass loss curve comparison and heat flux comparison
Fuel mass loss curve is not affected by environmental factors in WRF-Fire, and our proposed model tries to solve
this problem. We propose to use the burning time calculated from BURNUP as shown in equation (5) to draw the
fuel mass loss curve; at the same time, WRF-Fire obtains the curve by a constant weighing factor and the resulting
as shown in equation (6). In order to compare the difference, we set in equation (9) to 1. The burning
constant
time ( ) in our model (as shown in equation (9)) then plays the same role as
in the heat model of WRF-Fire (as
shown in equation (6)). We first performed experiment to illustrate that with changing fuel moisture or wind speed,
in WRF-Fire remains the same, but in our proposed model largely varies.
We set the fuel type to hard wood litter, the initial fuel diameter to 0.3 m, the fuel mass density to 400 kg m-3, the
fire temperature to 1350 K, the fuel moisture fraction to 0, and change the wind speed from 0 m s -1 to 50 m s-1. In
is then 1057 seconds. As shown in Fig. 1(a), although
WRF-Fire, after knowing the fuel type is hard wood litter,
wind speed significantly changes,
remains the same since it is only decided by the fuel type; meanwhile, in our
model,
decreases when wind speed becomes larger. The total reduction of
is about 20% when the wind speed

307

Haidong Xue et al. / Procedia Computer Science 9 (2012) 302 – 311

grows from 0 m s-1 to 50 m s-1. It is then more consistent with the observation in real fires that the larger the wind
speed, the faster the fuel will lose mass.
On the other hand, when setting wind speed to 20 m s-1, leaving other parameters the same as above, and
still remains the same in the heat model of WRFchanging only the fuel moisture fraction, as shown in Fig. 1(b),
Fire while greatly increases with the growth of fuel moisture. When the fuel moisture fraction is 0.5, is about
2.5 times as large as when the fuel moisture fraction is 0. With our proposed model, like in most of fires, wet fuels
lose mass slower than dry fuels.
Tf in WRF-Fire

Burning time in DEVS-FIRE
2500

1150

2300

1100

2100
Burning time (s)

Burning time (s)

Burning time in DEVS-FIRE
1200

1050
1000
950

1900
1700
1500

900

1300

850

1100

800

Tf in WRF-Fire

900
0

10

20

30

40

50

0

0.1

Wind speed (m/s)

0.2

0.3

0.4

0.5

Fuel moisture fraction

Fig. 1. (a) Comparison of burning time ( ) in DEVS-FIRE and in WRF-Fire in changing wind speed; (b) Comparison of
burning time in DEVS-FIRE and in WRF-Fire in changing fuel moisture fraction.

DEVS-FIRE (wind speed = 0)

DEVS-FIRE (wind speed = 30)

DEVS-FIRE (M=0)

DEVS-FIRE (M=0.3)

DEVS-FIRE (wind speed = 50)

WRF-Fire

DEVS-FIRE (M=0.5)

WRF-Fire

1

1

0.9

0.9

0.8

0.8

0.7

0.7
Fuel mass fraction

Fuel mass fraction

With this calculation of
we then draw the mass loss curves of our proposed DEVS-FIRE heat model when
wind speed is 0 m s-1, 30 m s-1 and 50 m s-1 (as shown in Fig. 2(a)), and when fuel moisture is 0, 0.3 and 0.5 (as
shown in Fig.2(b)). They are compared with the corresponding mass loss curve of WRF-Fire. It is clearly seen that
the curve of WRF-Fire remains the same, and in our proposed model the curve changes when wind speed or fuel
is reached.
moisture changes. Moreover, in our proposed DEVS-FIRE heat model, fuel stop to lose mass when
This heat model in turn may provide more precise heat flux calculations for DEVS-FIRE.

0.6
0.5
0.4

0.6
0.5
0.4

0.3

0.3

0.2

0.2

0.1

0.1
0

0
0

500

1000

1500
Time (s)

2000

2500

3000

0

500

1000

1500

2000

2500

3000

Time (s)

Fig. 2. (a) Fuel mass loss curves of WRF-Fire and DEVS-FIRE with different wind speed; (b) Fuel mass loss curves of WRF-Fire
and DEVS-FIRE with different fuel moisture fraction.

We performed another experiment to compare the heat flux produced by WRF-Fire and DEVS-FIRE, where we
set wind speed to 20 m s-1 and used two fuel moisture fractions, 0 and 0.5. For heat flux calculations, we set the heat
content and fuel load as those of hardwood litter fuel, i.e. heat content is 18606.7 kJ kg-1 and fuel load is 0.7 kg m-2.

308

Haidong Xue et al. / Procedia Computer Science 9 (2012) 302 – 311

Also, we set mineral content to 0, and net fuel load is then equivalent to fuel load. Also, the moisture content of
extinction was set to 0.7. All the other parameters were held the same as in previous experiments.
Four groups of heat flux data were compared: DEVS-FIRE heat flux for a fuel moisture fraction of 0; DEVSFIRE heat flux for a fuel moisture fraction of 0.5; WRF-Fire heat flux for a fuel moisture fraction of 0; and WRFFire heat flux for a fuel moisture fraction of 0.5. It should be noted that although the fuel moisture fraction does not
affect the fuel mass loss curve in WRF-Fire, it still influences the heat flux since it is an input of WRFflux model as shown in equation (8).
The results are displayed in Fig. 3. When the fuel moisture fraction is 0, the two models have similar heat flux
before the DEVS-FIRE burning time (974 seconds) is reached. In DEVS-FIRE, heat flux is influenced by wind
speed, so it is different from the one of WRF-Fire. After reaching the burning time, DEVS-FIRE outputs the heat
generated in the last simulation step and stops to output heat flux; meanwhile, WRF-Fire continues to output an
exponentially decreasing heat flux. When the fuel moisture fraction is 0.5, both DEVS-FIRE and WRF-Fire output
less heat flux than when the fuel moisture fraction is 0. However, the change of heat flux in DEVS-FIRE is more
remarkable. In DEVS-FIRE, the initial heat flux reduced to about 17% of the initial heat flux when the fuel moisture
The reason is that in DEVS-FIRE,
fraction is 0, whereas WRFincreased fuel moisture largely slow down the consumption of fuel. Again, once the burning time (2401 seconds in
this case) is reached, DEVS-FIRE stops to output the heat flux.

WRF-Fire (M=0)

DEVS-FIRE (M = 0)

WRF-Fire (M=0.5)

DEVS-FIRE (M = 0.5)

14

12

Heat Flux (kJ s-1 m-2)

10

8

6

4

2

0
0

200

400

600

800

1000

1200

1400
1600
Time (s)

1800

2000

2200

2400

2600

2800

3000

Fig. 3. Heat flux comparison between DEVS-FIRE and WRF-Fire when fuel moisture fraction is 0 and 0.5.

3.2. DEVS-FIRE/ARPS coupled simulation
The current method of coupling DEVS-FIRE to ARPS involves inserting the spatial distribution of the surface
sensible heat flux calculated by the heat model proposed for DEVS-FIRE into ARPS and, in turn, inserting the nearsurface weather conditions (temperature, humidity, wind speed, and wind direction) calculated by ARPS into
DEVS-FIRE at regular time intervals. DEVS-FIRE is able to run at a higher grid resolution than ARPS without
much additional cost; furthermore, the ARPS grid needs to be larger than the DEVS-FIRE grid in order to avoid the
fire spreading to the lateral boundaries and conflicting sharply with the boundary conditions. Therefore, the grids
are never identical for both models, and this information exchange requires some method of inexpensive grid
mapping and data interpolation.
Currently, the ARPS and DEVS-FIRE grids are matched geographically using the latitude/longitude coordinates
of the southeastern-most DEVS-FIRE grid cell as a reference. ARPS is generally run at coarser resolution, so the
heat flux data from all DEVS-FIRE cells within 0.5d (where d is the horizontal grid spacing in ARPS) of a given

Haidong Xue et al. / Procedia Computer Science 9 (2012) 302 – 311

309

ARPS grid point are mapped onto that grid point using a simple average. Meanwhile, weather data at DEVS-FIRE
cell locations between ARPS grid points are obtained via biquadratic interpolation (used in hopes of maintaining
some of the data structure near sharp gradients/boundaries) and written to an ASCII file for DEVS-FIRE to read. (It
should be noted here that the heat flux inserted into ARPS is entirely confined to the first layer above the surface,
instead of being distributed vertically as in other models such as WRF-Fire. This is done in hopes of better capturing
the intense heat flux convergence immediately above the combustion zone; however, this method has produced
numerical instability in some ARPS simulations involving very intense fires and may thus require modification for
future case studies.)
To demonstrate the importance of coupling the weather model to the fire model, a pair of 2-hour simulations
were run using an idealized atmosphere with weak static stability and initially-uniform, vertically-sheared zonal
wind over a uniform fuel bed. DEVS-FIRE was run at 10-meter resolution while ARPS was run at 30-meter
resolution, which required a 0.1-second time step for the ARPS integration. For the uncoupled simulation, ARPS
was allowed to respond to the heat generated by DEVS-FIRE, but DEVS-FIRE was not allowed to respond to
changing weather conditions calculated by ARPS; for the coupled simulation, both models ran in parallel and
exchanged information at 30-second intervals.
Even though the burn intensity at the fire front is the same for both simulations, coupling the models (instead of
having ARPS respond to DEVS-FIRE but not vice versa) has a clear impact on the atmospheric response. This is
illustrated in Fig. 4, which compares the near-surface atmospheric potential temperature perturbation and wind in
the vicinity of the northern half of the fireline for the uncoupled (top) and coupled (bottom) simulations at t = 5280
seconds. In the uncoupled simulation a succession of strong, nearly-stationary vortices forms in the south-central
portion of the plot; this is not observed in the coupled simulation.

Fig. 4. Simulated atmospheric response at 6 meters AGL for uncoupled (top) and coupled (bottom) DEVS-FIRE/ARPS model
runs at t = 5280 seconds. Arrows represent horizontal wind vectors, while color fills show positive potential perturbations
(relative to the idealized horizontally homogeneous base state) in 5°C increments ranging from <= 0 (white) to 40°C (dark
orange).

310

Haidong Xue et al. / Procedia Computer Science 9 (2012) 302 – 311

The cause of these vortices is apparent in Fig. 5, which shows the fire spread progressions calculated by DEVSFIRE; in the uncoupled simulation, the fireline develops sharp corners or kinks on either side of the line of
symmetry. When the atmospheric adjustment is not factored into the spread rate calculations, these kinks persist for
the entire simulation and provide a constant focus for vertical vorticity generation in the atmosphere immediately
above; in a coupled simulation, such a vortex on the north side of the line of symmetry would increase the spread
rate north of the kink while decreasing it south of the kink
would in turn reduce the tendency for additional vortices to form in these areas while current atmospheric and fuel
conditions persisted.
On the other hand, the coupled simulation also shows enhanced vorticity generation and spread rate on the flanks
of the initial fireline, as evidenced by the bulges in the second and third panels in the bottom row of Fig. 5. The
wind changes responsible for these bulges stem from the horizontal vorticity generated by intense buoyancy
gradients at the fireline; this vorticity is increasingly tilted and stretched as the fireline bulges advance beneath it,
which in turn amplifies the bulges until they merge at the line of symmetry. Thus, atmosphere-fire coupling is
subject to both positive and negative feedbacks, and the coupled simulation reveals the impacts of both
simultaneously (decreasing fire spread to the north and south but increasing it to the east). Such feedbacks are
difficult, if not impossible, to evaluate qualitatively in advance and have been shown in previous studies (e.g. [11])
to exert a large cumulative effect on both the fire spread and the atmosphere near wildfires lasting several hours or
more. To confirm and validate the impact of these effects within the DEVS-FIRE/ARPS coupled model, additional
simulations seeking to recreate fire spread from an actual wildfire case lasting several days are currently underway.

Fig. 5. Simulated fire spread from uncoupled (top) and coupled (bottom) DEVS-FIRE/ARPS model runs at (from left to right) t =
30, 1800, 3600, and 5400 seconds. Grid cells are plotted as unburned (green), ignited/burning (red), and burned out (black).

4. Conclusion
This paper presents post-frontal combustion heat modeling for the DEVS-FIRE wildfire spread model. The
developed heat model integrates features from both the BURNUP model and the heat model of WRF-Fire. To model
fuel consumption, it uses the BURNUP model to calculate the burning time and employs an exponentially
decreasing fuel mass loss curve to derive the fuel consumption rate. With this heat model, a DEVS-FIRE/ARPS
coupled atmosphere-fire simulation using uniform fuel model and flat terrain was performed which demonstrates the
impact of the coupled simulation on wildfire spread.
Future work includes running more simulations to evaluate the developed models and to simulate wildfire spread
for historical wildfires. In the process, the heat transfer computations used in ARPS will be modified to mitigate the
risk of numerical instability, e.g. by distributing the heat flux over a specified atmospheric depth and/or refining the
parameterizations used to estimate radiative flux through the air near the surface. Furthermore, it should be noted
that the current simulations are slower than real-time, even when using more than a hundred processors working in
parallel; for example, the coupled 2-hour simulations presented here required from 6 to 8 hours to produce, largely

Haidong Xue et al. / Procedia Computer Science 9 (2012) 302 – 311

311

because of the small time step required for integrating the atmospheric governing equations in ARPS at high spatial
resolution to avoid immediate instability. Therefore, current efforts also focus on further parallelizing and
streamlining ARPS computations (e.g. optimizing grid resolution and time step) as well as improving the efficiency
of the information exchange between ARPS and DEVS-FIRE.
References
1. L. Ntaimo, X. Hu, Y. Sun, DEVS-FIRE: towards an integrated simulation environment for surface wildfire spread and containment,
SIMULATION, 84 (2008) 137-155.
2. X. Hu, Y. Sun, L. Ntaimo, DEVS-FIRE: design and application of formal discrete event wildfire spread and suppression models,
SIMULATION, (2011).
3. M. Xue, K.K. Droegemeier, V. Wong, The Advanced Regional Prediction System (ARPS) - A multiscale nonhydrostatic atmospheric
simulation and prediction tool. Part I: Model dynamics and verification, Meteor. Atmos. Physics., 75 (2000) 161-193.
4. M. Xue, K.K. Droegemeier, V. Wong, A. Shapiro, K. Brewster, F. Carr, D. Weber, Y. Liu, D.H. Wang, The Advanced Regional
Prediction System (ARPS) - A multiscale nonhydrostatic atmospheric simulation and prediction tool. Part II: Model physics and applications,
Meteor. Atmos. Physics., 76 (2001) 134-165.
5. A.L. Sullivan, A review of wildland surface fire spread modelling, 1990-2007. 1: Physical and quasi-physical models, International
Journal of Wildland Fire, 18 (2009) 349-368.
6. R.R. Linn, A transport model for prediction of wildfire behaviour, in: Department of Mechanical Engineering, New Mexico State
University, 1997.
7. J.-H. Balbi, J.-L. Rossi, T. Marcelli, P.-A. Santoni, A 3D physical real-time model of surface fires across fuel beds, Combustion Science &
Technology, 179 (2007) 2511-2537.
8. R.C. Rothermel, A mathematical model for predicting fire spread in wildland fuels, in: USDA Forest Service research paper INT, 115,
Intermountain Forest & Range Experiment Station, Forest Service, U.S. Dept. of Agriculture, Ogden, Utah, 1972.
9. F.A. Albini, E.D. Reinhardt, Modeling ignition and burning rate of large woody natural fuels, International Journal of Wildland Fire, 5
(1995) 81-91.
10. M.A. Finney, Spatial modeling of post-frontal fire behavior, in: Final Report RMRS-99557-RJVA, Systems for Environmental
Management, Missoula MT, 1999.
11. T.L. Clark, J. Coen, D. Latham, Description of a coupled atmosphere-fire model, International Journal of Wildland Fire, 13 (2004) 49-63.
12. B.P. Zeigler, T.G. Kim, H. Praehofer, Theory of modeling and simulation, 2nd ed., Academic Press, Inc., 2000.
13. F. Gu, X. Hu, L. Ntaimo, Towards validation of DEVS-FIRE wildfire simulation model, in: High Performance Computing and
Simulation Symposium (HPCS'08), part of SpringSim'08, 2008.
14. M.A. Finney, FARSITE, fire area simulator--model development and evaluation, in: Research paper RMRS, RP-4, U.S. Dept. of
Agriculture, Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Research Station, Ogden, UT (324 25th St., Ogden 84401), 1998.
15. X. Hu, L. Ntaimo, Integrated simulation and optimization for wildfire containment, The ACM Transactions on Modeling and Computer
Simulation (TOMACS), 19 (2009) 1-29.
16. M.T. Kiefer, Y.-L. Lin, J.J. Charney, A study of two-dimensional dry convective plume modes with variable critical level height, Journal
of the Atmospheric Sciences, 65 (2008) 448-469.
17. J. Mandel, J.D. Beezley, A.K. Kochanski., Coupled atmosphere-wildland fire modeling with WRF 3.3 and SFIRE 2011, Geoscientific
Model Development, 4 (2011) 591-610.
18. P. Cunningham, R.R. Linn, Numerical simulations of grass fires using a coupled atmosphere-fire model: dynamics of fire spread, Journal
of Geophysical Research, 112 (2007).
19. J.B. Filippi, F. Bosseur, C. Mari, C. Lac, P.L. Moigne, B. Cuenot, D. Veynante, D. Cariolle, J.-H. Balbi, Coupled atmosphere-wildland
fire modelling, Journal of Advances in Modeling Earth Systems, 1 (2009).
20. F.A. Albini, J.K. Brown, E.D. Reinhardt, R.D. Ottmar, Calibration of a large fuel burnout model, International Journal of Wildland Fire,
5 (1995) 173-192.
21. J.J. Hollis, S. Matthews, R.D. Ottmar, S.J. Prichard, A. Slijepcevic, N.D. Burrows, B. Ward, K.G. Tolhurst, W.R. Anderson, J.S. Gould,
Testing woody fuel consumption models for application in Australian southern eucalypt forest fires, Forest Ecology and Management, 260 (2010)
948-964.

