Procedia Computer Science
Volume 51, 2015, Pages 610–619
ICCS 2015 International Conference On Computational Science

A software tool for the automatic quantiﬁcation of the left
ventricle myocardium hyper-trabeculation degree
Gregorio Bernab´e1 , Javier Cuenca1 , Pedro E. L´opez de Teruel1 , Domingo
Gim´enez2 , and Josefa Gonz´alez-Carrillo3
1

Computer Engineering Department, University of Murcia (Spain)
(gbernabe, javiercm, pedroe)@ditec.um.es
Computer Science and Systems Department, University of Murcia (Spain)
domingo@um.es
2
Hospital Virgen de la Arrixaca, Murcia (Spain)
josegonca.alarcon@gmail.com

Abstract
Isolated left ventricular non-compaction (LVNC) is a myocardial disorder characterised by
prominent ventricular trabeculations and deep recesses extending from the LV cavity to the
subendocardial surface of the LV. Up to now, there is no common and stable solution in the
medical community for quantifying and valuing the non-compacted cardiomyopathy. A software
tool for the automatic quantiﬁcation of the exact hyper-trabeculation degree in the left ventricle
myocardium is designed, developed and tested. This tool is based on medical experience, but
the possibility of the human appreciation error has been eliminated. The input data for this
software are the cardiac images of the patients obtained by means of magnetic resonance.
The output results are the percentage quantiﬁcation of the trabecular zone with respect to
the compacted area. This output is compared with human processing performed by medical
specialists. The software proves to be a valuable tool to help diagnosis, so saving valuable
diagnosis time.
Keywords: non-compacted cardiomyopathy, trabecules, left ventricle, computing application, automatic
quantiﬁcation

1

Introduction

In the last ﬁfteen years, non-compacted cardiomyopathy has aroused the interest of cardiologists
as a consequence of the important technological development in the main cardiologic image
techniques: echocardiography (EC), magnetic resonance (MR) and the multi-slice Computed
Tomography (CT) [3]. Non-compacted cardiomyopathy is characterized by the presence of
multiple trabecules in the left ventricle myocardium, associated to multiple inter-trabecular
recesses communicated with the ventricular cavity [4][9]. Up to now, there is no stable agreed
solution in the medical community for quantifying and valuing this cardiopathy.
610

Selection and peer-review under responsibility of the Scientiﬁc Programme Committee of ICCS 2015
c The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V.

doi:10.1016/j.procs.2015.05.329

A software tool...

Bernab´e, Cuenca, L´
opez de Teruel, Gim´enez and Gonz´
alez-Carrillo

Currently, the detection of the non-compacted cardiomyopathy from an MR image of a
patient, as presented in Figure 1a, in the Hospital Virgen de la Arrixaca at Murcia, Spain,
is performed manually in order to detect the left ventricle cavity, including the trabecules
(black zone in Figure 1b, identiﬁed as LV), the right ventricle cavity (white zone in Figure 1b,
identiﬁed as RV) and the external layer (gray and white delimited zone in Figure 1b, identiﬁed
as External Layer). The left ventricle layer appears divided in two zones: an internal one, where
the trabecules are located, called trabecular zone (formed by several black zones inside the LV),
and a dense external layer called compacted zone (all the area located between the external
layer and the LV). In previous studies, the quotient of the thickness of the two zones has been
speciﬁed as an established way for quantifying the trabecules [8] [13]. This quotient is calculated
by the cardiologists for all the segments in each slice (the American Heart Association deﬁnes
17 segments to be studied [1]) and in all the slices of the LV from the apex (top) to the base
(basal). The process is clearly inﬂuenced by the subjective and expert vision of the specialist,
who needs to spend considerable time evaluating each image of a patient and often a large
number of patients.

(a)

(b)

Figure 1: (a) Original MR image of a patient. (b) Left ventricle cavity with trabecules (black
delimited zone, identiﬁed as LV), right ventricle cavity (white delimited zone, identiﬁed as RV)
and external layer (gray and white line, identiﬁed as External Layer).
Jacquier et al. [7] describe a pioneer work to computationally quantify the trabeculated
mass by endocardium delineation. However, the proposed method was applied to a very small
number of patients and the classiﬁcation shown is based on the variables deﬁned previously by
the same method.
In this work, based on our experience in the application of 3D wavelet transform for highquality compression of medical video [2][5], we propose an approach which applies a series of
computational techniques1 to Quantify the LV hyper-Trabeculation (QLVT) degree, using the
cardiac images obtained by magnetic resonance (Figure 1b). The developed software tool is
based on medical experience, but the possibility of the human appreciation error is eliminated.
The output results are the percentage quantiﬁcation of the trabecular zone with respect to the
compacted one. The computational method can save valuable diagnosis time when compared
with the human processing.
1 Based on the ltmser algorithm [11] for the detection of stable regions implemented in QVision, a computing
vision library for QT [12].

611

A software tool...

Bernab´e, Cuenca, L´
opez de Teruel, Gim´enez and Gonz´
alez-Carrillo

The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 outlines the implementation of the
computing method proposed. Several experiments to test the proposal are presented in section
3. Finally, section 4 summarizes the work, concludes the paper and introduces future work.

2

The computing method: QLVT

A cardiac image of magnetic resonance is composed of a determined grid of pixels in gray
scale, as presented in Figure 1a. QLVT has to identify the left ventricle cavity among diﬀerent
structures, like the stomach, the liver, the right ventricle myocardium, etc. Also, it is necessary
to identify the right ventricle cavity to delimit the external layer of the LV, formed by the
external layer of the myocardium and the right part of the external layer of the RV cavity. All
structures represent similar geometric ﬁgures composed of a mass of pixels in a gray scale range.
The LV cavity is normally represented by a set of pixels near to white making a circular ﬁgure.
The RV cavity is located in the magnetic resonance on the left of the LV cavity, and consists of a
large group of pixels in a determined range of gray values. The external layer of the myocardium
is characterized by a thin black zone. The method applies a series of computational techniques
based on the ltmser algorithm [11] to detect diﬀerent structures (stable regions), implemented
in QVision2 [12], in the cardiac images of a person obtained by magnetic resonance. The tool
automatically selects the left ventricle cavity and the right ventricle cavity among the diﬀerent
stable regions detected previously, and searches the black zone of the external layer of the
myocardium in order to establish the external layer of the LV. Another essential target is the
detection of trabecular zones, which are characterized by grayish or black zones in the interior
of the LV. These trabecular zones are composed of a set of closed pixels, making small clouds,
with values near to black or in a gray range lower than the rest of the pixels of the LV cavity.
The method detects the diﬀerent clouds (stable regions) by applying the ltmser algorithm to the
LV cavity, and quantiﬁes the trabecular zones. The compacted zone is the area located between
the LV cavity and its external layer. The output result is the percentage of the trabecular zone
with respect to the compacted area for each cardiac image.
Algorithm 1 shows a general method for detecting the LV cavity, the trabecular zone and
the compacted zone in a cardiac image obtained by magnetic resonance. The algorithm obtains
the areas of the trabecular zone and the compacted zone in order to compute the percentage
quantiﬁcation of the trabecular zone with respect to the compacted area.
Algorithm 1 General method for detecting and computing the areas of the trabecular zone
and the compacted zone in the LV. It obtains the percentage quantiﬁcation of the trabecular
zone with respect to the compacted area
1:
2:
3:
4:
5:

Detect diﬀerent MSERs and identify LV cavity
Identify RV cavity and detect external layer of compacted zone
Detect diﬀerent trabecular zones
Compute areas of trabecular zones and the compacted zone in the LV
Obtain percentage quantiﬁcation of the trabecular zone with respect to the compacted area

In step 1, the input of QLVT is a cardiac image obtained by magnetic resonance. Ltmser [11]
detects the diﬀerent Maximally Stable Extremal Regions (MSER). Each MSER is a stable mass
of pixels in a determined gray scale range, has an irregular shape, and contains the coordinates
of the vertices in an image. As the LV cavity is normally represented by a circular shape, the
2 A computing vision library for QT (a cross-platform application framework that is widely used for developing application software that can be run on various software and hardware platforms with little or no change
in the codebase, while having the power and speed of native applications).

612

A software tool...

Bernab´e, Cuenca, L´
opez de Teruel, Gim´enez and Gonz´
alez-Carrillo

centroid of each MSER detected is computed in order to identify automatically the left ventricle
cavity. The area of the LV cavity is computed. In Figure 2a, we observe the diﬀerent MSERs,
numbered from 1 to 6, detected (all vertices in white) for a cardiac image and the identiﬁcation
of LV cavity.

(a)

(b)

(c)

Figure 2: (a) Diﬀerent MSERs (numbered from 1 to 6) detected for a cardiac image, and the
identiﬁcation of LV cavity. (b) RV cavity identiﬁed on the left of the LV cavity, and external
layer of the compacted zone (in white). (c) Several contours detected inside the LV cavity.
In step 2, from the LV cavity detected as the reference point, the method automatically ﬁnds
the right ventricle cavity among the diﬀerent stable regions, detected in step 1. In an image, the
RV cavity is located on the left of the LV cavity. As QLVT distinguishes the diﬀerent MSERs
and their centroids, a search based on Bresenham algorithm [10] is implemented to draw straight
lines between the centroid of the LV cavity and the other centroids of the MSERs detected in
order to identify the RV cavity. The external layer of the myocardium is characterized by a thin
black zone. QLVT searches this zone formed by diﬀerent value pixels close to zero to delimit the
compacted zone between the right part of the external layer of the RV cavity and the external
layer of the myocardium. It is possible to adjust the external layer depending on the intensity
of the black zone. In Figure 2b, the RV cavity, the LV cavity and the external layer of the
compacted zone (in white) can be observed. QLVT computes the total area delimited by the
external layer of the compacted zone.
In step 3, a multiple searching process of trabecular zones is made because these areas
could be found in the interior or around the letf ventricle cavity. The trabecular zones are
characterized by a closed range of gray-scale value pixels lower than the rest of the pixels
belonging to the LV cavity. The ltmser algorithm is applied in the interior of the LV cavity
to obtain the borders of connected and closed sets of pixels (contours or clouds), containing
gray-scale values equal or greater than a given threshold. The threshold is determined by
experienced medical specialists and the contrast of the input image. In Figure 2c, several
contours are detected into the LV cavity (in white). These contours are the trabecular zones
inside the LV cavity. The area of each contour is computed. For some patients, some trabecular
zones are found around the LV cavity, and those zones are identiﬁed by a search based on the
Bresenham algorithm, as we observe in Figure 3a, where the LV wall (in black) and a trabecular
zone (in grey) around the LV cavity are established. QLVT ﬁnds and computes the area of
these possible trabecular zones. Furthermore, a complementary search step, again based on the
Bresenham algorithm, from the external layer of the compacted zone to the trabecular zone
around the LV cavity is implemented to completely delimit the external layer of the trabecular
zone. In Figure 3b, the external layer of the compacted zone (in white) is maintained with
613

A software tool...

Bernab´e, Cuenca, L´
opez de Teruel, Gim´enez and Gonz´
alez-Carrillo

respect to the previous step (shown in Figure 2b). However, the external layer of the trabecular
zone (in black) is modiﬁed with respect to the previous external layer detected in the trabecular
zone (shown in Figure 3a in white). QLVT computes the area occupied by the trabecular zone.

(a)

(b)

(c)

Figure 3: (a) LV cavity (in black) and trabecular zone (in white) around the LV cavity. (b)
External layer of the trabecular zone (in black) around the LV cavity and the external layer of
the compacted zone (in white). (c) The LV cavity (in white), the trabecular contours inside
the LV cavity (in white), the extenal layer of the trabecular zone (in black) and the external
layer of the compacted zone (in white).
Finally, in step 4, QLVT obtains the total areas occupied by the LV cavity, the trabecular
contours in the interior of the LV cavity, the trabecular zone around the LV cavity and the
compacted zone. All these zones are identiﬁed (LV cavity, the trabecular contours inside the
LV cavity and the external layer of the compated zone are in white, whereas the external layer
of the trabecular zone is in black) in Figure 3c. The area of the compacted zone is the total
area determined by the external layer of the compacted zone minus the total area delimited by
the external layer of the trabecular zone. In the same way, the area of the trabecular zone is
the total area determined by the trabecular contour minus the area of the LV cavity plus the
areas of diﬀerent trabecular contours detected in the interior of the LV cavity. The percentage
quantiﬁcation of the trabecular zone is the area of the trabecular zone divided by the sum of
the areas of the compacted zone and the trabecular zone (step 5).
The output of the algorithm allows cardiologists to quantify the exact trabeculation degree
in the LV quickly and automatically.

3

Results

We have applied the computing method presented in section 2 to 122 cardiac images obtained
by magnetic resonance in a population of 18 patients (identiﬁed from P1 to P18) with noncompacted cardiomyopathy previously diagnosed and to two control groups of 9 patients in
each: the ﬁrst group is formed by people with magnetic resonance studies due to other cardiomyopathies, and the second group by people with magnetic resonance studies thanks to
familiar screening who has been diagnosed as healthy, and so genetically prove negativity.
Some patients received intravenous contrast before the magnetic resonance images acquisition.
The magnetic resonance studies were performed with a 1.5 T scanner (Achieva VC, Philips
Medical Systems, Best, Netherlands) between 2004 and 2012. The images were obtained in
synchronisation with the ECG and in apnea. The left ventricle function was evaluated with
a free precision in standard stable balance (repetition interval of 2.8 ms., echo time of 1.4
ms., ﬂip of 60, matrix of 190 × 200, echo train length of 23, cutting thickness of 8 mm, with
614

A software tool...

Bernab´e, Cuenca, L´
opez de Teruel, Gim´enez and Gonz´
alez-Carrillo

30 phases). The post-processing to determine the ventricular parameters was performed with
an independent workstation provided by the manufacturer (View-Forum 6.3, Philip Medical
System).

3.1

Quality evaluation by cardiologists

To assess the performance of the proposed method, a subjective evaluation on the output images
with the identiﬁed zones was performed by two skilled cardiologists. The images were graded
by specialists, using the scale proposed in [6] (Table 1).
Table 1: Evaluation scale to measure the diagnostic quality of medical images
5.0
4.5
4.0
3.5
3.0
2.5
2.0
1.5
1.0

Exact match: there is no noticeable diﬀerences
Noticeable diﬀerences: they are not diagnostically signiﬁcant
Small diagnostically signiﬁcant diﬀerences
Signiﬁcant diagnostic information is lost
Large diagnostically signiﬁcant diﬀerences

The evaluation results shown in Table 2 were obtained from the cardiologists when the
computing method proposed outputs the diﬀerent images of a patient with the LV cavity,
trabecular zones and compacted zone identiﬁed. For each image of a patient, cardiologists
observe the original image and the output of the proposed method. Based on the results reported
in Table 2, it is understood that the visibility is clear in all cases. For all the experimented
sequences, the cardiologists would be able to detect the presence of diagnostic features clearly,
and an exact measure of the areas of LV cavity, compacted zone and trabecular zone can be
obtained in a short time. 100% of the evaluated images have no noticeable diﬀerences for
diagnosis. Moreover, most of the tested images are exact and have not one diﬀerent pixel from
what an expert cardiologist could determine.
Table 2: Results of average quality measure obtained from cardiologists for images with LV
cavity, trabecular zones and compacted zone identiﬁed
Cardiologist 1
Cardiologist 2
Average

3.2

5.0
56.56%
46.34%
53.70%

4.5
40.98%
36.59%
40.12%

4.0
2.46%
14.63%
5.56%

3.5
0%
2.44%
0.62%

3.0
0%
0%
0%

2.5
0%
0%
0%

2.0
0%
0%
0%

1.5
0%
0%
0%

1.0
0%
0%
0%

Detailed evaluations

We analyze diﬀerent types of images to conﬁrm QLVT is capable of detecting and measuring
the LV cavity, the trabecular zones and the compacted area in diﬀerent situations. The software
oﬀers the opportunity of adjusting a threshold to detect the trabecular zones and the intensity
of the black zone to determine the external layer of the compacted zone.
In Figure 4, the area of compacted zone (ACZ) and the area of trabecular zone (ATZ)
for diﬀerents slices, from the apical to the basal, of the patients in the two control groups
are presented. There are great diﬀerences among the values of the areas, for all the patients
and slices, showing QLVT is capable of detecting LV cavities of several sizes. For a particular
patient, the general trend is to obtain higher values of trabecular zones than the compacted
zone in the apical slices up to the central ones and to reduce the importance of the trabeculated
areas in the basal slices. For example, several slices of the patients P1, P3, P5 and P7 obtain
important areas for the compacted zones and trabecular zones, with values higher than 8000
and 4000 pixels, respectively. Therefore, the percentage quantiﬁcation of the trabecular zone, as
615

A software tool...

Bernab´e, Cuenca, L´
opez de Teruel, Gim´enez and Gonz´
alez-Carrillo

12000

Area (pixels)

10000
8000
6000

ACZ

AT

4000
2000
0

P1

P2

P3

P4

P5

P6

P7

P8

P9

P10 P11

P12

P13

P14

P15

P16

P17 P18

Patients

Figure 4: Area of compacted zone (ACZ) and of trabecular zone (ATZ) computed by QLVT
for diﬀerent slices of patients.
Percentage Quantification

60

50
40
30

ATP%

20
10
0

P1

P2

P3

P4

P5

P6

P7

P8

P9

P10 P11

P12

P13

P14

P15

P16

P17 P18

Patients

Figure 5: Percentage quantiﬁcation of the trabecular zone (ATP%) computed by QLVT for
diﬀerent slices of patients P1, P2, ..., P18
we can observe in Figure 5, reaches the highest values of 43.00%, 56.89%, 36.01% and 53.31% in
the slices 2 of P1, P3, P5 and P7, and the lowest values of 9.72% in the slice 6 of P1, 17.87% in
the slice 8 of P3, 23.65% in the slice 4 of P5 and 10.22% in the slice 7 of P7. On the other hand,
patients P8, P10, P16 and P18 present narrow compacted zones and trabecular zones lower
than 4000 and 2000 pixels. Now, the percentage quantiﬁcation of the trabecular zone ranges
from 23.72% to 41.69% in P8, 11.36% to 31.66% in P10, 22.75% to 48.20% in P16 and 12.72% to
41.51% in P18. All mentioned slices with the LV cavity, trabecular zones and compacted zone
identiﬁed have been evaluated by cardiologists with 5.0 or 4.5, showing that QLVT precisely
detects and accurately measures both insigniﬁcant and very important trabecular zones.
In all patients, it is possible to conﬁgure the intensity of the black zone to determine the
external layer of the compacted zone by the cardiologists to obtain wide or narrow compacted
zones. Figure 6 shows the output of QLVT (LV cavity, trabecular zone and compacted area)
for slices 3 of P1, 7 of P7 and 5 of P18. The areas of compacted zone of P1 and P7 are wide and
achieve values of 9278 and 10291 pixels, whereas the trabecular area is 3592 and 1171 pixels.
Thus, the percentage quantiﬁcation of the trabeculated zone are 27.91% and 10.22%. However,
P8 presents a narrow compacted zone with an area of 2878 pixels and a trabecular zone of 867
pixels. Hence, the percentage quantiﬁcation of the trabecular zone is 23.15%. All these slices
have been evaluated by cardiologists with a 5.0, so demonstrating QLVT is able to detect wide
or narrow compacted zones accurately.
Patients P2, P3, P4, P6, P7, P10, P11, P16 and P17 received intravenous contrast before
616

A software tool...

Bernab´e, Cuenca, L´
opez de Teruel, Gim´enez and Gonz´
alez-Carrillo

Figure 6: Outputs with LV cavity, trabecular zone and compacted zone identiﬁed, for slices 3,
7 and 5 of patients P1, P7 and P18
the magnetic resonance. Therefore, the threshold to detect the trabecular zones, which has
been easily conﬁgured and adjusted by cardiologists, is higher than in the other cases because
the pixels which make the LV cavity have higher intensity. For example, Figure 7 presents
the outputs of QLVT for slice 4 of patients P2, P3 and P6, with identiﬁcation of LV cavity,
trabecular zone and compacted area. The percentage quantiﬁcation of the trabecular zone is
49.70%, 30.50% and 39.70% for P2, P3 and P6. As we can observe, in three images there
is a higher intensity in the diﬀerent stable regions due to the contrast received by patients.
However, the LV cavity and the trabecular and compacted zones are well delimited because the
cardiologists scored these zone delimitations with 5.0, 4.5 and 5.0.

Figure 7: Outputs with LV cavity, trabecular zone and compacted zone identiﬁed for slice 4 of
patients P2, P3 and P6
On the other hand, the images of the patients P12, P13 and P14 have been captured with
more darkness than for the rest of the patients. Thus, the LV cavity is composed of pixels
with a lower intensity and the threshold to identify the trabecular zones is lower than in the
rest of the cases. Figure 8 shows the outputs of slice 8 for P12, 5 for P13 and 9 for P14. The
percentage quantiﬁcation of the trabecular zone is 21.50%, 23.17% and 9.55% for P12, P13 and
P14. The lower intensity of the pixels is clearly observed in the three images. Therefore, it is
more diﬃcult for the cardiologists to identify and measure the diﬀerent structures manually,
and a signiﬁcant time to process each image would be needed. The computing method also
allows in these cases the faster automatical identiﬁcation and measurement. The subjective
evaluation by cardiologists for these identiﬁed zones is 4.5, 5.0 and 5.0, which highlighting the
eﬃciency of QLVT in processing darkness images.
Therefore, the experiments with diﬀerent types of analyzed images reveal the proposed
method is capable of detecting and measuring the diﬀerent zones in diﬀerent situations, by
adjusting the threshold to detect the trabecular zones and the intensity of the black zone to
determine the external layer of the compacted zone. The time needed to obtain the ﬁnal outputs
617

A software tool...

Bernab´e, Cuenca, L´
opez de Teruel, Gim´enez and Gonz´
alez-Carrillo

Figure 8: Outputs with LV cavity, trabecular zone and compacted zone identiﬁed of slices 8, 5
and 9 for patients P12, P13 and P14
is less than 2 minutes per image. This time is insigniﬁcant compared with the manual process
traditionally used, where cardiologists need around 25 minutes per image to delimit, measure
and compute the quotient of the thickness between the trabecular area and the compacted zone
for all segments.

4

Conclusions and future work

We have proposed the ﬁrst automatical software tool based on medical experience that accurately quantiﬁes the LV hyper-trabeculation degree, using the cardiac images obtained by
magnetic resonance.
We have presented a computing method that applies a series of computational techniques
based on the ltmser algorithm [11] for the detection of stable regions implemented, in QVision
[12] (a computing vision library for QT), around cardiac images obtained by magnetic resonance.
QLVT automatically selects the left ventricle cavity among the diﬀerent stable regions, and
identiﬁes the diﬀerent stable regions inside the left ventricle myocardium. The method ﬁnds
the right ventricle cavity and delimits the external layer of the left ventricle by the external layer
of the myocardium and the right part of the external layer of the RV cavity. The trabecular
zones are detected inside and around the left ventricle cavity. The threshold to identify the
trabecular zones and the intensity of the black zone to determine the external layer of the
compacted zone can be easily adjusted or conﬁgured by cardiologists. The output result is the
percentage quantiﬁcation of the trabecular zone with respect to the compacted area for each
cardiac image of a patient.
We have applied QLVT to a wide set of patient images with non-compacted cardiomyopathy
previously diagnosed due to other cardiomyopathies and people with magnetic resonance studies thanks to familiar screening who has been diagnosed as healthy, and so genetically prove
negativity. Some patients received intravenous contrast before the magnetic resonance and a
set of images have been captured with more darkness. The proposed method was therefore
tested with several types of patients and images with diﬀerent characteristics, like wide or narrow compacted zones and trabecular areas in a great range. The percentage quantiﬁcation of
the trabecular zone varied from 4.48 to 56.89, demonstrating that QLVT is able to detect both
insigniﬁcant and very important trabecular zones. Subjective grading values obtained from
the cardiologists conﬁrm that the output images are of diagnostic quality and are medically
acceptable.
The time needed to obtain the ﬁnal outputs is less than 2 minutes for each image, obtaining
speedups in ranges from 10 to 15 with respect to the manual process used traditionally by
cardiologists.
The computing method can be extended to the exact quantiﬁcation of the trabecular zones
618

A software tool...

Bernab´e, Cuenca, L´
opez de Teruel, Gim´enez and Gonz´
alez-Carrillo

in the right ventricle. The proposed method could be used and integrated in medical centers
in order to accelerate the diagnoses by cardiologists.

5

Acknowledgements

This work was supported by the Spanish MINECO, as well as European Commission FEDER
funds, under grant TIN2012-38341-C04-03. We are grateful to the reviewers for their valuable
comments.

References
[1] American Heart Association Writing Group on Myocardial Segmentation and Registration for
Cardiac Imaging, Manuel D. Cerqueira, Neil J. Weissman, Vasken Dilsizian, Alice K. Jacobs, Sanjiv
Kaul, Warren K. Laskey, Dudley J. Pennell, John A. Rumberger, Thomas Ryan, and Mario S.
Verani. Standardized myocardial segmentation and nomenclature for tomographic imaging of the
heart: A statement for healthcare professionals from the cardiac imaging committee of the council
on clinical cardiology of the American Heart Association. Circulation, 105(4):539–542, 2002.
[2] Gregorio Bernab´e, Jose M. Garc´ıa, and Jos´e Gonz´
alez. A lossy 3D wavelet transform for highquality compression of medical video. Journal of Systems and Software, 82(3):526 – 534, 2009.
[3] TK Chin, JK Perloﬀ, RG Williams, K Jue, and R Mohrmann. Isolated noncompaction of left
ventricular myocardium. A study of eight cases. Circulation, 82(2):507513, August 1990.
[4] R. Engberding and F. Bender. Identiﬁcation of a rare congenital anomaly of the myocardium by
two-dimensional echocardiography: persistence of isolated myocardial sinusoids. American Journal
of Cardiology, 53:17331734, 1984.
[5] Joaqu´ın Franco, Gregorio Bernab´e, Juan Fern´
andez, and Manuel Ujald´
on. Parallel 3D fast wavelet
transform on manycore GPUs and multicore CPUs. Procedia Computer Science, 1(1):1101 – 1110,
2010. {ICCS} 2010.
[6] D. Gibson, M. Spann, and S.I. Woolley. A wavelet-based region of interest encoder for the compression of angiogram video sequences. Information Technology in Biomedicine, IEEE Transactions
on, 8(2):103–113, June 2004.
[7] A Jacquier, F Thuny, B Jop, R Giorgi, F Cohen, JY Gaubert, JM Vidal, V Bartoli, G Habib, and
G Moulin. Measurement of trabeculated left ventricular mass using cardiac magnetic resonance
imaging in the diagnosis of left ventricular non-compaction. European Heart Journal, 31:10981104,
2010.
[8] R Jenni, E Oechslin, J Schneider, C Attenhofer Jost, and P A Kaufmann. Echocardiographic
and pathoanatomical characteristics of isolated left ventricular non-compaction: a step towards
classiﬁcation as a distinct cardiomyopathy. Heart, 86(6):666–671, 2001.
[9] Rolf Jenni, Norbert Goebel, Roberto Tartini, Jakob Schneider, Urs Arbenz, and Oswald Oelz.
Persisting myocardial sinusoids of both ventricles as an isolated anomaly: Echocardiographic,
angiographic, and pathologic anatomical ﬁndings. CardioVascular and Interventional Radiology,
9(3):127–131, 1986.
[10] Kenneth I. Joy. Breshenham’s algorithm. In Visualization and Graphics Research Group, Department of Computer Science, University of California, Davis, 1999.
[11] David Nistr and Henrik Stewnius. Linear Time Maximally Stable Extremal Regions. In Computer
Vision ECCV 2008. Lecture Notes in Computer Science, volume 5303, pages 183–196, Marseille,
France, 2008.
[12] PARP Research Group. University of Murcia, Spain. QVision: Computer Vision Library for QT,
2012. http://qvision.sourceforge.net/.
[13] Claudia Stllberger and Josef Finsterer. Left ventricular hypertrabeculation/noncompaction. Journal of the American Society of Echocardiography, 17(1):91–100, 2004.

619

