Procedia Computer
Science
Procedia
Computer Science
Science 001(2010)
1–21689–1690
Procedia
Computer
(2012)

www.elsevier.com/locate/procedia

International Conference on Computational Science, ICCS 2010

Visualization in Computational Science
Robert G. Belleman1,∗
Computational Science, University of Amsterdam

Abstract
This section and the papers that follow relate to to the workshop on Visualization in Computational Science which
is held at the Tenth International Conference on Computational Science (ICCS2010) in Amsterdam, the Netherlands.
This workshop brings together experts from visualization research and end-users to illustrate the state of the art and
advance potential areas of common interest.
c 2012 Published by Elsevier Ltd. Open access under CC BY-NC-ND license.
⃝
Introduction
The main motivation for this workshop is that researchers in computational science are faced with signiﬁcant
challenges in the analyses of their data. The increase in performance and capabilities of high-performance computing
systems allow them to investigate problems of increasing size and complexity. As a result, the data sets that are
generated by these problems have also grown considerably, both in size and complexity. This has made unsupervised
analysis increasingly diﬃcult, if not impossible. Where unsupervised means of analyses fall short, interactive methods
are often the only alternative. Here, the researcher uses his cognitive abilities, knowledge and experience to detect
patterns in his data. The most popular way to do this is through visualization.
Visualization is an indispensable method to detect structure and patterns in these data sets. This includes the development of increasingly advanced visualization algorithms that map data features to visual constructs, user-friendly
human-computer interaction that encourages interactive visual exploration, and computing architectures that improve
the use and responsiveness of interactive graphics displays. This workshop brings together experts from visualization
research and end-users to illustrate the state of the art and advance potential areas of common interest.
What can you expect at this workshop
This workshop attracted 20 paper submissions, 11 of which were selected by our reviewers for publication and
either oral or poster presentation at the workshop. The papers cover a wide range of subjects, including:
• interactive systems that integrate simulation and visualization into “human-in-the-loop” interactive simulations
(McAdam, Charles Sturt University, Australia) with several approaches that use GPUs to accelerate time constrained algorithms in both simulations and graphics rendering (Leist et al., Massey University Albany, New
∗

Email address: R.G.Belleman@uva.nl (Robert G. Belleman)
author

1 Corresponding

c 2012 Published by Elsevier Ltd. Open access under CC BY-NC-ND license.
1877-0509 ⃝
doi:10.1016/j.procs.2010.04.189

1690

R.G. Belleman / Procedia Computer Science 1 (2012) 1689–1690
Robert G. Belleman / Procedia Computer Science 00 (2010) 1–2

2

Zealand) as well as GPU algorithms for crease detection and rendering (Barakat et al., Purdue University,
United States);
• service-oriented approaches to the visualization of distributed data sources, both on a systems-design level
(Wood et al., University of Leeds, United Kingdom) and applied to medical image analysis (Koulouzis et al.,
University of Amsterdam, the Netherlands);
• immersive visualization environments; the study of the eﬀects of immersion and navigation (Henry et al., Virginia Tech, United States), and an overview of selection methods for the creation and management of content
in a CAVE (Dunk et al., University of Reading, United Kingdom);
• applied visualization in computational science domains: the use adaptive graphs for the visualization of volumetric meshes (Robaina et al., Universidade Federal Fluminense, Brasil), visualization applied to developmental biology and accelerator physics (R¨ubel et al., Lawrence Berkeley National lab, United States) and the
visualization of data from ﬁnance (Wu et al., University of Sydney, Australia) and astrophysics (Jin et al.,
University of Portsmouth, United Kingdom).
Acknowledgments
I feel proud and privileged with the help and support from the program committee and reviewers without whom
this workshop would not have been possible:
• Prof. Vassil N. Alexandrov, University of Reading, United Kingdom
• Prof. Gordon Clapworthy, University of Bedfordshire, United Kingdom
• Prof. Feng Dong, University of Bedfordshire, United Kingdom
• Prof. Peter Harris, University of Melbourne, Australia
• Prof. Chris Johnson, University of Utah, USA
• Dr. Elena Zudilova-Seinstra, University of Amsterdam, The Netherlands
Last; I look forward to welcoming you in Amsterdam for the presentations of the paper submissions in this
workshop. This tenth ICCS conference promises to be special, and I promise you that this workshop will not be any
diﬀerent.

