Procedia Computer Science
Volume 51, 2015, Pages 2076–2085
ICCS 2015 International Conference On Computational Science

Exploring the Eﬀects of a High-Order Vertical Coordinate
in a Non-Hydrostatic Global Model
Paul A. Ullrich1 and Jorge E. Guerra1
University of California, Davis, Davis, California, USA
paullrich@ucdavis.edu

Abstract
As atmospheric models are pushed towards non-hydrostatic resolutions, there is a growing need
for new numerical discretizations that are accurate, robust and eﬀective at these scales. In
this paper we describe a new arbitrary-order staggered nodal ﬁnite-element method (SNFEM)
vertical discretization motivated by ﬂux reconstruction methods. The SNFEM formulation generalizes traditional second-order vertical discretizations, including Lorenz and Charney-Phillips
discretizations, to arbitrary order-of-accuracy while preserving desirable properties such as energy conservation. Preliminary results are presented from applying this method to an idealized
global baroclinic instability.
Keywords: high-order, atmospheric modeling, non-hydrostatic, vertical coordinate, ﬁnite elements

1

Introduction

In typical general circulation models, the Earth’s atmosphere is discretized at a horizontal
resolution of approximately 25 − 110 km and a vertical resolution ranging from 100 m in the
lowest model levels to 3 − 4 km near the model top. For fully explicit temporal discretizations,
the maximum time-step allowed by these models is restricted the Courant-Friedrichs-Lewy
(CFL) condition, which relates the time-step to the spatial resolution via the maximum wave
speed. However, the relatively ﬁne grid spacing in the vertical then leads to a substantial
restriction on the maximum allowed global time-step size. To overcome this diﬃculty, the
hydrostatic approximation has traditionally been used to enforce instantaneous balance between
the vertical pressure gradient force and gravity and so remove vertically propagating sound
waves from the system. However, this approximation ignores horizontal transport of vertical
velocity and so is no longer valid for horizontal grid resolutions below approximately 10 km.
With horizontal resolutions quickly approaching this limit, the next generation of modeling
systems will need to adopt the Navi´er-Stokes equations in their unapproximated form. Models
using these equations (as opposed to the hydrostatic primitive equations) are typically referred
to as non-hydrostatic models. To avoid the bound on the CFL condition due to vertical resolution, work is ongoing on the use of an explicit temporal discretization in the horizontal in
2076

Selection and peer-review under responsibility of the Scientiﬁc Programme Committee of ICCS 2015
c The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V.

doi:10.1016/j.procs.2015.05.475

Exploring the Eﬀects of a High-Order Vertical Coordinate . . .

Ullrich and Guerra

conjunction with an implicit temporal discretization in the vertical (a technique known as Horizontally Explicit Vertically Implicit, HEVI). To retain high-order accuracy, these discretizations
are usually coupled via an Implicit-Explicit Runge-Kutta (IMEX-RK) method [3, 29, 30].
Staggered methods are a class of discretizations where scalar (density, pressure and tracer
density) and velocity degrees of freedom are stored at diﬀerent spatial locations [1]. These
methods have long been used for both horizontal discretizations in atmospheric models [14, 20,
24] and vertical discretizations [2, 5]. These methods further have excellent dispersive properties
and do not support stationary (zero phase speed) 2Δx modes [15, 25, 27], which are notorious
for polluting atmospheric models. Alongside the rise of ﬁnite element methods for atmospheric
modeling, there has been a renewed interest in pursuing staggering for ﬁnite element methods
[4, 6, 21] analogous to the mixed-ﬁnite element methods employed for elliptic problems [16].
This paper explores a discretization we refer to as staggered nodal ﬁnite element methods (SNFEMs), which are a class of arbitrary order-of-accuracy methods that extend traditional nodal ﬁnite element methods (NFEMs) by storing scalar and velocity degrees of freedom
at diﬀerential spatial locations. In particular, this paper focuses on the use of SNFEM for
discretization of the model’s vertical coordinate. The development of a high-order SNFEM vertical coordinate has the potential to improve simulation quality and reduce pressure gradient
errors. To assess this method, we have implemented several SNFEM discretizations within the
Tempest framework [28] and are performing an ongoing intercomparison of this formulation
with other schemes.

2

The non-hydrostatic equations of ﬂuid motion

Global atmospheric models have traditionally employed the hydrostatic approximation, which
assumes that the vertical atmosphere is perpetually in a state of balance between pressure
gradient and buoyancy forces. However, this approximation breaks down when the horizontal
resolution is ﬁner than roughly 10 km. With high-resolution atmospheric modeling in mind, we
will employ the unapproximated non-hydrostatic equations [9]. These equations, with shallowatmosphere approximation enforced, can be written in an arbitrary coordinate frame (α, β, ξ)
as follows:
∂uα
+ ui ∇i uα + θg αi ∇i Π + f (k × u)α = 0,
∂t
∂uβ
+ ui ∇i uβ + θg βi ∇i Π + f (k × u)β = 0,
∂t
∂θ
∂θ
∂θ
∂θ
+ uα
+ uβ
= −uξ ,
∂t
∂α
∂β
∂ξ
∂w
+ uα ∇α w + uβ ∇β w + uξ ∇ξ w = −θ
∂t
1 ∂
∂ρ
1 ∂
1
+
(Jρuα ) +
(Jρuβ ) = −
∂t
J ∂α
J ∂β
J

(1)
(2)
(3)
−1

∂r
∂Π
− gc ,
∂ξ
∂ξ
∂
(Jρuξ ),
∂ξ

(4)
(5)

where summation is implied over i ∈ {α, β, ξ} and the coordinate velocity uξ is given by
uξ (w, uα , uβ ) =

∂r
∂ξ

−1

w−

∂r
∂α

uα −

∂r
∂β

uβ .

(6)
2077

Exploring the Eﬀects of a High-Order Vertical Coordinate . . .

Ullrich and Guerra

Here α and β are arbitrary horizontal coordinates with basis vectors gα and gβ , ξ ∈ [0, 1]
is a vertical coordinate with basis vector gξ (which is perpendicular to surfaces of constant
ξ), r = r(α, β, ξ) is the radius in physical coordinates with radial unit vector k, g ij denotes
the contravariant metric, J = det gij is the metric Jacobian, gc is gravity, f is the Coriolis
parameter, ρ is the density, u = uα gα + uβ gβ + uξ gξ is the vector velocity, θ is the potential
temperature and Π is the Exner pressure. Einstein summation notation (implied summation)
is used for repeated indices. These equations make use of the covariant derivative ∇i , which
can be expanded as
g ji ∇i Π = g jα
u i ∇ i u j = uα
u i ∇i w = u α

∂Π
+ g jβ
∂α
∂uj
+ uβ
∂α
∂w
+ uβ
∂α

∂Π
∂Π
+ g jξ
,
∂β
∂ξ
∂uj
∂uj
+ uξ
+ Γjik ui uk ,
∂β
∂ξ
∂w
∂w
+ uξ
,
∂β
∂ξ

(7)
(8)
(9)

where Γjik denotes the Christoﬀel symbols of the second kind associated with the coordinate
transform (again with summation over repeated indices i and k implied). Further, the Coriolis
term can be written as
(k × u)α = g αβ
(k × u) = g
β

ββ

α

+ g αα

α

βα

βrα u
βrα u

+g

αrβ u
αrβ u

β

β

= J g αβ uα − g αα uβ ,

(10)

u −g

(11)

=J g

ββ α

βα β

u

.

The non-hydrostatic equations are closed via the equation of state
Π(ρ, θ) = cp

p0
p

Rd /cp

= cp

Rd ρθ
p0

Rd /cv

(12)

where Rd is the ideal gas constant for dry air, p0 is a reference pressure and cp and cv denote
the speciﬁc heat capacity of dry air at constant pressure and constant volume. Observe that
(1)-(4) are given in a non-conservative form; this formulation is generally desirable over the
conservative formulation (where momentum and ρθ are prognostic variables) since this form
can more readily conserve quantities relevant to atmospheric motion, such as total energy,
angular momentum and potential enstrophy, and (depending on the discretization) can lead to
a more accurate treatment of wave-like motions [25].
Note that the equations above use w as a prognostic variable in place of uξ . This choice
has the advantage of avoiding several complicated metric terms which arise in the evolution
equation of uξ , at the cost of introducing an additional diagnostic equation for the coordinate
velocity (6). Imperfect balance of these additional geometric terms has been observed to cause
the generation of a spurious wave mode, analogous to the observation of [13].
The equations (1)-(4) do not specify a coordinate system and so can be used for either
Cartesian or spherical geometry, only depending on the speciﬁcation of the three geometric
quantities: the metric Jacobian J, the contravariant metric g ij and the Christoﬀel symbols of
the second kind Γi jk .
To account for topography, terrain-following σ-coordinates are imposed by deﬁning the
radius r = r(α, β, ξ) so that r(α, β, 0) is coincident with the surface. For simplicity, we will
2078

Exploring the Eﬀects of a High-Order Vertical Coordinate . . .

Ullrich and Guerra

employ Gal-Chen and Somerville coordinates [8], which arise from the choice
r(α, β, ξ) = ξ [ztop − zs (α, β)] + a + zs (α, β),

(13)

where a is the radius of the Earth, ztop denotes the model height and zs (α, β) denotes the
surface elevation.

3

Discretization

The computational domain consists of nl model levels and nl + 1 model interfaces, which are
staggered in the vertical direction. Throughout this manuscript we will use subscript n to
denote variables stored on model levels and subscript i to denote variables stored on interfaces.
Although the exact placement of levels and interfaces is at the discretion of the model developer,
we choose to divide the vertical into nve vertical nodal ﬁnite elements with nvp levels per
element. Levels are placed at Gaussian quadrature nodes and interfaces at Gauss-Lobatto
quadrature nodes.
The placement of prognostic variables follows [25, 23, 26], who argue that there is only one
possible arrangement that maintains optimal wave propagation properties, avoids computational modes and allows for mass to be readily conserved. Speciﬁcally, under this formulation,
variables ρ, u and v are stored on model levels and w and θ are stored on model interfaces.
For simplicity, we employ the Strang-Carryover IMEX-RK scheme for the temporal discretization [29]. The vertical implicit solver has been implemented with three solution methods:
an iterative GMRES-type solver, a generalized matrix solver based on the DGESV solver from
LAPACK, and a diagonal matrix solver based on the DGBSV solver from LAPACK.

3.1

Vertical Discretization

Discrete evolution equations for the vertically staggered variables are constructed using an
approach similar to ﬂux reconstruction [11, 28]. Under this formulation, an interpolating polynomial over nodal values is ﬁrst constructed within an element. Values and derivatives of the
polynomial are then evaluated where necessary, augmented (when a discontinuity exists in the
reconstruction at element edges) by the robust derivative operator [28]. A depiction of the
vertical diﬀerentiation procedure is given in Figure 1. Continuity is enforced via direct stiﬀness
summation [18].
Quantitatively, this discretization requires the construction of interpolation operators Iin and
i
In which represent interpolation from nodes to interfaces and interfaces to nodes, respectively.
We also require diﬀerentiation operators from interfaces to interfaces (Dii ), from interfaces to
levels (Dni ), levels to levels (Dnn ) and levels to interfaces (Din ). The ﬁrst two operators (Dii and
Dni ) are deﬁned simply by diﬀerentiating the interpolating polynomials from model interfaces,
and averaging at element boundaries. This is eﬀectively a weak diﬀerentiation operation since
the interpolating polynomials of the interface variables is C 0 .
However, diﬀerentiation from levels to levels (Dnn ) and levels to interfaces (Din ) requires additional augmentation since the interpolating polynomials over levels are discontinuous at element
edges. To proceed, a robust diﬀerentiation operator is constructed. Deﬁne Z = [ξj,0 , ξj,nvp −1 ]
as the closed interval representing a single vertical element, with boundary ∂Z. Let f : ξ → R
be the interpolating polynomial on levels, which is deﬁned and continuous on Z ∪ ∂Z. Further,
let f˜ : ξ → R, representing the values of the interpolating polynomial on levels in adjacent
elements, be deﬁned on ∂Z. If continuity were enforced then one would expect that f and f˜
2079

Exploring the Eﬀects of a High-Order Vertical Coordinate . . .

Ullrich and Guerra

Figure 1: A depiction of the diﬀerentiation procedure linking variables stored at continuous (red)
and discontinuous (purple) nodes. (a) For interpolation/diﬀerentiation of continuous variables
needed at discontinuous nodes the continuous polynomial interpolant is simply evaluated /
diﬀerentiated at each node. (b) For interpolants derivatives of discontinuous variables needed
at continuous nodes, the robust diﬀerentiation procedure is used.

must satisfy f˜(α, β) = f (α, β) on ∂Z, but in this case no such criteria is enforced. Following
[11], robust diﬀerentiation in the ξ direction is deﬁned via
Dξ f (ξj,i ) =

∂f
∂ξ

+
ξ=ξj,i

dgR
dgL
(ξj,i )(f (nvp −1,j) − f(nvp −1,j) ) +
(ξj,i )(f (0,j) − f(0,j) ),
dξ
dξ

(14)

where the overline denotes the co-located average of f and f˜,
f (j,nvp −1) =

f (ξj,nvp −1 ) + f˜(ξj,nvp −1 )
,
2

f (0) =

f (ξj,0 ) + f˜(ξj,0 )
.
2

(15)

Here gL and gR are the local ﬂux correction functions, which are chosen to satisfy
gL (ξj,0 ) = 1,

gL (ξj,nvp −1 ) = 0,

gR (ξj,0 ) = 0,

gR (ξj,nvp −1 ) = 1,

(16)

and otherwise are chosen to approximate zero throughout [α0 , αnvp −1 ]. Options for gL and gR
include g1 (Radau polynomials), which will lead to the discontinuous Galerkin method, and g2 ,
which will lead to the mass-lumped discontinuous Galerkin method. For the remainder of this
text we will adopt the mass-lumped functions g2 , as described in [11]. These correction functions
are exactly zero at Gauss-Lobatto nodes within an element, and so lead to a simpliﬁcation of
the correction terms when evaluated at model interfaces.
A description of the numerical implementation of this method now follows. Here we use
boldface to represent variables stored in a column. Algorithmically, Exner pressure is ﬁrst
2080

Exploring the Eﬀects of a High-Order Vertical Coordinate . . .

Ullrich and Guerra

computed on model levels via
Πn ≈ cp

Rd /cv

Rd ρ n
p0

Ini θ i

Rd /cv

,

(17)

and mass ﬂux is computed on model interfaces via
F i ≈ Jk+1/2 (Iin ρn ) uξk+1/2 .

(18)

At the top and bottom interface Fi must be set to zero in order to enforce mass conservation.
The right-hand-side terms of (1)-(5) are then discretized as follows:
−uξ
−θ

∂r
∂ξ

−1

∂θ
∂ξ

i

≈ −uξi Dii θ i ,

∂Π
− gc ≈ −θ i
∂ξ
i

1 ∂F
−
J ∂ξ

≈
n

∂r
∂ξ

(19)
−1

Din Πn − gc ,

1 i
D F i.
Jk n

(20)
(21)

At the top and bottom interface, (19) and (20) are set to zero.
Vertical advection of velocity is handled in an analogous manner. First uξ is computed on
model levels,
−1
∂r
∂r
∂r
uξn ≈
uα −
uβ ,
Ini wi −
(22)
∂ξ n
∂α n n
∂β n n
and on model interfaces,
uξi ≈

∂r
∂ξ

−1

wi −
k+1/2

∂r
∂α

Iin uα
n −
k+1/2

∂r
∂β

Iin uβn .

(23)

i

Note that the advected terms in this formulation are susceptible to stationary 2Δx modes,
regardless of the order of accuracy of the underlying discretization [27]. Consequently, the
development of an eﬀective scheme for upwinding in the vertical within the SNFEM framework
is desirable and an area of ongoing work.

3.2

Horizontal Discretization

Spherical shells are discretized in the horizontal using an equiangular cubed-sphere grid [19, 17],
which consists of six Cartesian patches arranged along the faces of a inﬂated cube [28]. On
the equiangular cubed-sphere grid, coordinates are given as (α, β, p), with central angles α, β ∈
[− π4 , π4 ] and panel index p ∈ {1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6}. By convention, we choose panels 1–4 to be along
the equator and panels 5 and 6 to be centered on the northern and southern pole, respectively.
With uniform grid spacing, each panel consists of a square array of ne × ne elements with global
polynomial order np . The horizontal discretization otherwise follows the continuous spectral
element formulation [28], analogous to earlier eﬀorts with spectral elements [10, 7, 22, 9].
2081

Exploring the Eﬀects of a High-Order Vertical Coordinate . . .

4

Ullrich and Guerra

Validation: Baroclinic Instability

The baroclinic instability test of [12] is an important test case for hydrostatic dynamical cores.
Although it does not describe a non-hydrostatic phenomena, it represents a ﬁrst mechanism to
validate global atmospheric model performance; in particular, we would expect that a correct
and validated non-hydrostatic model should produce results analogous to those of a hydrostatic
model (for which many reference solutions are available). The background ﬁeld is chosen to
qualitatively resemble the real atmosphere. A small exponential-type perturbation is then
added which triggers the generation of an instability. Initialization of this test case in height
coordinates follows an iterative procedure [12].
The temperature T is computed in terms of the density and potential temperature using
(12) and the ideal gas law,
c /c
Rd ρθ p v
p0
T (ρ, θ) =
ρRd
p0
Three simulations were conducted on a small computing cluster with a ﬁxed horizontal grid
resolution of ne = 30 and np = 4 (corresponding to 48, 602 degrees of freedom per variable per
model level or 110 km equatorial resolution), nl = 30 and a 30 km model cap. The time step was
ﬁxed at Δt = 240 s. For each simulation the vertical polynomial order is varied by choosing
nvp = {1, 3, 30} keeping the total number of degrees of freedom constant. Computational
performance did not vary signiﬁcantly between simulations, with the high-order nvp = 30 case
associated with approximately a 10% slowdown compared with the nvp = 1 case. Models
typically use a stretched vertical coordinate in order to improve vertical resolution near the
surface, where the strongest vertical gradients in the baroclinic instability are present. However,
in this case we purposefully use uniformly spaced elements, leading to under-resolution of the
vertical in order to emphasize the eﬀect of vertical order-of-accuracy on the development of the
instability.
Surface temperature and surface pressure from these simulations are depicted in Figure 2
over the region of instability. The vertical coordinate with centered diﬀerences (1 level per
element) produces a baroclinic instability with the correct structure but relatively weak central pressure. Increasing the number of levels per element leads to a similar structure, but a
greatly improved central pressure. This formulation is further extended to one ﬁnite element
in the vertical direction, corresponding to 30 levels per element. In this limit we observe that
the resulting wave is visually similar to other empirically derived solutions for the baroclinic
instability [12].

5

Conclusions

We have described a new method for discretization of the vertical coordinate for atmospheric
models based on staggered nodal ﬁnite element methods and validated the method using the
baroclinic instability state of [12]. The SNFEM formulation herein generalizes traditional
second-order vertical discretizations, including Lorenz and Charney-Phillips discretizations, to
arbitrary order-of-accuracy while preserving desirable properties such as energy conservation.
Improvements in the vertical order of accuracy have been shown to lead to clear improvement
in the horizontal structure of the instability at ﬁxed horizontal resolution.
2082

Exploring the Eﬀects of a High-Order Vertical Coordinate . . .

Ullrich and Guerra

Figure 2: Snapshots from the baroclinic wave test case at day 9 simulated on a ne 30 grid with
30 vertical levels and 30 kilometer model cap. The time step is chosen to be Δt = 240 s.
Surface temperature and pressure are plotted in the left and right columns, respectively. The
rows represent (from top to bottom) 1, 3 and 30 levels per element.

2083

Exploring the Eﬀects of a High-Order Vertical Coordinate . . .

Ullrich and Guerra

References
[1] A. Arakawa and V.R. Lamb. Computational design of the basic dynamical processes of
the UCLA general circulation model. General circulation models of the atmosphere.(A
78-10662 01-47) New York, Academic Press, Inc., pages 173–265, 1977.
[2] A. Arakawa and S. Moorthi. Baroclinic instability in vertically discrete systems. J. Atmos.
Sci., 45(11):1688–1708, 1988.
[3] U.M. Ascher, S.J. Ruuth, and R.J. Spiteri. Implicit-explicit Runge-Kutta methods for
time-dependent partial diﬀerential equations. Appl. Numer. Math., 25(2-3):151–167, 1997.
[4] D. Boﬃ and L. Gastaldi. Some remarks on quadrilateral mixed ﬁnite elements. Comput.
Struct., 87(11-12):751–757, 2009.
[5] J. G. Charney and N. A. Phillips. Numerical integration of the quasi-geostrophic equations
for barotropic and simple baroclinic ﬂows. J. Atmos. Sci., 10:71–99, 1953.
[6] C. J. Cotter and J. Shipton. Mixed ﬁnite elements for numerical weather prediction. J.
Comput. Phys., 231(21):7076–7091, August 2012.
[7] J. Dennis, J. Edwards, K. J. Evans, O. N. Guba, P. H. Lauritzen, A. A. Mirin, A. St-Cyr,
M. A. Taylor, and P. H. Worley. CAM-SE: A scalable spectral element dynamical core for
the Community Atmosphere Model. Int. J. High Perform. Comput. Appl., 2011.
[8] T. Gal-Chen and R. C. J. Somerville. On the use of a coordinate transformation for the
solution of the Navier-Stokes equations. J. Comput. Phys., 17:209–228, 1975.
[9] F. X. Giraldo, J. F. Kelly, and E. M. Constantinescu. Implicit-explicit formulations of
a three-dimensional nonhydrostatic uniﬁed model of the atmosphere (NUMA). SIAM
Journal on Scientiﬁc Computing, 35(5):B1162–B1194, 2013.
[10] F. X. Giraldo and T. E. Rosmond. A scalable Spectral Element Eulerian Atmospheric
Model (SEE-AM) for NWP: Dynamical core tests. Mon. Weather Rev., 132:133–153,
2004.
[11] H. T. Huynh. A ﬂux reconstruction approach to high-order schemes including discontinuous
Galerkin methods. AIAA paper, 4079:2007, 2007.
[12] C. Jablonowski and D. L. Williamson. A baroclinic instabilitiy test case for atmospheric
model dynamical cores. Quart. J. Roy. Meteor. Soc., 132(621C):2943–2975, 2006.
[13] J. B. Klemp, W. C. Skamarock, and O. Fuhrer. Numerical Consistency of Metric Terms
in Terrain-Following Coordinates. Mon. Weather Rev., 131:1229–1239, 2003.
[14] S.-J. Lin. A vertically lagrangian ﬁnite-volume dynamical core for global models. Mon.
Weather Rev., 132(10):2293–2307, 2004.
[15] D. A. Randall. Geostrophic adjustment and the ﬁnite-diﬀerence shallow-water equations.
Mon. Weather Rev., 122:1371, 1994.
[16] P. Raviart and J. Thomas. A mixed ﬁnite element method for 2-nd order elliptic problems.
Mathematical Aspects of Finite Element Methods, pages 292–315, 1977.
2084

Exploring the Eﬀects of a High-Order Vertical Coordinate . . .

Ullrich and Guerra

[17] C. Ronchi, R. Iacono, and P. S. Paolucci. The “cubed sphere”: A new method for the solution of partial diﬀerential equations in spherical geometry. J. Comput. Phys., 124(1):93–
114, 1996.
[18] E. M. Rønquist and A. T. Patera. Spectral element multigrid. i. formulation and numerical
results. J. Sci. Comput., 2(4):389–406, 1987.
[19] R. Sadourny. Conservative ﬁnite-diﬀerence approximations of the primitive equations on
quasi-uniform spherical grids. Mon. Weather Rev., 100:136–144, 1972.
[20] W. C. Skamarock, J. B. Klemp, M. G. Duda, L. D. Fowler, S.-H. Park, and T. D. Ringler.
A multiscale nonhydrostatic atmospheric model using centroidal Voronoi tesselations and
C-grid staggering. Mon. Weather Rev., 140:3090–3105, 2012.
[21] A. Staniforth, T. Melvin, and C. Cotter. Analysis of a mixed ﬁnite-element pair proposed
for an atmospheric dynamical core. Quart. J. Royal Meteor. Soc., 139(674):1239–1254,
2013.
[22] M. A. Taylor and A. Fournier. A compatible and conservative spectral element method on
unstructured grids. J. Comput. Phys., 229(17):5879 – 5895, 2010.
[23] J Thuburn. Vertical discretizations giving optimal representation of normal modes:
Sensitivity to the form of the pressure-gradient term. Quart. J. Royal Meteor. Soc.,
132(621):2809–2825, 2006.
[24] J. Thuburn, T. D. Ringler, W. C. Skamarock, and J. B. Klemp. Numerical representation
of geostrophic modes on arbitrarily structured C-grids. J. Comput. Phys., 228(22):8321–
8335, 2009.
[25] J. Thuburn and T.J. Woollings. Vertical discretizations for compressible Euler equation
atmospheric models giving optimal representation of normal modes. J. Comput. Phys.,
203(2):386–404, 2005.
[26] M. D. Toy and D. A. Randall. Comment on the article “Vertical discretizations for
compressible Euler equation atmospheric models giving optimal representation of normal
modes” by Thuburn and Woollings. J. Comput. Phys, 223(1):82–88, 2007.
[27] P. A. Ullrich. Understanding the treatment of waves in atmospheric models, Part I: The
shortest resolved waves of the 1D linearized shallow water equations. Quart. J. Royal
Meteor. Soc., 140:1426–1440, 2013.
[28] P. A. Ullrich. A global ﬁnite-element shallow-water model supporting continuous and
discontinuous elements. Geosci. Model Dev. Disc., 7(4):5141–5182, 2014.
[29] P. A. Ullrich and C. Jablonowski. Operator-split Runge-Kutta-Rosenbrock methods for
nonhydrostatic atmospheric models. Mon. Weather Rev., 140:1257–1284, 2012.
[30] H. Weller, S.-J. Lock, and N. Wood. Runge–Kutta IMEX schemes for the Horizontally
Explicit/Vertically Implicit (HEVI) solution of wave equations. J. Comput. Phys., 252:365–
381, 2013.

2085

