Available online at www.sciencedirect.com

Procedia Computer Science 9 (2012) 866 – 876

TECA: A Parallel Toolkit for Extreme Climate Analysis
Prabhat1 , Oliver R¨ubel, Surendra Byna, Kesheng Wu, Fuyu Li, Michael Wehner and Wes Bethel
Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory

Abstract
We present TECA, a parallel toolkit for detecting extreme events in large climate datasets. Modern climate datasets
expose parallelism across a number of dimensions: spatial locations, timesteps and ensemble members. We design
TECA to exploit these modes of parallelism and demonstrate a prototype implementation for detecting and tracking
three classes of extreme events: tropical cyclones, extra-tropical cyclones and atmospheric rivers. We process a
modern TB-sized CAM5 simulation dataset with TECA, and demonstrate good runtime performance for the three
case studies.
Keywords:
Feature Detection and Tracking, Parallel Analysis, Climate Analysis

1. Introduction
Modern climate simulations produce massive amounts of data. Commonly used models such as the Community
Earth System Model (CESM) and Weather Research and Forecasting model (WRF) routinely produce tens of GBs
of data. Next generation Global cloud resolving simulations will soon produce TBs of data on a per-timestep basis.
Coordinated multi-model ensembles of climate model simulations such as the Coupled Model Intercomparison Project
(CMIP3) [1] contain hundreds of GBs today, CMIP5 [2] will contain tens of TBs in the near future. Such datasets
have presented tremendous opportunities in terms of sophisticated analysis (time-series, geo-spatial, pattern detection,
etc.) to further our understanding of the climate system. Indeed such ensembles are a crucial tool for international and
national organizations, such as the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC), tasked to assess the human
role in climate change and the potential of adaptation and mitigation strategies.
While valuable insight has been gained from such datasets, the sheer size of the CMIP3 archive has present significant challenges to the climate science community. The increased magnitude of CMIP5 in terms of both data volume
as well as complexity is limiting it potential uses. Conventional visualization and analysis tools, such as CDAT [3],
ferret [4], and nco [5], continue to rely on a serial execution model, fundamentally limiting the applicability of such
tools to large datasets. As higher resolution climate models enter the mainstream, insurmountable obstacles will face
the climate community if these limitations are not removed. While eﬀorts, such as UV-CDAT [6], ParCAL [7] and
PAGODA [8] are currently underway, advanced capabilities, such as machine learning and spatio-temporal analysis,
remain out of reach for most tools. Such limitations on the ability of climate scientists to exploit these large datasets
are unnecessary, as large supercomputing systems and commodity clusters are now commonly available and provide
1 Corresponding

Author. E-mail: prabhat@lbl.gov

1877-0509 © 2012 Published by Elsevier Ltd. Open access under CC BY-NC-ND license.
doi:10.1016/j.procs.2012.04.093

Prabhat et al. / Procedia Computer Science 9 (2012) 866 – 876

867

ample horsepower to facilitate sophisticated analysis. In this work, we build on current parallel computing hardware
and distributed memory programming models to develop capabilities for analyzing modern massive climate datasets.
Climate model output exposes ample parallelism across multiple dimensions. Typically, it is possible to run the
analysis code across individual ensemble members, timesteps, spatial regions and individual grid points. For instance,
hurricane detection can be performed independently across models with perturbed physics (ensembles), years, spatial
regions (northern hemisphere vs. southern hemisphere) and grid locations. Therefore, it is imperative that we design
and develop analysis capabilities that exploit the high degree of parallelism in climate datasets, and overcome the
large data challenges in the climate community.
TECA (Toolkit for Extreme Climate Analysis) is our ﬁrst step in this direction. We are interested in the characterization of extreme climate events (tropical cyclones, extra-tropical cyclones, atmospheric rivers, etc.). While these
speciﬁc events may be characterized by diﬀerent features (which we discuss Section 3), we note that the majority of
the runtime is dominated by the feature detection step, which can exploit temporal and spatial parallelism to good
eﬀect. Moreover, the speciﬁcs of implementing these ﬂavors of parallelism are independent of the feature in consideration; therefore, we designed TECA to do the heavy lifting in terms of loading data and providing spatial/temporal
parallelism, allowing developers to concentrate on implementing the particulars for each feature/event type.
To summarize, we prescribed the following design goals for TECA:
•
•
•
•

The toolkit should provide support for spatial and temporal parallelism
It should be easy to create an end-to-end custom analysis application
It should be easy to add new feature detection algorithms
The toolkit should provide climate-speciﬁc convenience functions, e.g., for loading NetCDF ﬁles, supporting
calendars, etc.

We have achieved a number of these goals in the current TECA implementation. In the following we ﬁrst discuss
the TECA software design (Section 2) and present three use cases that illustrate the toolkit in action (Section 3).
We present related work and discuss the current state of TECA and avenues for future work in Sections 4 and 5,
respectively.
2. TECA Software Design
As outlined in the previous section, our design goal for TECA was to design a general framework for handling
various ﬂavors of data parallelism (spatial, temporal) and to implement common features required by every feature
tracking/detection algorithm (e.g. loading NetCDF ﬁles, handling multiple calendaring systems, etc). We designed
and implemented TECA in C++; the distributed features were implemented using MPI.
From the perspective of a developer who wants to implement a new feature detection and tracking algorithm in
TECA, he/she needs to be able to specify a sequence of tasks and the input (data) and output (results) to/from the task.
Within a task, the developer has access to a 1D/2D/3D sub-block of data, and can implement the particulars of the
feature detection technique. Note that the developer does not make distributed MPI calls, nor does he/she have to be
bogged down with details of how the data was made available to the tasks. All he/she has to do is to iterate over their
local sub-block and process the data.
Results of the detection technique are typically stored in a local table, which can be subsequently aggregated to a
global table on a serial post-processing task. The developer writes custom code to analyze the contents of the table
and generate the ﬁnal results (statistics, tracks, etc).
We now examine the speciﬁcs of the TECA software design illustrated by Figure 1:
• Custom analysis tasks, such as feature detection and trajectory analysis, can be developed by inheriting from
T ECA base task. To interface the analysis with TECA and to deﬁne the data exchanged between consecutive
analysis tasks, the developer needs to implement three virtual functions of T ECA base task to: i) prepare the
input data, ii) analyze the input data, and iii) prepare the output data. To ease parallelization of the analysis,
TECA already provides a set of derived standard task-types (e.g., T ECA base f iletask), which implement the
splitting of the analysis into subtasks.

868

Prabhat et al. / Procedia Computer Science 9 (2012) 866 – 876

TECA_MPI_common

TECA_NetCDF_common

# data storage fields

Parallel aware framework

+initalizeMPI()
+finalizaeMPI()
+abortAllMPI()


+synchronizeTable()
+sortTable()
+add/get data functions


- mInData
- mOutData

mTasks<>

TECA_base_data
TECA_base_subtask
#mMPIRank
#mTaskId

#mTasks
asks
C
#mCurrentIndex
#mDataFilenames





TECA_base_filesubtask

TECA_base_tablebtask

#mFilename
#mTimesteps

#mTable
#mRowRange





+computeNumberOfTimesteps()
+computeTimestepLists()

TECA_base_task
#mCompleteTaskList
#mExecutionScheme
#mSynchronize
#mInData
#mOutData
.
+prepareInData() = 0
+analysisFunction() = 0
+prepareOutData() = 0
+defineTasks()=0


TECA_base_filetask

Serial Analysis/Interface




	

TECA_MPI_table

TECA_base_tabletask

#mCompleteFileLists
#mCompleteTimestepLists
#mTaskScheme

#mDataTables
#mTaskScheme

+defineTasks()


+defineTasks()


mAnalysisTasks <>



TECA_base
#mAnalysisTasks
#
#mFilelist
#mSerialRank
#
+init() = 0
+addAnalysisTask()
+runAnalysis()
+execute_serial()
+execute_onePerFile()
+execute_onePerTimestep()
+executeCustom()
#executeLocalAnalysisTasks()
#parseCommandLine()
#parseAdditionalCommandLineArgs()
#printHelp()




Ana_TstormsTimestep
+prepareInData()
+analysisFunction()
+prepareOutData()

TstormsTimestep

Comment: The synchronize and sort
functionality of the TECA_MPI_table make
Concat obsolete

TECA_CyclonTracking

Ana_Trajectories
+prepareInData()
+analysisFunction()
+prepareOutData()



Trajectories

Concat

	

+init()
+parseAdditionalCommandLineArgs()
+printHelp()

Sub-group



Group

Usage

Inheritance

Figure 1: Class diagram of TECA and illustration of a parallel implementation of the tropical cyclone detection.
• Each task has access to local data via T ECA base data, this includes information about local subtasks as well
associated user data. T ECA base data is used to specify the input and output of an analysis task.
• Output from each task is typically written to T ECA MPI table. T ECA MPI table implements a general distributed data table, which allows subtasks to store their results —such as cyclone locations— to the table while
the table provides functionality for synchronization of the table data (i.e., gather/collect the data across MPI
tasks) as well as for sorting the data records according to a user-deﬁned subset of data dimensions (columns),
e.g., yy:mm:dd. The structure of the table is deﬁned by the application code itself. A column can be added
to the table via a simple function call specifying the name and data type (e.g. double, int, char) for the new
column. To populate the table with data, T ECA MPI table provides addRow(...) and setItem(...) functions to
create new data records and to deﬁne the value for a particular data item, respectively.
• A custom application is designed by inheriting from T ECA base and specifying a series of tasks, and their
serial or parallel execution modes.
This design provides ﬂexibility to the developer in implementing the serial analysis code independent of TECA,
and then parallelizing the analysis by deﬁning simple T ECA base task wrappers. This approach can be readily
utilized for porting existing serial analysis applications to parallel platforms. At the same time, a developer can easily
implement new analysis methods directly in TECA with minimal overhead. Consequently, developers can better
focus on the analysis problem at hand while TECA manages aspects of parallelization, data aggregation and chaining
multiple analysis tasks in a pipelined fashion.
In the current implementation, TECA enables task classes to natively support parallelization over time (ﬁle+timestep)
and data records (rows) of a data table. While it is preferable to have a 1-1 mapping between processing cores and
timesteps, TECA enables users to process an arbitrary number of timesteps on each processing core. In the future,

Prabhat et al. / Procedia Computer Science 9 (2012) 866 – 876

869

we plan to enable task classes to support spatial and spatio-temporal parallelism in addition. Currently, interfaces for
loading NetCDF metadata are provided, but individual tasks make I/O calls on their own; we will address this in the
future.
3. Application Case Studies
We now apply the TECA framework for three large scale climate analysis problems, namely those of automatically
detecting and tracking tropical cyclones, extra-tropical cyclones, and atmospheric rivers in climate model output. The
goal of the analysis is to characterize frequency and distribution of these important extreme events. The results of
such analysis is useful for validating the accuracy of climate models in reproducing these events and investigating the
changes in such events under diﬀerent future scenarios.
All three case studies process high frequency output data from the Community Atmospheric Model (CAM5.1) at
0.25 degree resolution or approximately 28km at the equator. Data is stored at a temporal frequency of 3-hours. Eight
time steps, corresponding to a single day, are stored in individual NetCDF ﬁles. The typical size of a single NetCDF
ﬁle is 430MB; a year corresponds to roughly 156GB. The entire simulation output available to us is 4.2TB in size
and corresponds to 27 simulated years (1979-2005). However, not all of the data is read and processed by diﬀerent
analysis problems. All analysis is performed on hopper, a Cray XE6 system at NERSC. Each node of the hopper
system consists of 24 AMD cores with 32GB of memory. The system uses a Seastar network as the communication
interconnect, and a lustre ﬁlesystem for parallel I/O. We use a simple ﬁle-per-process I/O strategy for the reading
stage.
3.1. Tropical Cyclones
3.1.1. Scientiﬁc Motivation
Tropical storms are one of the most damaging climate events in terms of monetary destruction and loss of human
life [9]. Better understanding of the future trend of frequency and severity of the tropical storms is critical to assessing
impacts of climate change. High resolution climate models run under diﬀerent scenarios of human activity provide a
tool to project these trends [9, 10, 11]. These models are tested by performing simulations of the recent past, so their
output can be compared against available observations. After assessing a model against these observations, they are
run far into the future to investigate how tropical storm characteristics might change.
3.1.2. Algorithm
We begin our investigation by considering the TSTORMS code, originally developed at the Geophysical Fluid
Dynamics Library [11] for detecting tropical storms. The TSTORMS code is representative of many such climate
analysis programs: it processes climate model output one time step at a time, reads a handful of variables from the
modeling output and then performs a series of computations to produce a relatively small set of candidate points. The
detection step requires the majority of the computation time, and is characterized by the following conditions outlined
in [11]:
1. Vortex is deﬁned as the local relative vorticity maximum at the 850 hPa pressure isosurface. To be considered
as a tropical storm, the maximum vorticity must exceed 1.6 × 10−4 s−1 , where the vorticity is the curl of wind
velocity, and s denotes time in seconds.
2. Low pressure core is deﬁned as a local minimum of the sea surface pressure. From the low pressure core
outward, the surface pressure must increase by at least 4 hPa within a radius of 5 degrees. The local pressure
minimum must be within a distance of 2 degrees latitude and longitude from the vorticity maximum. This
pressure minimum is generally regarded as the storm center.
3. Warm-core is a local maximum of average temperature between 300 and 500 hPa. From the center of the
warm-core outward, the temperature must decrease by at least 0.8 degrees Celsius in all directions within a
distance of 5 degrees. The distance of the warm-core center from the storm center may not exceed 2 degrees.
All grid points that satisfy these multi-variate conditions form candidates for the next processing step. A stitching
phase is now invoked, which essentially places spatio-temporal constraints involving the speed of tropical storms,
the tendency to move poleward and westward and a speciﬁed minimum temporal duration. Such criteria are used to

870

Prabhat et al. / Procedia Computer Science 9 (2012) 866 – 876

Figure 2: Tropical cyclone tracks for 19 years of CAM5 output. Tracks are colored by storm categories on the
Sapphir-Simpson scale. Results were obtained by applying the parallel tropical cyclone analysis.
assign candidate points to individual tracks and resolve ties. The ﬁnal output are individual storm tracks which can
then be counted and categorized based on maximum wind speed. Note that the computationally expensive detection
step is embarrassingly parallel across timesteps. The stitching step is harder to parallelize, but takes up little runtime,
permitting execution in a serial mode.
The original TSTORMS is a single thread sequential program written in Fortran 77. It is fairly compute intensive:
serial execution on 500GB of modeling output took many days [12]. Doubling the horizontal resolution causes the
detection step to require 16 times more computations. In this work, we have re-implemented the tropical storm
detection algorithm in C and integrated the tropical storm detection capability into the proposed TECA toolkit.
3.1.3. TECA integration
The design of the implementation of the cyclone detection analysis using TECA is illustrated in Figure 1. The
initial detection of tropical storms at a single timestep is implemented in Ana T stormsT imestep. The storm detection
is automatically split by TECA into concurrent subtasks, each of which processes one timestep. The computation of
storm trajectories is then implemented as a serial task which operates on the T ECA MPI table data table generated
by the storm detection.
Only minimal changes to the original analysis code are needed in order to integrate the analysis with TECA. The
base analysis consists of three separate applications —TstormsTimestep, Concat, and Trajectories— which interact
through the use of intermediate ﬁles. A preliminary implementation in TECA —which preserved the communication
between tasks via intermediate ﬁles— did not require any changes to the original analysis code. The implementation
described here required only few changes to the analysis code to allow the storm detection (TstormsTimestep) to
output its results to a T ECA MPI table and enable the trajectories analysis (Trajectories) to operate on the table.
Using T ECA MPI table for data exchange made the Concat step obsolete and removed the need for intermediate
ﬁles for data exchange.
Integration of the tropical cyclone detection with TECA required implementation of the following main user
code. For each main analysis task we deﬁned a corresponding task class in TECA. The task classes implement
the preparation of input and output data while using the original analysis code to perform the analysis task. In
addition, the task classes specify how TECA should decompose the task into subtasks and how these subtasks should
be executed. The main application class T ECA CycloneT racking (which inherits from T ECA base), then links the
diﬀerent analysis tasks together to deﬁne a single coherent application. Here we mainly need to implement the init()
function, which instantiates the diﬀerent analysis tasks and adds them to the analysis pipeline.
3.1.4. Results
We processed 19 years of CAM5 output (1982-2000) with the tropical cyclone detection code. Data corresponding
to the various ﬁelds used in the analysis amounted to ≈ 200GB in size. A plot of the resulting Category 1-5 trajectories
is shown in Figure 2. We ran the detection step on 6935 cores of the hopper Cray XE6 system at NERSC. The detection

Prabhat et al. / Procedia Computer Science 9 (2012) 866 – 876

871

Figure 3: Snapshot of Extra-Tropical cyclone tracks for the month of January 2000. Tracks are colored based on
individual storm systems. Results were obtained by applying the parallel extra-tropical cyclone analysis.
step was completed in ≈ 2 hours. The results of the detection step was processed by the serial trajectory stitching step,
which took ≈ 10 seconds. This result highlights the power of data parallel computing: a task that would take ≈ 583
days to run on completion on a single core can now be completed in a few hours.
3.2. Extra-Tropical Cyclones
3.2.1. Scientiﬁc Motivation
Extra-tropical cyclones are of key importance to the climate at middle to high latitude regions. They determine the
local weather systems and also have strong inﬂuence on the general circulation [13, 14, 15]. For instance, the traveling
directions of Atlantic cyclones have been shown to determine the precipitation and temperature in northwestern and
southern Europe [16]. Extra-tropical cyclones are characterized by lower winds and less intense pressure minima
than their tropical counterparts, nevertheless they often result in heavy gales, thunderstorms and other severe weather.
They are also generally much larger in their geographical extent than tropical storms and occur more frequently. A
good understanding of how the statistics of extra-tropical cyclones (intensity, frequency, or position) change with the
changing climate will be fundamental for the projection of the local climate in the middle to high latitude regions.
3.2.2. Algorithm
Our extra-tropical cyclone detection procedure is similar in spirit to cyclone detection albeit with a few diﬀerences.
We follow the approach of [13, 17] for the extra-tropical cyclone detection and tracking procedure:
1. Vortex is deﬁned as the local relative vorticity maximum at the 850 hPa pressure isosurface. A region of 200km
× 200km is considered for determining the vorticity minima.
2. Storm center is deﬁned as a closest pressure minimum within a 5 degree radius of the vortex.
A stitching step is then invoked on candidate points that satisfy these criteria. The extra-tropical storm is constrained to last for at least 2 days and travel at least 1000Km over the course of its duration. A maximum distance
constraint of 600km is applied for every 6-hour interval, and a preference is given to storms that travel poleward and
eastward during the trajectory creation process. Similar to the tropical cyclone analysis, we found that the detection
step was the most expensive.
3.2.3. TECA Integration
The fundamental structure of the extra-tropical cyclone detection analysis is similar to the tropical cyclone detection discussed in Section 3.1. The design of the implementation of both algorithms in TECA as well as the eﬀort
required for integrating the analysis with TECA are comparable (see Section 3.1.3 and Figure 1).

872

Prabhat et al. / Procedia Computer Science 9 (2012) 866 – 876

3.2.4. Results
We processed 16 years of CAM5 output (1991-2005) with the extra-tropical cyclone detection code. Figure 3
shows sample trajectories from a single month in that duration. The processing was completed in ≈ 6 hours on 5840
cores. The larger runtime, especially compared to the tropical cyclones, is due to the wider latitude band that much
be searched for these storms, typically 20N through 90N and 20S to 90S, as compared to 30N to 30S for tropical
cyclones. We note that a single core would take ≈ 1460 days to analyze the same dataset.
3.3. Atmospheric Rivers
3.3.1. Scientiﬁc Motivation
Extreme precipitation events on the western coast of North America are often traced to an unusual weather phenomenon known as atmospheric rivers (ARs). These events refer to long and narrow structures in the lower atmosphere
that transports tropical moisture to the far-ﬂung regions outside of the tropical zone [18, 19]. In one of the earliest
studies on this phenomenon, it was determined that such a structure could carry more water than the great river Amazon [20, 21]. As they can be highly localized, river is an apt description of such a narrow stream of moisture moving
at high speeds across thousands of kilometers. AR events occur in oceans around the globe, including the Atlantic
basin aﬀecting the British Isles.
The key characteristic recognized in earlier studies of ARs is the moisture ﬂux [22]. However, that quantity turns
out to be diﬃcult to observe directly. In 2004, Ralph et al. [23] established a much simpler set of conditions to
identify atmospheric rivers in satellite observations. Their detection is primarily based on the total column Integrated
Water Vapor (IWV) content, which is measured in millimeters (mm) or centimeters (cm). They identify an AR as
atmospheric feature with IWV > 2cm, more than 2000 km in length, and less than 1000 km in width. Satellite
observations can direction measure IWV, however, the water vapor concentration in the model output ﬁles has to be
vertically integrated in order to produce IWV. Some speciﬁc implementation details are as follows:
3.3.2. Algorithm
The AR detection process has two phases: i) detection of AR events and ii) computation of AR statistics. The ﬁrst
phase of our detection algorithm proceeds in four steps:
• The ﬁrst step reads IWV data from a list of ﬁles. For climate model output, daily averaged values are read and
then converted to three day averages.
• For a selected ocean basin, such as the northern Paciﬁc Basin, select all mesh points where IWV is above a
speciﬁed threshold value. Our default threshold is 2cm of equivalent water as suggested by Ralph at al. [23].
This step focuses our attention to a speciﬁc ocean basin. We also remove the tropical portion of the basin as our
attention is focused on the extra-tropical features.
• Group the connected mesh points into regions in space through a connected component labeling algorithm. In
this process, we count each mesh point as connected to eight neighboring points adjacent to it. We use a twopass algorithm that gathers the connectivity information among the foreground pixels and then assign the ﬁnal
labels to each pixel [24]. The connectivity information is eﬃciently represented in a union-ﬁnd data structure,
which is known to be theoretically optimal in computational complexity measures. We refer to each connected
region as a candidate.
• For each candidate, we verify the criteria suggested by Ralph et al. to classify it as an atmospheric river or not.
We ﬁrst verify whether a connected region originates from the tropical area and makes landfall on an appropriate
coast. In the case of north Paciﬁc basin, this would be the west coast of North America from California to British
Columbia. If these two conditions are met, then we measure the length and the width for the region. The length
is measured as the maximum length of the median axis of the region and the width is computed as the ratio
between the area covered by the connected region and its length. A candidate satisfying the length and width
constraints is classiﬁed as an Atmospheric River. If the event passes over Hawaii, it is further denoted as a
”Pineapple Express”. To evaluate the strength or other impacts, we compute quantities from additional model
output ﬁelds such as precipitation, wind speed, moisture ﬂux at landfall and so on.

873

Prabhat et al. / Procedia Computer Science 9 (2012) 866 – 876

(a)

(b)

Figure 4: Sample CAM5 AR detections from our parallel code. Atmospheric rivers events in February and December
of 1991 are plotted. Note that our method is able to detect AR events of diﬀerent shapes and sizes.
3.3.3. TECA Integration
A standalone implementation of the above algorithm was presented in [25]. In this work, we enhance the implementation by integrating it into the TECA framework. In particular, TECA is able to handle the tasks of spatiotemporal parallelism. After the candidate points satisfy the AR criterion, the date, length, width, and landfall information is stored using T ECA MPI table. The AR detection is implemented as a derived class of T ECA base f iletask.
For each timestep of the data, a corresponding subtask is generated, while additional “ghost” timesteps may be included in each subtask to perform AR detection using, e.g, 3-day averages. Each of the subtasks is executed by TECA
in parallel using a static scheduling scheme. Once the detection is complete, the output data of all subtasks is collected
and sorted by date (yy:mm:dd) using the synchronize and sort functionality provided by T ECA MPI table.
The second phase of the analysis takes the data table of the detected AR events as input and computes the AR
event statistics, such as: i) the number of AR events in a year, ii) the length of each event, and iii) where each event
land falls. This phase of the analysis is implemented as derived class of T ECA base tabletask. Computing event
statistics is inexpensive and is, therefore, executed by TECA as a single serial task. To link the two analysis tasks to a
single coherent application, we then need to implement the main application class (which inherits from T ECA base)
to deﬁne the overall analysis pipeline. The implementation eﬀort and modiﬁcations required to the original analysis
code are comparable to the storm detection (Section 3.1.3).
3.3.4. Results
We processed 27 years of CAM5 data (1979-2005) with the atmospheric river detection tool. The data corresponding to the integrated water vapor ﬁeld is 32.5GB in size. Figure 4 shows two AR events in February and December
of 1991 detected using our tool. We ran the detection step on 9,855 cores of the Hopper system in ≈ 4 seconds. If
this step were run sequentially, the same detection code would have taken ≈ 657 minutes. The TECA code preserves
the data parallelism we have shown in our standalone AR detection tool. The post-processing step to determine AR
statistics ran on a single core of an XE6 node on the Hopper machine, taking ≈ 0.5 seconds.
4. Related Work
Climate scientists typically develop specialized data analysis tools for their research problems. The tropical storm
detection code [11] and the atmospheric river detection code [19, 25] mentioned earlier belong to this category. The
work presented in this paper attempts to develop a parallel framework for diﬀerent analysis codes to work together on
top of a common substrate that can handle ﬂavors of spatial and temporal parallelism.
There have been a number of eﬀorts to develop more generic climate analysis tools. We review a number of
existing software packages contrast them with our present work.
CDAT Climate Data Analysis Tool is powerful suite of analysis and visualization capabilities targeted for the
climate community. Its stated goal is to use an open-source, object-oriented, easy-to-learn scripting language (Python)

874

Prabhat et al. / Procedia Computer Science 9 (2012) 866 – 876

to link together separate software subsystems and packages to form an integrated environment for data analysis. The
tool is well designed and has a large number of users. However, we believe that their approach does not emphasize
the need for parallel data analysis. We also note that the the next generation UV-CDAT [6] infrastructure is trying to
address some of these limitations.
GrADS (Grid Analysis and Display System) is an interactive desktop tool for easy access, manipulation, and
visualization of earth science data; the openGrADS project intends to develop advanced interfaces and extensions for
GrADS. They emphasize ease of use on desktop computers and do not directly address the pressing issue of handling
massive amounts of climate data.
Statistical Tool for Extreme Climate Analysis (STECA) provides a graphical user interface for users to compute
statistics of daily atmospheric climate analysis, such as heat index, relative humidity, wind chill, etc. The GUI allows
users to specify data ﬁles and select statistical functions. The extReams toolkit generates daily and seasonal statistics
of weather. In contrast to both these tools, TECA detects extreme climate events in large climate datasets by exploiting
parallelism on supercomputing platforms.
The NCAR Command Language [26] and NetCDF Operators [27] are powerful, general utilities for performing
a range of operations (examining, subsetting, averaging, plotting) on climate data. Eﬀorts such as ParCAL [7] and
Pagoda [8] are developing parallel analogues of these utilities, enabling parallel processing on large datasets. Our
eﬀort is fairly specialized in this regard, we are developing a framework for parallel feature tracking and analysis.
Kendall, et al. [28] present the DStep system which is similar in spirit to our work. Their system allows for simpliﬁed traversal of spatio-temporal domains across a large scale distributed memory system. They use a MapReduce
like framework to process data and merge the results. They also use sophisticated data management and parallel I/O
techniques, and demonstrate teleconnection analysis on an ensemble dataset.
Finally, we note that a few visualization and analysis tools have been demonstrated to scale on large supercomputing platforms and process massive datasets. VisIt [29] and Paraview [30] belong to this category. However, these
tools are designed to be general purpose, and are not speciﬁcally targeted for the climate community. It is possible to
implement the features in TECA within the VTK pipelines of VisIt and Paraview, and expose some climate-speciﬁc
features to users. We will explore this route in the future as a vehicle for production deployment to a broad user
community.
5. Discussion and Future Work
Using TECA greatly simpliﬁes the parallel implementation of the tropical storm, extra-tropical cyclone and atmospheric river detection analyses described in the previous section. TECA handles many of the common tasks involved
with parallelizing the analysis, in particular: i) splitting of analysis tasks into independent subtasks, ii) execution of
the subtasks in parallel, iii) collecting data from all MPI ranks and sorting of the collected data by using TECA’s
parallel table data structure for storage and exchange of analysis results, and iv) integration of diﬀerent analysis task
(e.g,. detection of storms and computation of storm trajectories) into a single analysis application. The object-oriented
design of TECA provides developers with ﬂexibility and and ease of integration of new features, such as new schemes
for decomposition of analysis into subtasks, without having to modify TECA itself.
The current implementation of TECA achieves a number of the goals we had proposed, such as ease of use and native support for temporal parallelism; but it also has various limitations. While a developer may easily add new types
of tasks and task-decompositions, TECA currently does not provide native support for spatial parallelism, i.e., TECA
currently does not implement subtasks based on spatial sub-regions of the globe. This will likely be a limitation when
data from kilometer scale atmospheric models becomes available. Simple forms of temporal parallelism, namely
assigning one timestep per core, will introduce load balancing problems, wherein only a small subset of the cores
will undertake a detailed search for sparse extreme events. This problem can be alleviated by assigning interleaved
timesteps (or spatial subsets) across cores, or a more elaborate workload-driven dynamic load balancing scheme. Finally, TECA has little I/O support at the moment. TECA currently only provides a straightforward interface to climate
data, while I/O operations are largely performed by the analysis algorithms. We plan to address these limitations in
future work.
Our current performance numbers reﬂect tests at a single problem conﬁguration: ≈ O(6000)-way concurrency and
primarily utilizing temporal parallelism. We would like to perform more extensive scalability tests by utilizing spatial,

Prabhat et al. / Procedia Computer Science 9 (2012) 866 – 876

875

temporal and spatio-temporal parallelism across a variable number of cores. Mixing diﬀerent parallel modalities will
enable us to run at much larger concurrencies and will likely expose scalability bottlenecks.
6. Conclusion
In conclusion, we have presented a design for TECA that leverages diﬀerent ﬂavors of data parallelism currently
available in large climate datasets. We have demonstrated the power of the toolkit by application to three important
climate science problems, namely that of detecting tropical cyclones, extra-tropical cyclones and atmospheric rivers.
We have tested these implementations on large TB sized climate datasets and demonstrated good runtime performance
on thousands of cores. The TECA toolkit provides for an extensible framework that can be leveraged for implementing
diﬀerent feature detection and tracking algorithms for tackling large scale climate science problems.
7. Acknowledgement
This work was supported by the Regional and Global Climate Modeling Program and the Earth System Modeling
Program of the Oﬃce of Biological and Environmental Research, the Director, Oﬃce of Science, Oﬃce and Advanced
Scientiﬁc Computing Research, of the U.S. Department of Energy under Contract No. DE-AC02-05CH11231. This
work used resources of the National Energy Research Scientiﬁc Computing Center (NERSC), which is supported by
the Oﬃce of Science of the U.S. Department of Energy under Contract No. DE-AC02-05CH11231.
References
[1] G. A. Meehl, C. Covey, T. Delworth, M. Latif, B. McAvaney, J. F. B. Mitchell, R. J. Stouﬀer, K. E. Taylor, The wcrp cmip3 multi-model
dataset: A new era in climate change research, Bulletin of the American Meteorological Society 88 (2007) 1383–1394.
[2] IPCC, Cmip5 - coupled model intercomparison project phase 5, http://cmip-pcmdi.llnl.gov/cmip5/.
[3] Cdat, http://www-pcmdi.llnl.gov/software-portal/cdat.
[4] Ferret data visualization and analysis, http://ferret.wrc.noaa.gov/Ferret/.
[5] netcdf operator (nco), http://nco.sourceforge.net/.
[6] Ultrascale visualization - climate data analysis tools, http://uv-cdat.llnl.gov/.
[7] Parallel climate analysis library, http://trac.mcs.anl.gov/projects/parvis.
[8] Pagoda: Parallel analysis of geoscience data, https://svn.pnl.gov/gcrm/wiki/Pagoda.
[9] M. F. Wehner, G. Bala, P. Duﬀy, A. A. Mirin, R. Romano, Towards direct simulation of future tropical cyclone statistics in a high-resolution
global atmospheric model, Advances in Meteorology 2010 (2010) Article ID 915303.
[10] P. J. Webster, G. J. Holland, J. A. Curry, H. Chang, Changes in tropical cyclone number, duration, and intensity in a warming environment,
Science 309 (5742) (2005) 1844–1846.
[11] T. R. Knutson, J. J. Sirutis, S. T. Garner, I. M. Held, R. E. Tuleya, Simulation of the recent multidecadal increase of atlantic hurricane activity
using an 18-km-grid regional model, Bulletin of the American Meteorological Society 88 (10) (2007) 1549–1565.
[12] D. Hasenkamp, A. sim, M. Wehner, K. Wu, Finding tropical cyclones on a cloud computing cluster: Using parallel virtualization for largescale climate simulation analysis, in: CloudCom, 2010.
[13] L. Bengtsson, K. I. Hodges, E. Roeckner, Storm tracks and climate change, J. Climate 19 (2006) 3518–3543.
[14] N. Lau, Variability of the observed midlatitude storm tracks in relation to low-frequency changes in the circulation pattern, J. Armos. Sci. 45
(1988) 2718–2743.
[15] N. Lau, The stationary wave response to a tropical sst anomaly in an idealized gcm, J. Armos. Sci. 47 (1990) 2546–2566.
[16] H. van Loon, J. C. Rogers, The seesaw in winter temperatures between greenland and northern europe. part i: General description, Mon. Wea.
Rev. 106 (1978) 296–310.
[17] L. Bengtsson, K. I. Hodges, N. Keenlyside, Will extra-tropical storms intensify in a warmer climate?, J. Climate 22 (2009) 2276–2301.
[18] F. M. Ralph, M. D. Dettinger, Storms, ﬂoods and the science of atmospheric rivers, EOS, Transactions of AGU 92 (32) (2011) 265–266.
[19] M. D. Dettinger, F. M. Ralph, T. Das, P. J. Neiman, D. R. Cayan, Atmospheric rivers, ﬂoods and the water resources of california, Water 3 (2)
(2011) 445–478.
[20] Y. Zhu, R. E. Newell, Atmospheric rivers and bombs, Geophysical Research Letters 21 (18) (1999-2002) 1994.
[21] R. E. Newell, N. E. Newell, Y. Zhu, C. Scott, Tropospheric rivers? a pilot study, Geophysical Research Letters 19 (24) (24012404) 1992.
[22] Y. Zhu, R. E. Newell, A proposed algorithm for moisture ﬂuxes from atmospheric rivers, Monthly Weather Review - USA 126 (3) (725-735)
1998.
[23] F. M. Ralph, P. J. Neiman, G. A. Wick, Satellite and caljet aircraft observations of atmospheric rivers over the eastern north paciﬁc ocean
during the winter of 1997/98, Monthly Weather Review 132 (7) (2004) 1721–1745.
[24] K. Wu, E. Otoo, K. Suzuki, Optimizing two-pass connected component labeling algorithms, Pattern Analysis & Applications 12 (2) (117135)
2009.
[25] S. Byna, Prabhat, M. F. Wehner, K. Wu, Detecting atmospheric rivers in large climate datasets, in: Supercomputing 2011 Workshop on
Petascale Data Analytics: Challenges and Opportunities, 2011.

876

Prabhat et al. / Procedia Computer Science 9 (2012) 866 – 876

[26] Ncar command language, http://www.ncl.ucar.edu/.
[27] netcdf operator, http://nco.sourceforge.net/.
[28] W. Kendall, J. Wang, M. Allen, T. Peterka, J. Huang, D. Erickson, Simpliﬁed parallel domain traversal, in: Proceedings of 2011 International
Conference for High Performance Computing, Networking, Storage and Analysis, SC ’11, ACM, New York, NY, USA, 2011, pp. 10:1–10:11.
doi:10.1145/2063384.2063397.
URL http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/2063384.2063397
[29] Visit visualization tool, https://wci.llnl.gov/codes/visit/.
[30] Paraview, http://www.paraview.org/.

