Procedia Computer Science
Volume 51, 2015, Pages 1534–1544
ICCS 2015 International Conference On Computational Science

Numerical veriﬁcation criteria for coseismic and
postseismic crustal deformation analysis with large-scale
high-ﬁdelity model
Ryoichiro Agata12 , Tsuyoshi Ichimura3 , Kazuro Hirahara4 ,
Mamoru Hyodo5 , Takane Hori5 , Chihiro Hashimoto6 , and Muneo Hori3
1

5

Department of Civil Engineering, The University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan
agata@eri.u-tokyo.ac.jp
2
Research Fellow of the Japan Society for the Promotion of Science
3
Earthquake Research Institute, The University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan
ichimura@eri.u-tokyo.ac.jp, hori@eri.u-tokyo.ac.jp
4
Kyoto University, Kyoto, Japan
hirahara@kugi.kyoto-u.ac.jp
Japan Agency for Marine-Earth Science and Technology, Yokohama, Japan
hyodo@jamstec.go.jp, horit@jamstec.go.jp
6
Nagoya University, Aichi, Japan
hashi@seis.nagoya-u.ac.jp

Abstract
Numerical veriﬁcation of postseismic crustal deformation analysis, computed using a large-scale ﬁnite
element simulation, was carried out, by proposing new criteria that consider the characteristics of the
target phenomenon. Speciﬁcally, pointwise displacement was used in the veriﬁcation. In addition,
the accuracy of the numerical solution was explicitly shown by considering the observation error of
the data used for validation. The computational resource required for each analysis implies that highperformance computing techniques are necessary to obtain a veriﬁed numerical solution of crustal deformation analysis for the Japanese Islands. Such veriﬁcation in crustal deformation simulations should
take on greater importance in the future, since continuous improvement in the quality and quantity of
crustal deformation data is expected.
Keywords:

1

Introduction

Numerical simulation is widely used in science and engineering. To assure the quality of results obtained by numerical simulation, a process known as ”veriﬁcation and validation (V&V)” has been
proposed[18]. Veriﬁcation is a process that checks whether a numerical model assumed for a certain
1534

Selection and peer-review under responsibility of the Scientiﬁc Programme Committee of ICCS 2015
c The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V.

doi:10.1016/j.procs.2015.05.344

Veriﬁcation for hi-ﬁ crustal simulation

Agata, Ichimura, Hirahara, Hyodo, T. Hori and M. Hori

physical phenomenon (e.g., a partial diﬀerential equation) is solved correctly by the simulation code.
This process is typically used for setting an appropriate discretization size, within which the numerical
solution converges. Validation is a process that checks whether the numerical model reasonably explains
the target physical phenomenon. This classiﬁcation avoids confusion when discussing diﬀerences between results of numerical solutions and actual observation data.
In the ﬁeld of solid earth science, coseismic (during an earthquake) and postseismic (after an earthquake) crustal deformation due to fault dislocation in a subduction zone has been studied. The time and
spatial scale of the deformation is of the order of 100 ∼ 101 years and 103 km × 103 km horizontally,
respectively. Many studies have used analytical solutions with simpliﬁed structures [14][4] to calculate
crustal deformation, since analytical solutions do not require the same computational power as numerical solutions. However, since interplate faulting in a subduction zone has a complex and heterogeneous
three-dimensional (3D) structure, numerical simulation methods; e.g., ﬁnite element (FE) methods, are
suitable for analyzing deformation around this system. Some recent studies attempted to use an FE
model at a relatively low resolution to include the 3D structure of the subduction zone in the simulation
[12] [17]. Ongoing development of observational techniques has yielded more detailed data on crustal
deformation and crustal structure. In Japan, for example, crustal deformation data have been collected
by GEONET [5], the observation error of which is of the order of mm. In focal regions of subduction
earthquakes, some observation systems are already in service with observation errors of the order of cm
(e.g., DONET [10]). Detailed geometric data of 3D heterogeneous crustal structure are also available in
those focal regions (e.g., Koketsu et al. [11]). Crustal deformation data are used for validation of numerical simulation results or inversion analysis of earthquake fault slips, while crustal structure data are
applied to construction of numerical simulation models. It is desirable to carry out simulations of crustal
deformation at a resolution and accuracy similar to those data, at the appropriate time and spatial scales
for the target problem. This is not, however, an easy task: even with the newest computational environments, construction of simulation models and performing the simulation itself becomes computationally
costly.
To overcome the problem of computational cost, high-performance computing (HPC) is necessary.
Ichimura et al. [9] developed a tool to compute coseismic and postseismic crustal deformation on a
large-scale computer such as the K computer, currently the fastest supercomputer in Japan, using an
FE model of similar high-ﬁdelity to the crustal structure data (HFM: high-ﬁdelity model). That paper
mainly discussed a fast and scalable computational method. We expect that such a high-ﬁdelity crustal
deformation simulation method will become a standard tool for analyzing crustal deformation, as more
global crustal structure data of subduction zones are expected to be available in the future. To discuss
the necessity for high-ﬁdelity analysis, it is also important to examine the quality of simulation results.
However, none of the veriﬁcation methods used in other ﬁelds are applicable to the target simulation. For
instance, the typical veriﬁcation methods used in computer-aided engineering (CAE) are based on stress
distribution [8]. In computational seismology, some studies (e.g., Martin [3]) used criteria to quantify
the level of agreement between two wave forms such as the goodness-of-ﬁt scores [2]. These veriﬁcation
criteria are not applicable to the characteristics of crustal deformation simulations; the simulation results
need to be compared with pointwise displacement data spread across a wide area.
In this paper, we seek to carry out veriﬁcation of the numerical solutions computed in [9] by checking
the convergence of the numerical solution. To clarify the accuracy of the results which the problem
setting provides, we propose new veriﬁcation criteria that are more suitable for the characteristics of the
crustal deformation simulation mentioned above. For the evaluation of accuracy, we also consider the
observation error of crustal deformation data to be used for validation, inversion analysis of earthquake
fault slip, etc. We also discuss the computation time for the target simulation to show that HPC facilities
are essential to assure the quality of the simulation results.
1535

Veriﬁcation for hi-ﬁ crustal simulation

2

Agata, Ichimura, Hirahara, Hyodo, T. Hori and M. Hori

Target problem

Details of the target problem for veriﬁcation are provided in Ichimura et al. [9], and described brieﬂy
here. We describe coseismic and postseismic crustal deformation as linear elasticity and the Maxwell
model of viscoelasticity, as:
σi j, j + fi = 0,
μ
1
σ
˙ i j = λ˙kk δi j + 2μ˙i j − (σi j − σkk δi j ),
η
3
1
i j = (ui, j + u j,i ).
2
Here, σi j , fi are the stress tensor and outer force. ( ˙ ), ( ),i , δi j , η, i j , ui are ﬁrst-order derivative in
time, ﬁrst-order derivative in the ith coordinate, Kronecker delta, viscosity coeﬃcient, strain tensor and
displacement, respectively. λ, μ are Lame’s constants. These governing equations are for the Maxwell
model, and equivalent to those of linear elasticity when η = ∞. Since the equations do not include the
acceleration term, the problem can be solved as a quasi-static problem, and so a larger time-step length
can typically be taken. We used an FE method to solve the equation using the formulation of Parker
et al. [15], after which the problem becomes equivalent to the solution of a linear equation in Ku = f
for each time step. Earthquake fault slip was introduced by using the split-node technique [13], and
Dirichlet boundary conditions were imposed at the sides and bottom of the target domain. Speciﬁcally,
displacements in the normal direction at points on the side and bottom planes are ﬁxed to zero, while
there are no imposed values in other directions [1]. To solve Ku = f on a large-scale supercomputer
such as the K computer, Ichimura et al. [9] developed a scalable and fast linear solver. The basic
algorithm consists of a Conjugate Gradient method and Element-by-Element method [13] to achieve
memory eﬃciency. To improve the convergence of the CG solver, an adaptive preconditioner was used
in combination with a multigrid approach based on elements of diﬀerent polynomial orders. The code
was parallelized using both Message Passing Interface (MPI) and OpenMP (hybrid parallelization). We
computed response displacement due to a point source in a multilayered elastic/visco elastic half–space
using the method above, and compared the numerical solution with an analytical solution computed
using the method of Fukahata and Matsu’ura [4]. We found our numerical solution agreed well with the
analytical solution [9].
The target problem is a simulation of coseicmic and postseismic crustal deformation of the Japanese
Islands due to the 2011 Tohoku-oki Earthquake. The target domain for the analysis is shown in Figure
1. To carry out FE analyses, we need geometry data for the crustal structure of the Japanese Islands, to
construct an FE mesh. For the ground surface, JTOPO30, an elevation data set in 900-m resolution, was
used. For the Philippine Sea Plate and Paciﬁc Plate, two types of data were applied: For the focal region,
the detailed data of Koketsu et al. [11] were used, whereas the CAMP model [6] was used elsewhere.
The thickness of the elastic layer of the continental plate and the elastic slab of the Philippine Sea Plate
were set to be 30 km, and the elastic slab of the Paciﬁc Plate to be 80 km. Viscoelastic layers were
located below each elastic layer. The viscosity of the viscoelastic layers was set to be η = 5 × 1018 Pa s
following Hashimoto et al. [6]. For FE mesh construction for HFM, we used a meshing technique
using a background grid[9]. This method allows to set an arbitrary mesh resolution ds in the interface
between each layer, with slight approximation of geometry to maintain the mesh quality. At the same
time, unnecessary elements are merged to generate larger elements elsewhere. A quadratic tetrahedral
element type was used (Figure 2). Hereafter, ”mesh size” also refers to ”ds”, the resolution of the layer
interface. Figure 3 shows the FE model constructed for the target area. The mesh is constructed in a
Cartesian coordinate system. The target area is 0 ≤ x ≤ 2944 km west-to-east, 0 ≤ y ≤ 2752 km
south–to–north, and −850 ≤ z ≤ 0 km vertically. In construction of the basic settings used hereonin,
1536

Veriﬁcation for hi-ﬁ crustal simulation

3

Agata, Ichimura, Hirahara, Hyodo, T. Hori and M. Hori

Evaluation method of accuracy

The goal of veriﬁcation is to estimate the numerical error caused by the discretization [18]. Studies
of FE analyses often use Richardson extrapolation for this purpose, by using numerical solutions with
diﬀerent descretization sizes to analyze convergence rate [16]. On the other hand, approximation of
geometry is necessary to maintain the mesh quality in the process of constructing FE mesh in such a
large domain as our target, as mentioned in Section 2. We have conﬁrmed that numerical solutions
computed by our method approaches certain values as the discretization size gets smaller, by drawing
convergence curve associated with our numerical solution. However, we also found that slight change
in geometry is sensitive to the convergence curve with respect to the discretization sizes, which made
it diﬃcult to apply error analysis using Richardson extrapolation to our computation method. Thus we
need an alternative veriﬁcation strategy, and so made it as following. Based on the fact that the numerical
solution approaches to certain value as the discretization size gets smaller, we seek to ﬁnd certain spatial
discretization size with which the error is expected to be suﬃciently small. We used the same approach
for the time step length and the domain size. Here, for simplicity, we ﬁrstly present basic settings based
on some prescribed analyses. By comparing the solution using basic settings with those of a diﬀerent
mesh size, time-step length and target domain, we show convergence of the solution using basic settings.
For the basic settings, ds=1000m, dt=30days, and the target domain is that shown in Figure 1. Here
we deﬁne Model A as an FE model with the same parameters as the basic model but with ds=750m,
Model B as an FE model with the same parameters as the basic model but with dt=15days and Model
C as an FE model where the side and bottom surfaces of which are extended by 64km to the normal
direction (See the summary of model settings in Table 1). On land, we used 1198 observation points,
which were equivalent to the locations of GEONET observation points included in the target domain.
On the seaﬂoor, out of those serviced by the Japan Coast Guard and Tohoku University, the seven points
that were studied in Sun et al. [17] were used.
As discussed previously, simulation results of postseismic crustal deformation are usually used in
pointwise comparison with crustal deformation data. Note that a pointwise metric is stricter than the one
based on integrated value, such as norm of displacement vector for whole the target domain, but proper
for typical application problems such as inversion analysis of earthquake fault slip proposed by Yabuki
& Matsu’ura [19]. Therefore, we evaluated the results at the locations of observation points where data
for post seismic crustal deformation have been collected. This manner requires less postprocessing, and
enables relatively clear visualization. For evaluation of convergence with respect to pointwise displacement, we seek to show that changes of computed displacements lie within a certain range when making
changes to mesh size, time-step length and target domain. The term ”certain range” refers to a relative
diﬀerence of less than 1%. Here we deﬁne:
εa = |u (r) − u(r)|
u (r) − u(r)
εr = |
|,
u(r)
where εa , εr are absolute and relative diﬀerences, and u(r) and u (r) are displacements in Point r computed with the basic settings and with the amended parameters. However, if the magnitude of the
displacement is signiﬁcantly small, the relative diﬀerence tends to be larger. It is therefore not always
easy to evaluate these points using only relative diﬀerence. Hamanaka [7] reported that the observation
errors of GEONET routine solutions are 2 mm horizontally and 1 cm vertically, which we used for evaluation of εa hereafter. Here, we determined that if the absolute value of the displacement is smaller than
the observation error, the solution at that point is also included within the acceptable ”certain range”
without any additional conditions. In other words, at each observation point, the conditions
Horizontal:
1538

Veriﬁcation for hi-ﬁ crustal simulation

Agata, Ichimura, Hirahara, Hyodo, T. Hori and M. Hori

Table 1: Comparison of the settings of the four models.
Basic setting
Model A
Model B
Model C

ds
1000m
750m
1000m
1000m

dt
30days
30days
15days
30days

area
Figure1
Figure1
Figure1
Figure1+64km in the side and bottom planes

Ch1 = (u < 200mm ∧ εa < 2mm) ,
Ch2 = (u ≥ 200mm ∧ εr < 0.01) ,
Ch1 ∨ Ch2 = {true},
Vertical:
Cv1 = (u < 1000mm ∧ εa < 10mm) ,
Cv2 = (u ≥ 1000mm ∧ εr < 0.01) ,
Cv1 ∨ Cv2 = {true},
should be satisﬁed. Note that observation error is used only to decide which error to use as a metric
for the evaluation, relative or absolute, and so we do not use any physical measurement values in this
process. It is natural to introduce criteria which are coordinate-dependent, because errors in simulations
or observations are sometimes coordinate-dependent (in our case, GEONET routine solutions error as
mentioned above). The expressions are written in such a way that they are convenient for evaluation
or visualization of diﬀerences, because all points are easily divided into two groups depending on the
displacement value, as shown in the next section.

4

Results

Firstly we show the simulation results using HFM with the basic settings. The accumulated postseismic
crustal deformation(coseismic + postseismic) for 10 years after the earthquake (including coseismic
deformation) are shown in Figure 4. After the elastic response due to coseismic fault slip, viscoelastic
response due to relaxation of stress merely contributes the diﬀerence of displacement between coseismic
deformation and postseismic crustal deformation.
Next, we show the diﬀerence in the simulation results of the accumulated postseismic crustal deformation using models A, B and C. We plotted relative diﬀerence and absolute diﬀerence in the same
ﬁgure because absolute error is used for checking the condition Ch1 (or Cv1 ) and relative error for Ch2 (or
Cv2 ). Hence the observation points for checking Ch1 and Ch2 (or Cv1 and Cv2 ) do not overlap with each
other. Relative error is plotted in blue and gold coloration, while absolute error is plotted in green and
red. Since these two legends do not have common color with each other, the readers can judge which
kind of error is being evaluated in a speciﬁc evaluation point only by its color. In cases where the value
of the error was larger than the maximum value of the color bar in the legend, the point has been plotted
in orange. Figure 5 illustrates the diﬀerences between the basic model and Model A. At almost all of
the points, the diﬀerence is signiﬁcantly small. In the z component, larger diﬀerences can be seen in
seaﬂoor observation points and in the Tohoku area. Figure 6 illustrates the diﬀerences between the basic
1539

Veriﬁcation for hi-ﬁ crustal simulation

Agata, Ichimura, Hirahara, Hyodo, T. Hori and M. Hori

model and Model B. Again diﬀerences are signiﬁcantly small at almost every point. Also, the inﬂuence
of time-step length on these diﬀerences appears to be independent of point location. Figure 7 illustrates
the diﬀerences between the basic model and Model C. In the x component, larger diﬀerences can be
seen at locations far from the focal region than in the other components. This is probably because deformation in the x component is signiﬁcantly larger than that of the other components (See Figure 4):
The error due to the Dirichlet conditions imposed in the model boundaries may be expected to increase.
Although the diﬀerence between these ﬁgures reﬂects the characteristics of the variable parameter, there
are no orange points in any of the ﬁgures. This suggests that numerical solution of the basic model
satisﬁes the criteria given in Section 3.
To compute a 10-year simulation using the basic model, we used 8192 nodes on K computer (1/10 of
the entire resource) for 2.4 hours. It is clear that greater computation resources are needed for equivalent
analyses using Models A, B and C due to their ﬁner discretization or larger area. In addition, many
prescribed analyses have been carried out for determining the basic system. These facts indicate that
HPC techniques, which enable our scalable program to run on a state-of-the-art supercomputing system
such as the K computer, are indispensable for this type of veriﬁcation analysis.

5

Concluding remarks

Although veriﬁcation, one of the two components of V&V,is important for assuring the quality of results
obtained by numerical simulation, explicit veriﬁcation has not been commonly applied to numerical simulation of crustal deformation. In this paper, we carried out numerical veriﬁcation of the problem solved
using HFM [9], by checking the convergence of numerical solutions with respect to mesh size, time-step
length, and target domain. Since our computation method, specialized for an analysis in a large target
domain, cannot apply widely used veriﬁcation methods such as error analysis using Richardson extrapolation, we took another veriﬁcation strategy. Speciﬁcally, considering the characteristics of crustal
deformation simulation, we proposed veriﬁcation criteria which used pointwise displacement for veriﬁcation. In our criteria, the accuracy of the numerical solutions was explicitly shown by considering
the observation error of the data used in validation. The computational time required for each analysis
implies that HPC facilities are necessary for such veriﬁcation, for crustal deformation analysis of the
Japanese Islands. HPC in combination with such a veriﬁcation method may be expected to assure the
quality of crustal deformation simulations.
The quantity of crustal deformation data, in particular, seaﬂoor observation data at high accuracy, is
expected to increase in the future. Carrying out veriﬁcation in simulations of crustal deformation will
become more important in analysis of these data.

References
[1] B. T. Aagaard, M. G. Knepley, and C. A. Williams. A domain decomposition approach to implementing fault slip in ﬁnite-element models of quasi-static and dynamic crustal deformation.
Journal of Geophysical Research: Solid Earth, 118(6):3059–3079, 2013.
[2] John G Anderson. Quantitative measure of the goodness-of-ﬁt of synthetic seismograms. In
13th World Conference on Earthquake Engineering Conference Proceedings, Vancouver, Canada,
Paper, volume 243, 2004.
[3] Florent De Martin. Veriﬁcation of a spectral-element method code for the southern california
earthquake center loh. 3 viscoelastic case. Bulletin of the Seismological Society of America,
101(6):2855–2865, 2011.
1542

Veriﬁcation for hi-ﬁ crustal simulation

Agata, Ichimura, Hirahara, Hyodo, T. Hori and M. Hori

[4] Yukitoshi Fukahata and Mitsuhiro Matsu’ura. Quasi-static internal deformation due to a dislocation source in a multilayered elastic/viscoelastic half-space and an equivalence theorem. Geophysical Journal International, 166(1):418–434, jul 2006.
[5] Geospatial Information Authority of Japan. Gnss earth observation network system. 2010.
[6] Chihiro Hashimoto, Kenji Fukui, and Mitsuhiro Matsufura. 3-D Modelling of Plate Interfaces and
Numerical Simulation of Long-term Crustal Deformation in and around Japan. Pure and Applied
Geophysics, 161(9-10):2053–2068, aug 2004.
[7] Y Hatanaka. Evaluation of Precision of Routine Solutions of GEONET (in Japanese). Journal of
the Geospatial Information Authority of Japan, 108:49–56, 2005.
[8] T.J.R. Hughes, J.A. Cottrell, and Y. Bazilevs. Isogeometric analysis: Cad, ﬁnite elements, nurbs,
exact geometry and mesh reﬁnement. Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering,
194(39–41):4135–4195, 2005.
[9] T. Ichimura, R. Agata, T. Hori, K. Hirahara, and M. Hori. On Analysis Method for Coseismic and
Postseismic Crustal Deformation with Large-scale High-ﬁdelity Model (preparing). Geophysical
Journal International, 195(3), sep 2015.
[10] Y. Kaneda, K. Kawaguchi, E. Araki, H. Matsumoto, T. Nakamura, M. Nakano, S. Kamiya,
K. Ariyoshi, T. Baba, M. Ohori, N. Takahashi, and T. Hori. Dense ocean ﬂoor network for earthquakes and tsunamis (donet/donet2) part3 –development and data application for the mega thrust
earthquakes around the nankai trough–. 1:1553, 2011.
[11] K Koketsu, H Miyake, H Fujiwara, and T Hashimoto. Progress towards a Japan Integrated Velocity
Structure Model and Long-Period Ground Motion Hazard Map. The 14th World Conference on
Earthquake Engineering, pages 1–7, 2008.
[12] C. Kyriakopoulos, T. Masterlark, S. Stramondo, M. Chini, and C. Bignami. Coseismic slip distribution for the M w 9 2011 Tohoku-Oki earthquake derived from 3-D FE modeling. Journal of
Geophysical Research: Solid Earth, 118(February):3837–3847, jul 2013.
[13] HJ Melosh and A Raefsky. A simple and eﬃcient method for introducing faults into ﬁnite element
computations. Bulletin of the Seismological Society of America, 71(5):1391–1400, 1981.
[14] Y Okada. Surface deformation due to shear and tensile faults in a half-space. Bulletin of the
Seismological Society of America, 75(4):1135–1154, 1985.
[15] Jay Parker, Gregory Lyzenga, Charles Norton, Cinzia Zuﬀada, Margaret Glasscoe, John Lou, and
Andrea Donnellan. Geophysical Finite-Element Simulation Tool (GeoFEST): Algorithms and
Validation for Quasistatic Regional Faulted Crust Problems. Pure and Applied Geophysics, 165(34):497–521, may 2008.
[16] P. J. Roache. Quantiﬁcation of Uncertainty in Computational Fluid Dynamics. Annual Review of
Fluid Mechanics, 29(1):123–160, January 1997.
[17] Tianhaozhe Sun, Kelin Wang, Takeshi Iinuma, Ryota Hino, Jiangheng He, Hiromi Fujimoto, Motoyuki Kido, Yukihito Osada, Satoshi Miura, Yusaku Ohta, and Yan Hu. Prevalence of viscoelastic
relaxation after the 2011 Tohoku-oki earthquake. Nature, 514:84–87, sep 2014.
1543

Veriﬁcation for hi-ﬁ crustal simulation

Agata, Ichimura, Hirahara, Hyodo, T. Hori and M. Hori

[18] The American Society of Mechanical Engineers. Asme v&v 10-2006 - guide for veriﬁcation and
validation in computational solid mechanics. The American Society of Mechanical Engineers,
2006.
[19] T Yabuki and M Matsu’ura. Geodetic data inversion using a Bayesian information criterion for
spatial distribution of fault slip. Geophysical Journal International, 109(2):363–375, 1992.
[20] Yuji Yagi and Yukitoshi Fukahata. Rupture process of the 2011 Tohoku-oki earthquake and absolute elastic strain release. Geophysical Research Letters, 38(19):1–5, 2011.

Acknowledgment
This work was supported by JSPS Fellows (26–8867). Part of the results is obtained by using the K
computer at the RIKEN Advanced Institute for Computational Science (Proposal number hp120278 &
120308).

1544

