Procedia Computer Science
Volume 29, 2014, Pages 1146–1155
ICCS 2014. 14th International Conference on Computational Science

Stochastic Parameterization to Represent Variability and
Extremes in Climate Modeling
R. Langan1,3∗, R. Archibald1,3 , M. Plumlee5 , S. Mahajan1,2 , D. Ricciuto1,6 , C.
Yang4 , R. Mei1,2 , J. Mao1,6 , X. Shi1,6 , and J. S. Fu4 .
1

Climate Change Science Institute, Oak Ridge National Laboratory, Oak Ridge, TN
Computational Earth Sciences Group, Oak Ridge National Laboratory, Oak Ridge, TN
Computational and Applied Mathematics Group, Oak Ridge National Laboratory, Oak Ridge, TN
4
Department of Civil & Environmental Engineering University of Tennessee Knoxville, TN
5
Industrial and Systems Engineering, Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, GA
6
Environmental Science Division, Oak Ridge National Laboratory, Oak Ridge, TN
2

3

Abstract
Unresolved sub-grid processes, those which are too small or dissipate too quickly to be captured
within a model’s spatial resolution, are not adequately parameterized by conventional numerical
climate models. Sub-grid heterogeneity is lost in parameterizations that quantify only the ‘bulk
eﬀect’ of sub-grid dynamics on the resolved scales. A unique solution, one unreliant on increased
grid resolution, is the employment of stochastic parameterization of the sub-grid to reintroduce
variability. We administer this approach in a coupled land-atmosphere model, one that combines
the single-column Community Atmosphere Model (CAM-SC) and the single-point Community
Land Model (CLM-SP), by incorporating a stochastic representation of sub-grid latent heat
ﬂux to force the distribution of precipitation. Sub-grid diﬀerences in surface latent heat ﬂux
arise from the mosaic of Plant Functional Types (PFT) that describe terrestrial land cover.
With the introduction of a stochastic parameterization framework to aﬀect the distribution
of sub-grid PFT’s, we alter the distribution of convective precipitation over regions with high
PFT variability. The stochastically forced precipitation probability density functions (pdf)
show lengthened tails, demonstrating the retrieval of rare events. Through model data analysis
we show that the stochastic model increases both the frequency and intensity of rare events in
comparison to conventional deterministic parameterization.
Keywords:

1

Introduction

The deterministic numerical methods used in climate modeling, which rely on discretization,
lead to scale separation and prevent the explicit resolution of small-scale dynamics. Conven∗ Corresponding

1146

Author: langanrt@ornl.gov

Selection and peer-review under responsibility of the Scientiﬁc Programme Committee of ICCS 2014
c The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V.
doi:10.1016/j.procs.2014.05.103

Stochastic Parameterization in Climate Modeling

R. Langan et. al.

Figure 1: The stochastic model is focused on the weighted average calculation of the latent heat
ﬂux, where sub-grid variability better represents and the pdf tails of atmospheric processes like
precipitation.

tional closure to this problem involves incorporating the average of sub-grid ﬂows as initial
conditions. However, the chaotic behavior of the nonlinear diﬀerential equations that describe
the climate imply that errors in initial conditions can impact resolved scales. For instance,
the use of averaging based parameterizations is known to cause model dampening of variation
in climate processes. Statistical methods are widely accepted as an approach to quantifying
and remediating model errors symptomatic of the closure problem. Stochastic ensemble modeling, for example, is used to forecast the overall predictability of the climate system through
a sampling of initial observation error. In the small-scales, stochastic physics can enhance parameterizations of the sub-grid and simulate the dynamical variability that is characteristic
of the climate system [5]. Stochastic forcing in climate has the ability to bridge multi-scale
interactions, because of this, it is clear that stochastic forcing will play a primary role in our
understanding of non-gaussian statistics and the dynamics of extreme events [14]. With regard
to land models, stochastic methods can broaden the inﬂuence of surface heterogeneity by channeling variance through sub-grid land cover distributions. In eﬀect, stochastically perturbed
land distributions give rise to a wider array of dynamical event outcomes, including extreme or
rare events. This paper presents a model that introduces stochastic error to the distribution
of sub-grid PFT’s to improve latent heat ﬂux variability and extremes on the land boundary
layer.
One challenge associated with the closure problem is model underestimation of both precipitation variability and extreme precipitation events [4]. This research oﬀers the statistical
representation of land-atmosphere latent heat ﬂuxes as a tool for enhancing extreme precipitation modeling. Figure 1 depicts a stochastic approach to the closure problem for latent heat
ﬂux. We target the representation of latent heat ﬂux on the land boundary layer because of
its dominant role as a driver of convective precipitation. Latent heat ﬂux rates over land are
derived from the phenological characteristics associated with particular PFT’s. The diversity
of PFT’s that constitute a heterogeneous land cover instill variability in the heat ﬂuxes of
the land-atmosphere interface. To reproduce the variability of latent heat ﬂux, we develop
a stochastic framework that perturbs the sub-grid PFT distribution. We then examine how
the incorporation of latent heat ﬂux variability beneﬁts precipitation simulation in the coupled
CAM-SC and CLM-SP model.
The focus of our alternate PFT parameterization, is to statistically stimulate variance in the
latent heat exchanges of the land-atmosphere interface. Our stochastic parameterization uses an
adaptive methodology which allows for the control and optimization of incorporated stochastic
1147

Stochastic Parameterization in Climate Modeling

R. Langan et. al.

Figure 2: The CLM incorporates the terrestrial ecological impacts on hydrology. (source [10])

intensity. We use a control parameter to facilitate the study of weighted PFT distributions;
through the analysis of diﬀerent noise intensity models we determine the optimal noise model
for achieving latent heat ﬂux variability by comparison to observational data. The model is
distinct in its use of parameter, β, as well as a Dirichlet distribution, a multivariate distribution
of non-negative variables summing to unity with single parametric control of the variance [6].
The Dirichlet distribution, well-suited to statistically model weighted average sums, has been
used in a broad number of ﬁelds, including evolutionary theory [12], Bayesian statistics [11],
geology [3], forensics [8], econometrics [7], transport [1], and population biology [13] to name
a few prominent studies. This method of stochastic modeling has yet to be utilized in climate
studies.

1.1

CESM

Both the CLM and CAM are components of the Community Earth System Model (CESM), a
climate model designed through collaboration with universities, national labs, and the National
Center for Atmospheric Research (NCAR). The CESM uses a coupled-climate-system approach
combining atmosphere, land surface, ocean and sea ice models to produce a comprehensive
model of climate dynamics. This interdisciplinary model was developed to study changes in
climate as well as the complex interactions of component processes such as cloud physics,
radiative transfer, and boundary layer processes as well as their overall inﬂuence on large scale
circulation.
The land component of the CESM, the CLM, is well-suited to studies examining the impact
of terrestrial ecosystems on the cycling of energy, gases, and water. The biogeophysics component simulates the radiative transfer between the land-atmosphere boundary and incorporates
variables such as: reﬂected solar radiation, surface stresses, latent heat ﬂux, and sensible heat
ﬂux. Initial conditions for the CLM can incorporate vegetative and terrestrial inﬂuence on
1148

Stochastic Parameterization in Climate Modeling

R. Langan et. al.

climate processes and enable a more precise modeling of biogeophysical ﬂuxes. A few of these
signiﬁcant vegetative characteristics include: stomal structure, albedo, roughness length, and
canopy height [2]. When coupled to the CAM, the ﬂuxes associated with the terrestrial ecology
are passed to the atmospheric model where they inﬂuence larger circulatory processes. Figure
2 depicts the ﬂuxes on the land boundary layer that drive the hydrologic cycle. In the CLM,
convective precipitation is parameterized to be dependent on the convective available potential
energy (CAPE), a process strongly inﬂuenced by these surface heat ﬂuxes [16].

2

Stochastic Model

We divide the description of the stochastic model in two parts; parameterization and stochastic
distribution. First we explain the sub-grid latent heat ﬂux parameterization used in the CLM
and then present our stochastic distribution that captures the variability of the sub-grid latent
heat ﬂux.

2.1

Parameterization

Typical climate models have a horizontal spatial resolution of about 150km, however, within
this sub-grid scale a wide variety of surface features interact with and inﬂuence the climate
system. Large-scale surface heterogeneity in the CLM is represented by ﬁve primary land cover
types, namely, glacier, lake, wetland, urban and vegetated as seen in ﬁgure 3. PFT’s are used
to further classify heterogeneities within the vegetated land-unit where they quantify ecological
impact on atmospheric circulations. In this way, the CLM represents the entire domain of plant
species with ﬁfteen PFT’s that are categorized based on their ﬂux-inﬂuencing characteristics.
Datasets describing the fractional abundance of sub-grid PFT’s are then used to generate initial
conditions and thus relay the sub-grid impact of the land component. The CLM’s Present Day
PFT dataset [15] uses satellite products to obtain the distribution and areal extent of PFT’s
as well as their leaf area index values. These PFT blueprints enable sub-grid heterogeneity
parameterization since they reproduce the physical properties of land cover while sustaining
the multiple PFT representation.

2.2

Stochastic Distribution

Conventional models incorporate small-scale dynamics by passing up the average inﬂuence of
sub-grid features on the climate system. The consequence is a loss of information, including
the variance of climate-inﬂuencing surface characteristics like land composition. We begin with
a description of the conventional parameterization where sub-grid latent heat ﬂux is computed
as the average of the column at each time-step:
˜ ti =
Q

N
i=1

αi Qti ,

N

αi = 1.

where

(1)

i=1

In equation (1), N represents the number of PFTs, αi is the proportion of the ith functional
type and Qi is the latent heat ﬂux for a speciﬁc functional type. The values of αi are quantities
obtained from datasets like the Present Day PFT dataset. We modify the conventional representation (1) and generate stochastic sub-grid representation the following Dirichlet distribution,
parameterized:
1149

Stochastic Parameterization in Climate Modeling

R. Langan et. al.

Figure 3: source [9]

D(α, β),

N

where α ∈ RN
>0 ,

αi = 1,

and

β ∈ R>0 .

(2)

i=1

The value of α controls the expected value of the output, i.e.,
if

W ∼ D(α, β)

then

EWi = αi .

(3)

Finally, the value of β controls the variance,
var(Wi ) = αi (1 − αi )/(β + 1),

(4)

framing a process in which a large value of β will have little variance and vice versa. The most
eﬃcient method for producing draws from the Dirichlet distribution is the following algorithm,
based on the work [6]:
Data: Given the PFT Dataset α and variance parameter β
Result: Dirichlet distributed PFT Dataset, W ∼ D(α, β)
for i=1 to N do
wi∗ ∼ Gamma(β, αi )
end
for i=1 to N do
w∗
wi = N i w ∗
i=1

i

end
Algorithm 1: Generating draws from the Dirichlet distribution from PFT dataset
The pdf of this particular parametrization is not commonly used:
f (α, β) =
1150

Γ(β)
N
i=1

N

Γ(αi ) i=1

i −1
xβα
i

(5)

Stochastic Parameterization in Climate Modeling

R. Langan et. al.

PDF of Stochastic Dirichlet PFT (Present day, beta = 16)
8

BDS temperate
NET temperate
BDT temperate
bare ground
C3 grass
C4 grass
C3 crop

7

Probability Density

6
5
4
3
2
1
0
0

10

20

30

40

50

60

70

Weight (%)

80

90

100

Figure 4: Dirichlet distribution for the PFT dataset at the Lamont, Oklahoma–present day
timeframe, T42 spectral resolution, and β = 16.

The result will depend on the parameter β, and a larger value of β signiﬁes greater conﬁdence
in the PFT dataset. As β → ∞ the samples will converge to αi in probability; this convergence
result can be derived via Chebyshev’s inequality based on the expression for the variance.

3

Methods

We use the single-column feature of the CESM to simulate the land and atmosphere at T42 spectral resolution–approximately 2.8 degrees. The Atmospheric Radiation Measurement (ARM)
Southern Great Plains (SGP) facility, funded by the Department of Energy (DOE), provides
detailed atmospheric measurements and these data products are used to form our observational
datasets [15]. To enable the comparison of model output against real-world data, single-column
simulations are run over the Lamont, Oklahoma ARM site. Our control simulation uses the
original weighted average method given in (1) to calculate the latent heat ﬂux at each timestep for the PFT dataset. Stochastic simulations incorporate the Dirichlet distribution and β
parameter given in (2), modeling the latent heat ﬂux as:
˜t =
Q
i

N
i=1

Wi Qti ,

N

Wi = 1,

where

and

W ∼ D(α, β).

(6)

i=1

We simulate the stochastic model 50 times each for variation parameter with values β =
{16, 8, 4, 2} to survey the impact of incorporated variance. ARM SGP observational data is then
used to tune the model variation parameter, β. Figure 4 is an example Dirichlet distribution
generated by our stochastic process that uses the Present Day Dataset for PFT representation,
the ARM Lamont site measurement data from time period: 1994-2013, T42 spectral resolution,
and β = 16.
1151

Stochastic Parameterization in Climate Modeling

R. Langan et. al.

Figure 5: Model simulations of a heavy rainfall event, during late spring, where the precipitation
timeline of the control model is in red and the ﬁfty ensemble members of the stochastic model
are in green.

4

Results

The single-column model for CESM is a strongly constrained climate simulation, where each
stochastic run has the same boundary conditions along the entire column. Each simulation is
run over a one year time frame with a time-step of 20 minutes. Part of our analysis considers
extreme precipitation events or events occurring less than 10% of the time. We also consider
the duration in which rainfall intensity remains at the ‘extreme’ threshold, a factor used in
determining when an extreme event becomes a natural disaster.
Figure 5 depicts a rare, heavy, rainfall event taking place in the control model, visible in red,
over the course of two days in the late spring over the Lamont, Oklahoma location. The total
average precipitation projected by the control model is 86.6mm. The ﬁfty stochastic ensemble
runs, each utilizing the same single-column boundary conditions, are depicted in green and are
forced with variation parameter β = 4. The boundary conditions strongly constrain the singlecolumn model and all stochastic runs follow the same rain events. Despite this, it can been
seen that some stochastic ensemble members are capable of simulating intensifying precipitation
for a longer duration. Stochastic ensemble members diversify total rainfall spread in this 48hr
period: ensemble members have a mean and standard deviation of 88.9±3mm. Collectively, the
stochastic ensembles widen the spread of precipitation intensity; individually, certain stochastic
ensembles signal a more extreme event than projected by the control. In this way, the ensembles
of our stochastic model are more likely to project potential natural disasters.
The eﬀect of the stochastic simulations for the single-column model have their most dramatic
eﬀect on the tails of the pdfs. Figure 6 depicts the tails of the latent heat ﬂux and precipitation
for the control simulation, the stochastic simulation: β = 4, and the observational dataset
1152

Stochastic Parameterization in Climate Modeling

R. Langan et. al.

Latent Heat Flux: pdf tail
Stochastic
Control
Observations

.10

x 10

Stochastic
Control
Observations

2.5

Frequency

Frequency

.15

Precipitation: pdf tail

−3

3

2
1.5
1

.05
0.5
0
200

300

400

500

600
2

0

700

Latent Heat Flux (W/m )

4

6

8

10

12

Precipitation (mm/hr)

14

16

(a) The pdf tail of the latent heat ﬂux for the (b) The pdf tail of precipitation for the stochastic
stochastic model, the control and the ARM data model, the control and the ARM data from Lamfrom Lamont, OK.
ont, OK.

Figure 6
provided by ARM1 . It can seen in Figure 6 that the observational data display long tail behavior
that is not simulated by the control. This demonstrates that a tailored stochastic forcing of
variability to the single-column model improves simulation of real-world extreme precipitation.
Since the stochastic model acts on the latent heat ﬂux at each time-step, an examination of
the hourly diﬀerence in latent heat ﬂux provides a sensitivity measure of stochastic impact
to single-column simulations. Figure 7a portrays the pdf ﬁt of the hourly diﬀerence in latent
heat ﬂux of the following data: observational measurements of latent heat ﬂux, the control
model simulation of the variable, and ﬁfty ensemble members of the stochastic simulation with
variation parameters β = {16, 8, 4, 2}. Figure 7b shows the relative error in simulated latent
heat ﬂux for both the control model and and the stochastic model as compared to the measured
data. The stochastic model has a lower relative error for each of the variational parameter
values, and β = 4 has the lowest relative error. Thus, the stochastic parameterization with
noise value given by β = 4, provides the best model for latent heat ﬂux variability.

5

Conclusion

For the foreseeable future–as long as grid-size is greatly limited by computational complexity–
climate models will require innovative parameterizations to capture features of the climate
system. Parameterizations based on averaging techniques dampen variability and as a result,
models underpredict extreme events. This research addresses model deﬁciency in the case of
extreme precipitation with a novel stochastic approach to sub-grid parameterization. We show
that our method, which statistically represents PFT’s, improves the representation of latent heat
ﬂux variability and this boosts the frequency of simulated rare precipitation. Consequentially,
our model narrows the gap between forecasted rare precipitation events and their frequency in
nature. Also, we demonstrate how the unique statistical approach, with tunable beta parameter,
provides a chassis for noise model optimization and validation with observational data. The
parametrization advances implemented in this study have the potential to improve warning
systems for disasters like ﬂooding and drought.
1 Data

available at http://www.arm.gov

1153

Stochastic Parameterization in Climate Modeling

R. Langan et. al.

Latent Heat Flux: pdf of hourly difference
.15

.05
0
.20

Relative Error

Control
Beta=16
Beta=8
Beta=4
Beta=2
Observation

.10

Frequency

0.35

.15

Relative Error of Stochastic Models

0.3

0.25

.10

0.2

.05
0
.03

.07

.14

.28

.56

1.10
2

2.30

4.50

Control

Latent Heat Flux (W/m )

(a) Frequency estimation of the pdf showing the
hourly diﬀerence in latent heat ﬂux for the stochastic model with diﬀerent beta values, control simulation, and ARM observational data.

Beta=16

Beta=8

Model

Beta=4

Beta=2

(b) Relative error of the frequency estimation of
the pdf for the hourly diﬀerence in latent heat ﬂux
for the stochastic model for each beta value and the
control, as compared to the observational data.

Figure 7

5.1

Acknowledgments

The submitted manuscript has been authored in part by contractors [UT-Battelle LLC, manager of Oak Ridge National Laboratory (ORNL)] of the U.S. Government under Contract No.
DE-AC05-00OR22725. Accordingly, the U.S. Government retains a non-exclusive, royalty-free
license to publish or reproduce the published form of this contribution, or allow others to do so,
for U.S. Government purposes. Special thanks to the Research Alliance in Math and Science
(RAMS) program and the Climate Change Science Institute (CCSI) at ORNL.

References
[1] J. Bakosi and J. R. Ristorcelli. A stochastic diﬀusion process for lochner’s generalized dirichlet
distribution. Journal of Mathematical Physics, 54(10), 2013.
[2] G. B. Bonan, S. Levis, L. Kergoat, and K. W. Oleson. Landscapes as patches of plant functional
types: An integrating concept for climate and ecosystem models. Global Biogeochemical Cycles,
16(2), 2002.
[3] F. Chayes. Numerical correlation and petrographic variation. Journal of Geology, 70, 1962.
[4] A. M. DeAngelis, A. J. Broccoli, and S. G. Decker. A comparison of cmip3 simulations of precipitation over north america with observations: Daily statistics and circulation features accompanying
extreme events. J. Climate, 26, 2013.
[5] R. H. Gardner, B. Rojder, and U. Bergstrom. Prism: A systematic method for determining the
eﬀect of parameter uncertainties on model predictions. Technical report, Studsvik Energiteknik
AB report/NW-83/555, Nyk¨
oping, Sweden, 1983.
[6] A. Gelman, J. B. Carlin, H. S. Stern, and D. B. Rubin. Bayesian data analysis. CRC press, 2003.
[7] C. Gourieroux and J. Jasiak. Multivariate jacobi process with application to smooth transitions.
Journal of Econometrics, 131, 2006.
[8] K. Lange. Applications of the dirichlet distribution to forensic match probabilities. Genetica,
96(1-2), 1995.
[9] NCAR. Community land model: Surface heterogeneity, 2013.

1154

Stochastic Parameterization in Climate Modeling

R. Langan et. al.

[10] K. W. Oleson, D. M. Lawrence, G. B. Bonan, B. Drewniak, M. Huang, C. D. Koven, S. Levis,
F. Li, W. J. Riley, Z. M. Subin, S. C. Swenson, and P. E. Thornton. Technical description of
version 4.5 of the community land model (clm). Technical Report NCAR/TN-503+STR, Climate
and Global Dynamics Division, NCAR Earth System Laboratory, 2013.
[11] C. D. M. Paulino and C. A. De Bragan¸ca Pereira. Bayesian methods for categorical data under
informative general censoring. Biometrika, 82(2), 1995.
[12] K. Pearson. Mathematical contributions to the theory of evolution. on a form of spurious correlation which may arise when indices are used in the measurement of organs. Royal Society of
London Proceedings Series I, 60, 1896.
[13] M. Steinrucken, Y. X. R. Wang, and Y. S. Song. An explicit transition density expansion for a
multi-allelic wright–ﬁsher diﬀusion with general diploid selection. Theoretical Population Biology,
83, 2013.
[14] P. Sura. Stochastic models of climate extremes: Theory and observations. Extremes in a Changing
Climate–Detection, Analysis and Uncertainty. Water Science and Technology Library, 65, 2013.
[15] S. Xie, R. B. McCoy, S.A. Klein, R. T. Cederwall, W. J. Wiscombe, E.E. Clothiaux, K. L. Gaustad,
J. C. Golaz, S. D. Hall, M. P. Jensen, K. L. Johnson, Y. Lin, C. N. Long, J. H. Mather, R. A.
McCord, S. A. McFarlane, G. Palanisamy, Y. Shi, and D.D. Turner. Clouds and more: Arm
climate modeling best estimate data. Bull. Amer. Meteor. Soc., 91, 2013.
[16] G. J. Zhang and N. A McFarlane. Sensitivity of climate simulations to the parameterization of
cumulus convection in the canadian climate centre general circulation model. Atmosphere-Ocean,
33(3), 1995.

1155

