Procedia Computer Science
Volume 80, 2016, Pages 496–506
ICCS 2016. The International Conference on Computational
Science

An Ensemble Approach to Weak-Constraint
Four-Dimensional Variational Data Assimilation
Jeremy A. Shaw1 and Dacian N. Daescu2
1
2

Portland State University, PO Box 751, Portland, OR, 97207, USA.
shaw@pdx.edu
Portland State University, PO Box 751, Portland, OR, 97207, USA.
daescu@pdx.edu

Abstract
This article presents a framework for performing ensemble and hybrid data assimilation in a
weak-constraint four-dimensional variational data assimilation system (w4D-Var). A practical
approach is considered that relies on an ensemble of w4D-Var systems solved by the incremental
algorithm to obtain ﬂow-dependent estimates to the model error statistics. A proof-of-concept
is presented in an idealized context using the Lorenz multi-scale model. A comparative analysis
is performed between the weak- and strong-constraint ensemble-based methods. The importance of the weight coeﬃcients assigned to the static and ensemble-based components of the
error covariances is also investigated. Our preliminary numerical experiments indicate that an
ensemble-based model error covariance speciﬁcation may signiﬁcantly improve the quality of
the analysis.
Keywords: model error; weak constraint; variational data assimilation; ensemble methods; error covariance; error bias

1

Introduction

Four-dimensional variational data assimilation (4D-Var) provides an estimate to the state of
a dynamical system through the minimization of a cost functional that measures the distance
to a prior state (background) estimate and observations [20] over a time window [t0 , tN ]. The
analysis ﬁt to each information input component is determined by the speciﬁcation of the error
covariance matrices in the data assimilation system (DAS).
Unlike the extended Kalman ﬁlter, error covariances are typically not updated between 4DVar assimilation cycles. A practical approach to improve the quality of the analysis is to include
the “errors of the day” by using an ensemble-based estimate to the background error covariance
matrix. Evensen [11] introduces this Monte Carlo alternative as the ensemble Kalman ﬁlter
(EnKF) and it has since been implemented in various studies, e.g. [15], [17], [18]. Lorenc [21]
496

Selection and peer-review under responsibility of the Scientiﬁc Programme Committee of ICCS 2016
c The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V.

doi:10.1016/j.procs.2016.05.329

An Ensemble Approach to Weak-Constraint 4D-Var

Shaw and Daescu

and Fairbairn et al. [12] investigate the potential use of EnKF for numerical weather prediction
(NWP) applications and its analysis performance, as compared with 4D-Var.
For large-scale dynamical systems, the number of ensemble forecasts is much smaller as
compared to the dimension of the discrete state vector. Therefore, an ensemble-based representation to the background error covariance matrix is of low rank and corrupted by sampling
errors. To alleviate these issues, several approaches have been considered for practical implementation including covariance localization [15, 16] and the formulation of hybrid methods that
aim to synergistically combine the merits of variational and ensemble-based DA [1, 2].
Weak-constraint 4D-Var (w4D-Var) provides a theoretical framework to account for modeling errors in the analysis scheme. Tr´emolet [25] investigates some possible implementations
of w4D-Var. In addition to the speciﬁcation of the background error covariance (B) matrix,
the w4D-Var formulation requires information on the model error statistics and speciﬁcation
of the model error covariance. Up to now, the increased computational cost associated with
w4D-Var has prevented its practical implementation. Various simpliﬁcations to reduce the
computational burden have been considered, including writing the model error covariance as
a scalar multiple of the background error covariance (see [8] for example) and modeling the
model error [14, 26, 27]. Research to implement an ensemble data assimilation approach to
model error covariance estimation in w4D-Var is at an incipient stage. Mitchell and Carrassi
[24] use ensembles to account for model error, but in the context of the ensemble transform
Kalman ﬁlter. Desroziers et al. [9] investigate a possible implementation of an ensemble 4D-Var
using a four-dimensional ensemble covariance.
Ensemble data assimilation can estimate not only the model error covariance matrices, but
also bias. Traditionally, an assumption is made that the errors in data assimilation are unbiased
to simplify the computational cost or because the information about error biases is not available.
Bias in data assimilation has been explored in the works by Dee [4], Dee and Da Silva [5], and
Dee and Todling [6], where it is noted that errors in models and the data are often systematic
rather than random. Attempts to correct for error bias have been made in the form of bias
detection and correction methods and “bias-aware” data assimilation methods, including bias
correction in variational data assimilation [7], but not in the context of w4D-Var. Bias-aware
Kalman ﬁlters have been explored by Dr´ecourt et al. [10].
This work investigates novel applications of ensemble and hybrid techniques to estimate
the model error statistics in a w4D-Var DAS. The implementation of ensemble-based DA for
w4D-Var is presented. A proof-of-concept and comparison of w4D-Var to the ensemble data assimilation and hybrid assimilation schemes is made in numerical experiments. The terminology
and notation follow closely to that of Ide et al. [19] and Tr´emolet [25].

2

Ensemble Data Assimilation

Weak-constraint 4D-Var provides a sequence of time-distributed analyses xai ∈ Rn that estimate
the true state xti of a dynamical system at time ti of the data assimilation interval [t0 , tN ]. The
nonlinear cost functional associated with w4D-Var is deﬁned as
J(x0 , . . . , xN ) =

1
1
[x0 − xb0 ]T B−1 [x0 − xb0 ] +
2
2
+

1
2

N

T

[yi − hi (xi )] R−1
i [yi − hi (xi )]
i=0

N

[η i − qi ]T Q−1
i [η i − qi ]

(1)

i=1

497

An Ensemble Approach to Weak-Constraint 4D-Var

Shaw and Daescu

where xb0 ∈ Rn is a prior (background) estimate of the true state at time t0 , yi ∈ Rpi is the
observation vector at time ti , hi denotes the observation operator that maps the state xi into
observation space, and η i = xi − Mi (xi−1 ) represents the error in the forecast model Mi
that advances the state from time ti−1 to time ti . The vector qi is deﬁned as the statistical
expectation of η i and is referred to as model error bias. The statistical information on the
background error εb = x0 − xb0 , observational errors εoi = yi − hi (xi ), and model errors η i is
used to specify the positive deﬁnite matrices B ∈ Rn×n , Ri ∈ Rpi ×pi , and Qi ∈ Rn×n , which
represent the background, observation, and model error covariance matrices used in the data
assimilation system.
In some applications, model error bias is not accounted for or is assumed to be zero, which
eliminates the qi term from the cost functional. In a strong-constraint 4D-Var system, a
perfect model assumption xi = Mi (xi−1 ) is used to completely eliminate the model error
term from (1) and simplify the cost functional so that the only free variable is x0 , the initial
condition. By taking into account model error in w4D-Var, the control variable is sequence of
states {x0 , . . . , xN }. Tr´emolet [25] describes other possible formulations of the control variable,
including {x0 , η 1 , . . . , η N }.
Ensemble data assimilation has been used in conjunction with variational methods in an
attempt to capture the “errors of the day” and dynamically update the background error
covariance. Ensembles can also be used to estimate the model error covariances Qi and the
model bias qi by using ensembles for the analysis states xai,j . The steps needed to obtain
ensemble estimates of model error are presented next.

2.1

Derivation of the Model Error Ensemble

When the true model error statistics are unknown, the data assimilation system speciﬁcations
of the error bias qi = qti and error covariance Qi = Qti are made. The incremental algorithm,
introduced by Courtier et al. [3], may be used to perform w4D-Var over a time window [t0 , tN ].
The states xgi at which the model and observation operators are linearized will utilize the
assumed model error statistics, that is, let
xg0 = xb0 ,

xgi = Mi (xgi−1 ) + qi ,

i = 1, . . . , N.

(2)

The incremental method then produces the four-dimensional analysis
xa = xg + K[y − h(xg )]

(3)

where K is the four-dimensional gain matrix analogous to the Kalman gain matrix.
An ensemble of analyses xai,j , where i = 0, 1, . . . , N and j = 1, . . . , Ne , is used to produce a
low-rank representation to the model error covariance. The setup is as follows.
• Prescribe the background error statistics B, observation error covariances Ri , and model
error statistics Qi , qi to be used for each w4D-Var problem, the same speciﬁcation for
each ensemble member.
• From the background state xb0 , form the background ensemble xb0,j = xb0 + εbj , where εbj
is generated from the normal distribution N (0, B).
• Perturb the observation yi to form an ensemble yi,j = yi + εoi,j , where the perturbation
εoi,j is normally distributed with mean zero and covariance Ri , for i = 0, 1, . . . , N and
j = 1, . . . , Ne .
498

An Ensemble Approach to Weak-Constraint 4D-Var

Shaw and Daescu

• For each member of the background ensemble xb0,j , form the corresponding ensemble of
guesses xgi,j according to (2) using the assumed model error bias qi .
A substitute for using the statistics of B to perturb the background is to use the approximate
background error
ε = xa0 − xb0 /n

(4)

as the standard deviation for the mean zero normally distributed perturbation. A multiplicative
constant β can be included so that the standard deviation of the perturbations is βε.
By performing w4D-Var using the incremental method with data xg0,j , . . . , xgN,j and observations y0,j , . . . , yN,j , we get an ensemble of analysis states xai,j . The four-dimensional analysis
ensemble xaj follows from (3)
xaj = xgj + Kj [yj − h(xgj )]

(5)

where the gain matrix Kj may vary with the ensemble member j. In this framework, the best
estimate of the true state is obtained as the ensemble average for each time
1
Ne

¯ ai =
x

Ne

xai,j .

(6)

j=1

From (5) and (6), deﬁne ensemble estimates to model error
¯ ai − Mi (xai−1,j )
η i,j = x

(7)

for i = 1, . . . , N and j = 1, . . . , Ne . With the model error ensemble now available, the model
error bias qti is estimated by the ensemble mean
qi,e =

1
Ne

Ne

η i,j

(8)

j=1

and the associated ensemble estimates to the model error covariance matrix are
Qi,e =

1
Ne − 1

Ne

[η i,j − qi,e ][η i,j − qi,e ]T .

(9)

j=1

Now that estimates for the model error bias and model error covariance are available, qi,e and
Qi,e may be used in a w4D-Var data assimilation system. This procedure is summarized in
Algorithm 1. Possible ensemble-based assimilation schemes are described next.

2.2

Ensemble-based w4D-Var Schemes

Instead of prescribing the model error covariance matrices as static Qi that do not change
between assimilation cycles, one approach is to specify the model error bias and model error
covariance matrices as qi,e and Qi,e , respectively. This choice of specifying qi = qi,e and
Qi = Qi,e utilizes the information from the “errors of the day” to improve the quality of the
analysis. These speciﬁcations can be kept up-to-date in future time-steps by computing the
ensemble estimates qi,e and Qi,e in each data assimilation cycle.
499

An Ensemble Approach to Weak-Constraint 4D-Var

Shaw and Daescu

Algorithm 1 Computation of the ensemble estimates of model error.
1:
2:
3:
4:
5:
6:
7:
8:
9:
10:
11:
12:
13:
14:
15:
16:
17:
18:
19:
20:
21:
22:
23:

procedure Model Error Ensemble(B, Ri , Qi , qi , Ne )
for j = 1, . . . , Ne do
xb0,j = xb0 + εbj
xg0,j = xb0,j
for i = 1, . . . , N do
xgi,j = Mi (xgi−1,j ) + qi
end for
for i = 0, 1, . . . , N do
yi,j = yi + εoi,j
end for
(xa0,j , . . . , xaN,j ) = w4DVar(B, Ri , Qi , qi , xgi,j , yi,j )
end for
for i = 0, 1, . . . , N do
¯ ai from equation (6)
Compute x
for j = 1, . . . , Ne do
Compute η i,j from equation (7)
end for
end for
for i = 1, . . . , N do
Compute qi,e from equation (8)
Compute Qi,e from equation (9)
end for
end procedure

Perturb the background
Set the guess states

Perturb the observations
Analysis ensemble

The ensemble covariance matrices Qi,e may have low rank due to a small ensemble size and
additionally suﬀer from the presence of sampling error. To reduce this, one may replace Qi in
the data assimilation system by the Schur (elementwise) product of the ensemble covariance
Qi,e with a localization matrix
Qi = Qi,e ◦ Ci

(10)

where Ci is a properly selected correlation matrix. A popular correlation function to apply is
the ﬁfth-order rational function of compact support, given by equation (4.10) of Gaspari and
Cohn [13].
Another option is to specify the model error covariance matrices as a linear combination of
a static matrix Qi,c and the ensemble covariance
Qi = αi Qi,c + (1 − αi )Qi,e .

(11)

A localization matrix Ci may applied to Qi,e so that (11) is replaced by
Qi = αi Qi,c + (1 − αi )Qi,e ◦ Ci .

(12)

Similarly, the model error bias is speciﬁed as a linear combination of a static vector qi,c and
the ensemble average using the same parameter
qi = αi qi,c + (1 − αi )qi,e
500

(13)

An Ensemble Approach to Weak-Constraint 4D-Var

Shaw and Daescu

where 0 ≤ αi ≤ 1. This combination of two speciﬁcations of model error is referred to as
hybrid data assimilation. For αi = 1, the speciﬁed model error will utilize the current static
speciﬁcation, or the status quo, while for αi = 0, it will be set to the ensemble model error statistics. Hybrid data assimilation is designed to combine the merits of both the static
component {Qi,c , qi,c } and the dynamic component {Qi,e , qi,e } with a value of αi satisfying
0 < αi < 1 to improve the quality of the analysis more than the static and dynamic components
can do alone.

3

Numerical Experiments

The performance of ensemble and hybrid formulations of w4D-Var assimilation described in
subsection 2.2 is investigated in comparative numerical experiments performed with the multiscale model of Lorenz [22]
dxk
hc
= xk−1 (xk+1 − xk−2 ) − xk −
dt
b

J

yjk + F

(14a)

j=1

dyjk
hc
= cbyj+1,k (yj−1,k − yj+2,k ) − cyjk + xk
dt
b

(14b)

where k = 1, . . . , K and j = 1, . . . , J. The yjk variables vary at a smaller scale than the xk
variables and are arranged as y11 , y21 , . . . , yJ1 , y12 , . . . , yJ2 , . . . , yJK . They also extend cyclically
so that yJ+1,1 = y11 . We will refer to the model given by (14) by LZ96. In this experiment, the
“true” state of the dynamical system is represented by the integration of (14) by the fourthorder Runge-Kutta method with b = c = 10, h = 1, K = 40, J = 10 and F = 8. By ignoring
the eﬀects of the yjk variables, the Lorenz 40-variable model [23]
dxk
= xk−1 (xk+1 − xk−2 ) − xk + F
dt

(15)

will only approximate the true state evolution and model error is now introduced by the unrepresented small-scale dynamics. Thus, for the data assimilation process, the true state xti at
time ti will be the x-values produced from the integration of (14), whereas the forecast model
Mi will be the integration of (15) using a constant step-size t = 0.05, which identiﬁes to a
6-hour time period. The integration of (14) requires a smaller time step to preserve numerical
stability, so a 6-hour forecast is achieved through ten smaller time-steps with t = 0.005.
A data assimilation window consists of the current time t0 and three time-steps, representing
an assimilation window [t0 , t3 ]. Observational data are generated from the true state with the
observational error taken from the distribution N (0, (σ o )2 ) with the standard deviation speciﬁed
as σ o = 0.55. The observation operator satisﬁes hi (xi ) = xi for i = 1, 2, 3.
An analysis will be produced from w4D-Var after setting up the background error covariance
B by running the extended Kalman ﬁlter using the true model error statistics for 700 timesteps with B initialized to the identity matrix. The background xb0 for each step of the extended
Kalman ﬁlter is taken to be a forecast of the previous analysis perturbed by random noise. After
the spin-up cycle is complete, B will then remain static for w4D-Var assimilation.
A comparative analysis is done to investigate the performance of the ensemble and hybrid
assimilation methods to gauge their beneﬁts. Three w4D-Var schemes (henceforth referred to as
Control, Weak Ensemble, and Weak Hybrid) are run concurrently in order to properly compare
and contrast the results. For each assimilation system, the background and observation error
covariances are speciﬁed as described above, whereas the model error statistics are set as follows.
501

An Ensemble Approach to Weak-Constraint 4D-Var

Shaw and Daescu

• (Control) Mis-speciﬁed model error covariances speciﬁed as Q = 2 diag(Qt ) and model
bias q = 0 is considered as the status-quo and serves as the basis for comparing against
the other schemes.
• (Weak Ensemble) Use equations (8) and (10) from an ensemble size of 20. The background
was perturbed using (4) and multiplicative factor β = 10, which was used to make sure the
ensemble had suﬃcient spread. The localization matrix is obtained using the ﬁfth-order
rational function of Gaspari and Cohn [13] with correlation length 8.
• (Weak Hybrid) Use equations (12) and (13) with α = 0.5. The static components are set
to Qc = 2 diag(Qt ) and qc = 0 and the ensemble covariance with localization is the same
one computed for the weak ensemble scheme.
Additionally, three strong-constraint 4D-Var schemes are considered. With the same observation error covariances as the w4D-Var systems, the background error covariance matrix is set
as follows.
• (Strong 4D-Var) Set B as the matrix from the spin-up cycle.
• (Strong Ensemble) Set B as an ensemble estimate obtained from an ensemble of 20 strongconstraint 4D-Var assimilation systems. Further details are in the next paragraph.
• (Strong Hybrid) Use the hybrid B = αBc + (1 − α)Be , where the static component Bc is
the covariance produced from the spin-up cycle and Be is the background ensemble error
covariance with localization computed for the strong ensemble scheme. The parameter α
is also set to 0.5 like the weak hybrid scheme.
The ensemble-based schemes for the strong-constraint 4D-Var utilize background perturbations computed using (4) with multiplicative factor β = 5. In this case, the analysis xa0 in (4) is
obtained from a strong-constraint 4D-Var run. The observations yi are perturbed in the same
manner as described in subsection 2.1. Each analysis ensemble member xa0,j is forecast to the
beginning of the next assimilation cycle and Be is deﬁned to be the sample covariance from the
ensemble of these forecasts.
To better compare the performance of the control system to the other ﬁve assimilation
schemes, the ratio of errors between the ﬁve other schemes and the control is considered. For
example, if the weak ensemble scheme outperforms the control scheme, then the ratio of the
weak ensemble errors to the control errors will be less than 1. A ratio of 1 means the schemes
have the same performance and larger than 1 if the weak ensemble scheme performs worse than
the control.
Figure 1 shows the ratio of the monthly (30-day) average analysis errors for each method
to the control, that is, εa ( method )/εa (control), where the analysis error is the diﬀerence
between the LZ96 x-values and the w4D-Var analysis. It is noticed that the strong hybrid and
weak ensemble schemes have similar performance, whose ratios ﬂuctuate near 1. The weak
ensemble scheme does not seem to perform much better than the control scheme, however
the weak hybrid errors show an improvement over the entire assimilation period. At month
7, an improvement of about 7% is achieved. The fact that the ensemble scheme ratios are
sometimes slightly larger than 1 can be attributed to two important components: the factor β
that controls the background ensemble spread and the ensemble size. The choice to set β = 10
for w4D-Var ensemble schemes was made to ensure that Qe did not suﬀer from being orders of
magnitude smaller than Qt . Due to the banded structure of the localization matrix, the model
error correlations are not fully accounted for in the ensemble and hybrid methods. Still, enough
502

An Ensemble Approach to Weak-Constraint 4D-Var

Shaw and Daescu

Figure 1: The ratio of the global monthly anal- Figure 2: The ratio of the average oma diﬀerysis error to the control w4D-Var experiment. ences to the control.

of the correlation structure was recovered from the ensembles to reduce the monthly hybrid
w4D-Var error averages.
Figure 2 shows the ratio of the three-year averaged observed-minus-analysis (oma) yi −
hi (xai ) diﬀerence for each grid point to the control. It shows that the analyses for the weak
ensemble scheme better ﬁt with the observations than the hybrid scheme, even though Figure
1 shows the hybrid scheme had a lower average analysis error. Since the background, observational, and model error components of w4D-Var are weighted by their corresponding inverse
covariance matrices in the cost functional, the analysis ﬁt to the observations is aﬀected by
the magnitudes of the error covariance matrices. In particular, Qe having a larger magnitude
than the hybrid model error covariance reduces the weight of model error in the analysis and
increases the relative weights of the background and observations. Recalling that B and R
remain unchanged between the two schemes, it can be inferred that Qe has a larger magnitude
and that the hybrid speciﬁcation better represents the true model error statistics. Some evidence to support this conjecture is shown in Figure 3, which compares the prescribed model
error variance to the ensemble and hybrid model error variances, obtained from the three-year
average covariance matrices.
The performance of a hybrid data assimilation system is closely determined by the weight
assigned to the static and ensemble-based components of the error covariances. This aspect is
investigated by running the hybrid data assimilation scheme for diﬀerent α for Q = αQc + (1 −
α)Qe ◦ C, where Qc is the static component of Q speciﬁed as the control error covariance. For
α = 0, the system runs in ensemble mode while for α = 1, the system runs as the control, the
status quo. The weight α varies from 0 to 1 in steps of Δα = 0 025 and the ratio of the timeand space-averaged analysis errors over a three year period to the control verses the choice of
α is shown in Figure 4. The ensemble size for generating Qe is 20, as before. The results show
that the error corresponding to pure ensemble mode provides an improvement over the control
data assimilation system by about 2.5%. Further reduction in the analysis error is achieved
due to the speciﬁcation of the hybrid covariance with 0 < α ≤ 0 95. In particular, the hybrid
covariance matrix corresponding to approximately α = 0 625 provides the greatest reduction in
the analysis error, about 7.5% improvement over the control.
503

An Ensemble Approach to Weak-Constraint 4D-Var

Shaw and Daescu

Figure 4: The ratio of the time- and spaceFigure 3: A comparison of the prescribed averaged analysis errors to the control verses
model error variance to the time-averaged en- the hybrid scalar weight α for the model error
semble and hybrid model error variances.
covariances.

4

Conclusion

This article provides a framework for performing ensemble and hybrid data assimilation in a
w4D-Var setting. A practical approach is considered that relies on an ensemble of w4D-Var
systems solved by the incremental algorithm to obtain an ensemble of analysis sequences, the
best estimates of the true state from which an ensemble of model error estimates are formed.
These model error ensembles provide insight to the true nature of the model error covariance
matrices. Model error bias has traditionally been assumed to be zero, and it may be possible
to incorporate information about model error bias to improve the quality of the analysis with
future research in this area.
In some situations, such as the case when the number of ensemble members is small, the
ensemble covariance matrices will have low rank and may not be a completely reliable representation of the true model error statistics. The weighted combination of a static matrix, a
diagonal matrix for example, and the ensemble covariance can prove to be an improvement over
the ensemble matrices alone. A further improvement is to remove the random noise within the
ensemble covariance by using a localization matrix.
The results of our numerical experiments provide a proof-of-concept for using ensembles in
a w4D-Var setting. Specifying the model error covariances as the ensemble covariances with
localization can improve the analysis error. Further improvement can be made in a hybrid
setting with a good choice of the scalar weights.
Further research is needed to improve upon ensemble and data assimilation in w4D-Var.
For a data assimilation window [t0 tN ] of N + 1 times, N model error ensembles of size Ne are
QN . When the dimension
formed and are used to estimate each model error covariance Q1
of the state space is large, this can be computationally expensive, so it would be desirable to
have a small ensemble size and still obtain a good estimate of the model error statistics. To
do this becomes a question of how to optimally perturb the background and observations when
forming the initial ensemble. Another improvement can be made by determining how to specify
the hybrid scalar weights to get the best improvement in the quality of the analysis.
The numerical results in this study assumed an idealized observing system in which all
504

An Ensemble Approach to Weak-Constraint 4D-Var

Shaw and Daescu

states in the dynamical system are observed. In practical applications, the performance of
the data assimilation system is closely determined by the observing system conﬁguration and
further research is needed to investigate the performance of both ensemble and hybrid w4D-Var
assimilation schemes.

Acknowledgment
This work was supported by the NASA Modeling, Analysis, and Prediction Program under
award NNX13AN94G.

References
[1] H. Cheng, M. Jardak, M. Alexe, and A. Sandu. A hybrid approach to estimating error covariances
in variational data assimilation. Tellus A, pages 1–15, dec 2011.
[2] A. M. Clayton, A. C. Lorenc, and D. M. Barker. Operational implementation of a hybrid
ensemble/4D-Var global data assimilation system at the Met Oﬃce. Quarterly Journal of the
Royal Meteorological Society, 139(675):1445–1461, jul 2013.
[3] P. Courtier, J. N. Th´epaut, and A. Hollingsworth. A strategy for operational implementation of
4DVar, using an incremental approach. Quarterly Journal of the Royal Meteorological Society,
pages 1367–1387, 1994.
[4] D. P. Dee. Bias and data assimilation. Quarterly Journal of the Royal Meteorological Society,
131(613):3323–3343, oct 2005.
[5] D. P. Dee and A. M. Da Silva. Data assimilation in the presence of forecast bias. Quarterly Journal
of the Royal Meteorological Society, pages 269–295, 1998.
[6] D. P. Dee and R. Todling. Data assimilation in the presence of forecast bias: The GEOS moisture
analysis. Monthly Weather Review, 128:3268–3282, 2000.
[7] D. P. Dee and S. Uppala. Variational bias correction of satellite radiance data in the ERA-Interim
reanalysis. Quarterly Journal of the Royal Meteorological Society, 135(644):1830–1841, 2009.
[8] J. C. Derber. A variational continuous assimilation technique. Monthly Weather Review, 1989.
[9] G. Desroziers, J.-T. Camino, and L. Berre. 4DEnVar: link with weak-constraint 4D-Var
and diﬀerent possible implementations. Quarterly Journal of the Royal Meteorological Society,
140(October):2097–2110, 2014.
[10] J. P. Dr´ecourt, H. Madsen, and D. Rosbjerg. Bias aware Kalman ﬁlters: Comparison and improvements. Advances in Water Resources, 29:707–718, 2006.
[11] G. Evensen. Sequential data assimilation with a nonlinear quasi-geostrophic model using Monte
Carlo methods to forecast error statistics. Journal of Geophysical Research: Oceans, 99(C5):10143–
10162, 1994.
[12] D. Fairbairn, S. R. Pring, A. C. Lorenc, and I. Roulstone. A comparison of 4DVar with ensemble
data assimilation methods. Quarterly Journal of the Royal Meteorological Society, may 2013.
[13] G. Gaspari and S. E. Cohn. Construction of correlation functions in two and three dimensions.
Quarterly Journal of the Royal Meteorological Society, 125(April 1998):723–757, 1999.
[14] A. Griﬃth and N. Nichols. Adjoint methods in data assimilation for estimating model error. Flow,
Turbulence and Combustion, 65:469–488, 2000.
[15] T. M. Hamill, J. S. Whitaker, and C. Snyder. Distance-dependent ﬁltering of background error
covariance estimates in an ensemble Kalman ﬁlter. Monthly Weather Review, 129:2776–2790, 2001.
[16] P. L. Houtekamer and H. L. Mitchell. A sequential ensemble Kalman ﬁlter for atmospheric data
assimilation. Monthly Weather Review, pages 123–137, 2001.

505

An Ensemble Approach to Weak-Constraint 4D-Var

Shaw and Daescu

[17] P. L. Houtekamer and H. L. Mitchell. Ensemble Kalman ﬁltering. Quarterly Journal of the Royal
Meteorological Society, 131:3269–3289, 2005.
[18] P. L. Houtekamer, H. L. Mitchell, G. Pellerin, M. Buehner, M. Charron, L. Spacek, and B. Hansen.
Atmospheric Data Assimilation with an Ensemble Kalman Filter: Results with Real Observations.
Monthly Weather Review, 133(3):604–620, 2005.
[19] K. Ide, P. Courtier, M. Ghil, and A. C. Lorenc. Uniﬁed Notation for Data Assimilation: Operational, Sequential and Variational. Journal of the Meteorological Society of Japan, 75(1B):181–189,
1997.
[20] F. Le Dimet and O. Talagrand. Variational algorithms for analysis and assimilation of meteorological observations: theoretical aspects. Tellus A, 1986.
[21] A. C. Lorenc. The potential of the ensemble Kalman ﬁlter for NWP a comparison with 4D-Var.
Quarterly Journal of the Royal Meteorological Society, 129(595):3183–3203, oct 2003.
[22] E. N. Lorenz. Predictability: A problem partly solved. Proc. Seminar on predictability, 1996.
[23] E. N. Lorenz and K. A. Emanuel. Optimal Sites for Supplementary Weather Observations: Simulation with a Small Model. Journal of the Atmospheric Sciences, 55(3):399–414, feb 1998.
[24] L. Mitchell and A. Carrassi. Accounting for model error due to unresolved scales within ensemble
Kalman ﬁltering. Quarterly Journal of the Royal Meteorological Society, 2014.
[25] Y. Tr´emolet. Accounting for an imperfect model in 4D-Var. Quarterly Journal of the Royal
Meteorological Society, 132(621):2483–2504, oct 2006.
[26] D. Zupanski. A general weak constraint applicable to operational 4DVAR data assimilation systems. Monthly Weather Review, pages 2274–2292, 1997.
[27] D. Zupanski and M. Zupanski. Model Error Estimation Employing an Ensemble Data Assimilation
Approach. Monthly Weather Review, 134(1994):1337–1354, 2006.

506

