Available online at www.sciencedirect.com

Procedia Computer Science 18 (2013) 218 – 229

2013 International Conference on Computational Science

A Study On Relevance Of S
A
Attitude
, Implementing An Interdisciplinary
Approach In a Post Graduate Program.
PK.Ragunath*, R.Ravi Mohan, P.Venkateshan
Dept. of Bioinformatics, Sri Ramachandra University, Chennai ,INDIA.
EMAIL:spibet@gmail.com
Corresponding Author : *Dr.PK.Ragunath
ABSTRACT
nature. A very
impact and implementation style. One such curriculum model SRU-2011 was
implemented in the center identified and the output was reviewed. The usual
problems related to Inter - Disciplinary Programs are unrelated subjects, growth
of new fields of study, selection of different subjects, different impacting
methods,
we found that a correlation exists between attitude related issues and student
placement results. The outcome of these results and other related issues have
been discussed.
KEYWORDS
Bioinformatics, Interdisciplinary, Curriculum Design, Attitude, Placements.
1.0 HIGHLIGHTS
Over a period of time several academic disciplines have become more
interdisciplinary rather than stagnate as unidisciplinary ones. Bioinformatics is
The interdisciplinary program chosen for this study is the PG program - M.Sc.
(Bioinformatics) in the Department of Bioinformatics at Sri Ramachandra University,
Chennai, Tamilnadu, India. We have implemented, the SRU model ( Published
curriculum model) for the curriculum development, the purpose of this model is of the
interactions of various Academic-components in a system, the experimental
techniques that most suit systems biology approach are those that are system - wide.
The admission details ( their undergraduate field of study/entry level skills ) and the
results of their placement had been studied for the students of the M.Sc.
(Bioinformatics) course for 5 consecutive batches have been studied in the
Department of Bioinformatics at Sri Ramachandra University, Chennai, Tamilnadu,
India for the time period between 2004 -2008. Research shows that the Study
centre where SRU Model has been implemented is stable with reference to

1877-0509 © 2013 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. Open access under CC BY-NC-ND license.
Selection and peer review under responsibility of the organizers of the 2013 International Conference on Computational Science
doi:10.1016/j.procs.2013.05.185

P.K. Ragunath et al. / Procedia Computer Science 18 (2013) 218 – 229

producing an interdisciplinary science for a 5 year period as it is found to be very
flexible. The choice of the career of students which is an exhibition of their attitude
towards placement could be a result of the consequential reasoning. At this juncture,
we were able to identify the individual components (Attitude related issues like
Opportunity Trend influence, Attitude,
1.1 Science: In the pursuit of knowledge, academic institutions classified
sciences as physics, chemistry, mathematics and computer science and so on,
called by the generic name of pure sciences. In course of time, it was realised that
such compartmentalisation was found to be meaningless and interdependence
was not only desirable, but unavoidable. In other words, study of pure
academic disciplines has been replaced by study of interdisciplinary disciplines.
Academic Disciplines can be broadly classified into two major groups - Pure
Sciences and Interdisciplinary branches, on the basis of their scope of delivery
/ practised in Colleges, and Universities.
1.2 Pure sciences
time, several academic disciplines have become more
interdisciplinary rather
than stagnate as unidisciplinary ones. Bioinformatics is an emerging
and
1.3 Uni-disciplinary Science:
impact on conservation. This is because conservation can be likened to a
complex jigsaw puzzle, where the puzzle pieces are issues, stakeholders or
scientific disciplines themselves. It is unlikely that any single discipline
(reproductive biology, genetics, nutrition) could be the sole key to solve a
particular
conservation
jigsaw
puzzle.1 Subjects
like
Mathematics,
Physics,
Chemistry, and Biology, are considered
as
unidisciplinary in nature. Hence,
these are also called as pure sciences. The advantages of unidisciplinary
sciences are as follows.
(a) Focus and undivided attention is possible. (b) Research and Development in
the chosen field is faster. (c) New discoveries or patents are possible.
However, in spite of the advantages, there are some disadvantages too. They are as
follows. (a)Research in related subjects becomes difficult.(b) As these subjects have
evolved over a period of time and newer fields of study emerge, the scope for research in
these uni- disciplinary subjects have got diluted.(c)In addition to this, Research and
Development in unidisciplinary subjects become difficult as over a period of time, its growth
becomes stunted and future discoveries and innovations get diluted.
1.4 Interdisciplinary Sciences: As specialisation became necessary newer subjects like
Integral mathematics, Computer Science, Biotechnology and Bioinformatics which are truly
interdisciplinary came into existence. According to a definition created by the National
Institutes of Health (http://www.nih.gov/), Bioinformatics is research, development, or/and
application of computational tools and approaches for expanding the use of biological,

219

220

P.K. Ragunath et al. / Procedia Computer Science 18 (2013) 218 – 229

medical, behavioural or health data, including those to acquire, store, organize, analyze, or
visualize such data2.Bioinformatics is a relatively new interdisciplinary field that integrates
computer science, mathematics, biology, and information technology to manage, analyze,
and understand biological, biochemical and biophysical information3.Bioinformatics is a
multifaceted discipline combining many scientific fields including computational biology,
statistics, mathematics, molecular biology, and genetics4.Bioinformatics allows researchers
to open new windows of insight into our genetic makeup, providing pathways to
understanding disease processes and creating novel diagnostic and treatment
strategies5.The field of bioinformatics will continue to evolve through the incorporation of
diverse technologies and methodologies that draw experts from disparate fields to create
the latest computational and informational tools specifically design for the biomedical
research enterprise.6
1.5 Emergence of interdisciplinary Sciences & its Relevance: Today it is recognised
that we can no longer rely upon uni-disciplinary solutions for our most pressing geoproblems. The hard problems require multiple perspectives and kinds of expertise. This is
reflected in the names and activities of organizations and journals 7.
The advantages of interdisciplinary sciences are as follows. 1. More number of related
subjects can be included.2. A student of an interdisciplinary science becomes a truly multiskilled person. 3. When a student wants to narrow his field of specialisation, studying a
science which is truly inter-disciplinary is useful.4. More and more new areas for research
and development are identified like Bioinformatics, Biomedical Engineering, Nano
Metallurgy and so on.5. The true advantage of a multidisciplinary science is that the student
can specialise in their own area (subject studied in graduation level) or the new
multidisciplinary science (subject studied in post- graduation level).
The disadvantages of interdisciplinary sciences are as follows. 1. The first disadvantage is
that there are too many subjects to be taught and hence we require more skilled faculty and
resources. 2. The design of the curriculum design is difficult. The suggested framework
implies a layered information structure of the content consisting of three layers, each
capturing a different aspect of the information space
conceptual, resource related, and
contextual.
3. Infra-structure bottlenecks will result as there are many subjects to be handled and
classrooms and other resources might be a problem. 4. The course delivery method is
difficult to decide as to the student has to be taught the theory and practical application of
the subjects is yet to be decided as an effective method of delivery.5. The basic skills of
students are lacking in certain subjects as they are studying totally new subjects but they
are able to do well in the subjects which they have studied in graduation. Hence, the bridge
courses are essential.
1.6 Bridge courses: Bridge courses are being tried out in order to prevent students from
doing badly in certain subjects. The bridge courses are meant to teach graduate level
material. These bridge courses were useful to the students without strong back ground in
Biology or Mathematics. Such students often have high levels of skill, but lack some of the
background knowledge that the other students have8.

P.K. Ragunath et al. / Procedia Computer Science 18 (2013) 218 – 229

1.7 Issues pertaining to Layering of Subjects: Conceptualization can support topical
exploration of related domain concepts).Subject domain conceptualization has been long
used for knowledge representation in intelligent tutoring systems (ITS). More recently,
concept structures play a central role in Adaptive Hypermedia (AH) applications for content
fragmentation and structuring, and in a concept-based course.9.Bioinformatics is a multidisciplinary subject, with research questions taken from biology, medicine, pharmacology
and agricultural studies. The name Bioinformatics suggests that it is multidisciplinary.10.
1.8 Attitude towards certain preferred subjects: Now let us look at why a student prefers
a particular subject compared to another one. The particular interest is to examine student
attitude to the learning environment provided in the units that make up their discipline
content. Moreover, some characteristics of learning environment support students in
developing their subject skills such as the classroom setting, the availability of resource
materials and the duration of subject lesson. In order to establish the learning environment,
teachers have to play their role in influencing the social development of students particularly
their attitude towards mathematics. During the process of learning, the teachers act to guide
the students to focus and help them in the discussion.11.
1.9 Attitude Engineering: Attitude is not seen as a unitary psychological construct, but as
a category of behaviour that is produced by different evaluative processes. Students may
express liking or disliking of mathematics because of emotions, expectations or
13
values.12
.Since the objective of this model is of the interactions in a system, the experimental
techniques that most suit systems biology approach are those that are system-wide and
attempt to be as complete as possible.14.During the process of learning, the teachers act to
guide the students to focus and help them in the discussion. The importance of the research
se to an object.15. Understanding
subject.16.Having the right attitude is one of the basics that success requires. The
combination of a sound personal philosophy and a positive attitude about ourselves and the
world around us gives us an inner strength and a firm resolve that influences all the other
areas of our existence.17.
Most of the attitude models relate to psychology and hence cannot be applied to studying
st
students attitude towards various subjects, based on a study by Wolf and Fraser (2007) 18,
they also examined the relationship between learning environment and students outcomes
(attitude and achievement) using simple correlation and multiple regression with 165
samples. Majeed et al.(2002)19
lly
MacLeod (1992)20
be affected when they face mathematics problem (Hannula 2002)
Fishbein, 1977).22

21

.The importance of the

221

222

P.K. Ragunath et al. / Procedia Computer Science 18 (2013) 218 – 229

ad
that students perceived a positive influence on their success from talking to their
advisors.23.The purpose of the study was to determine the relationship among the learning
mathematics.
Specifically, the purpose of the study was to achieve the following objectives: a) to
ability and
attitude
towards mathematics based on institute. b) to determine the relationship of learning
mathematics.
The above mentioned studies are proof that there exists a linkage between attitude and the
management issues pertaining to an interdisciplinary program. We have made an attempt to
study the same.
2.0 MATERIAL AND METHODS
2.1 SRI RAMACHANDRA UNIVERSITY
In the year 1985,Sri Ramachandra University was established under the UGC Act as part of
the Sri Ramachandra Education & Health Trust. Ever since its inception, this institute has
grown from strength to strength gaining the status of a University in September, 1994 under
Section 3 of the University Grants Commission Act, 1956. This study has been conducted
with the help of the data collected in the Department of Bioinformatics for the M.Sc.
(Bioinformatics) at Sri Ramachandra University, Chennai, Tamilnadu, India from the
admission to their placement (the place where they are working).
2.2 STUDY CENTER
The department of Bioinformatics handles the scientific discipline integrating Biomedical
Science and Information Technology to help understand biological processes were
established in 2003. The objective of the department is to train the students in the ever
expanding field of Bioinformatics by inculcating the concepts of various methods of
Computing, Genomics, Proteomics, Structural Bioinformatics and Drug Discovery.
2.3 Name of the interdisciplinary program chosen: M.Sc. (Bioinformatics). The
interdisciplinary program chosen for this study is the M.Sc. (Bioinformatics) course in the
Department of Bioinformatics at Sri Ramachandra University, Chennai, Tamilnadu, India.
2.4 No of batches studied: 5 (2004 - 2008). The admission details (their undergraduate
field of study) and the results of their placement had been studied for the students of the
M.Sc. (Bioinformatics) course for 5 consecutive batches have been studied in the
Department of Bioinformatics at Sri Ramachandra University, Chennai, Tamilnadu, India for
the time period between 2004-2008.
2.5 Curriculum Model Selected: In the SRU model for the curriculum development, we
have used the System Biology Approach for the M.Sc. bioinformatics course in the
Department of Bioinformatics in Sri Ramachandra University, Chennai, Tamilnadu, India.

P.K. Ragunath et al. / Procedia Computer Science 18 (2013) 218 – 229

Since the purpose of this model is of the interactions of various components in a system,
the experimental techniques that most suit systems biology approach are those that are
system-wide.
The following are the advantages of using the SRU Model. a) System biology approach has
been followed in this Curriculum Model. b) Flow approach has been followed. c) Three-tier
architecture has been implemented in the curriculum model. d) This curriculum model is
easy to follow. e) In the curriculum we move from the basic subjects to the advanced ones.
f) There is layering of subjects in the curriculum model. g) Lab design is easy to implement.
h) New developments can be very easily incorporated in this curriculum model. i) This
curriculum model is highly flexible. j) We have followed the template approach to develop
the curriculum model. k) This curriculum model can be upgraded very easily. l) Portability of
this curriculum model for any other course is also possible. m) This curriculum model lends
itself to ensuring quality standards.24.
placement in various domains. Hence we have made an attempt to study this in
detail.
2.6 Results: All the results are tabulated and analysed for three input groups such as
Biology, Computing and Others. This is referred to in the Appendices 1, 2, 3.
3.0 DISCUSSION
Our analysis shows that the Study center, where SRU Model has been implemented and is
stable with reference to producing an interdisciplinary science/ unidisciplinary for 5 years as
it is found to be very flexible. In our study we have studied the results of 5 batches of Post
graduate students in bioinformatics. Their fields of interest have changed from their area of
expertise to a different field and they have got placed in these fields.
For e.g. a student with I.T background is able to acquire skills in Biomedical Sciences and
gets labeled as a Biomedical expert and not as an I.T person. Similarly in many cases, the
Business Intelligence and Artificial Intelligence as the teacher has made the student an
expert in the field. Certain mediocre students (input status) who were below average in
relation to their peers have been able to find successful jobs in ITES sector. In some other
cases, a student who has a narrow specialisation (Statistics and Mathematics- input)
(Output- Artificial intelligence) has managed to get a job in Artificial Intelligence domain and
he is the highest earner. In another case, a student who has a narrow specialisation (input)
has managed to get a job in Business intelligence domain and the student is the highest
earner. In another case a pure Biologist remains a biologist. In other case a pure Biologist
remains a biologist, a pure Chemistry student remains a Chemist, and a Biochemistry
students remains a specialist in that field. Whereas a student who acquires more than
his/her basic subject becomes a real bioinformatician ( a true interdisciplinary expert) and
there is evidence that some students have become bioinformaticians in the real sense of
the word. Hence the SRU Model has been the value proposition for the students of the
Study center of the Sri Ramachandra University.
Our attempt has been to study the placement data of 5 batches of students (2004-2008) of
M.Sc. (Bioinformatics) at the Department of Bioinformatics , Sri Ramachandra University,
Porur, Chennai, Tamilnadu, India and to establish that attitudes of students towards certain

223

224

P.K. Ragunath et al. / Procedia Computer Science 18 (2013) 218 – 229

subjects plays a major role in shaping their careers. At this juncture, an academic program
is being introduced of a true interdisciplinary nature such as Bioinformatics. The true
advantages of Interdisciplinary sciences are as follows.
When a student wants to narrow his field of specialisation, studying a science which
is truly inter-disciplinary is useful.
2. More and more new areas for research and development are identified like
Bioinformatics, Biomedical Engineering, Nano Metallurgy and so on.
3. The true advantage of an interdisciplinary science is that the student can
specialise in their own area (subject studied in graduation level) or the new
multidisciplinary science (subject studied in the post- graduation level).
3.1 About our Study Center: This study has been conducted with the help of the data
collected in the Department of Bioinformatics for the M.Sc. (Bioinformatics) at Sri
Ramachandra University, Chennai, Tamilnadu, India from the admission to their placement
(the place where they are working). The following are the results of the study conducted
based on the data of the students of M.Sc. Bioinformatics at the Department of
Bioinformatics, Sri Ramachandra University, Chennai, Tamilnadu, India during the period of
2004-2008 for 5 consecutive batches.
Research shows that the Study centre where SRU Model has been implemented is stable
with reference to producing an interdisciplinary science for a 5 year period as it is found to
be very flexible.
Hence the SRU Model has been the value proposition for the students of the Study centre
of the Sri Ramachandra University, due to its System Biology Approach and it is proof that
this Model has helped the students to be flexible in developing their area of specialisation or
sticking to their specialisation subjects in their graduation.
There are certain cases where the students have specialised in new emerging areas.
Therefore all students have benefitted from the SRU Model. Our attempt has been to study
the placement data of 5 batches of students (2004-2008) of M.Sc. (Bioinformatics) at the
Department of Bioinformatics, Sri Ramachandra University, Porur, Chennai, Tamilnadu,
India and to establish that Attitudes of students towards certain subjects plays a major role
in shaping their careers after placement in various domains.
At this juncture we were able to study the individual components (Attitude related issues like
Students influence).Research shows that the Study centre where SRU Model has been
implemented for the last 5 consecutive batches is stable with reference to producing an
interdisciplinary science specialist for a period of 5 years as it is found to be very flexible.
These could be the result of Peers influence, Influence of parents and the influence of
teachers.
Here outcomes or ends are identified as the good and the means are selected to meet that
good. The end justifies the means. This is associated with Utilitarianism and John Stuart Mill
(1806-73). It is listed below as End Right. Some call it the ethics of consequences.25.
The choice of the career of students which is an exhibition of their attitude towards
placement could be a result of the consequential reasoning. At this juncture we were able to
Peer influence, Opportunity Trend influence, Attitude, Students influence). Thus this could

P.K. Ragunath et al. / Procedia Computer Science 18 (2013) 218 – 229

be the result of student
mentioned above and their interaction with respect to the result (placement).Hence we can
conclude that the components of attitude engineering and its interaction with regards to
placement could be a result of consequential reasoning.
4.0 SCOPE FOR FURTHER STUDY
Further study needs to be done to evolve an appropriate models/tools to quantify the above
mentioned attitude related issues for standardisation and value addition.

BIBILOGRAPHY.
1.Holt: Reproductive science and integrated conservation
2.NIH Working Definition Of Bioinformatics And Computational Biology, July 17,
2000,Michael Huerta , Gregory Downing, Florence Haseltine, Belinda Seto,Yuan Liu.
www.bisti.nih.gov/docs/CompuBioDef.pdf.
3. Inter-disciplinary Introductory Course in Bioinformatics, Yana Kortsarts, Robert W.
Morris, Janine M. Utell. Information Systems Education Journal. Volume 8, Number 27.
proc.isecon.org/2008/3312/index.html.
4.Journal of the American Medical Informatics Association, Volume 10, Issue 6, November
December 2003, Pages 515 522. Bioinformatics and medical informatics: collaborations on
the road to genomic medicine. Victor Maojo, Casimir A Kulikowski.
5. The Lancet Infectious Diseases. Volume 4, Issue 2, February 2004, Pages 100 111.
Penelope A Bryant, Deon Venter, Roy Robins-Browne, Nigel Curtis.
6. Introduction to bioinformatics: Research Articles by D Fenstermacher 2005.dl.acm.org/
citation.cfm?id=1059479.105948.
7. Cartography and Geographic Information Science / April, 2005. Geovisualization and GI
Science.by Menno-Jan Kraak, Alan M. MacEachren.
8. Final recommendation of the sub-committee on Bridge Courses, TIFR, S. Dugad, S.
Gupta, E. Krishnakumar, V. Nanal, B. Paul, and P. Raychaudhuri.
9. Dicheva, D. & Dichev, C. (2004). A Framework for Concept-Based Digital Course
Libraries. Journal of Interactive Learning Research, 15(4), 347-364. Norfolk, VA: AACE.
10. Open Access Journals in the Thomson ISI citation Databases.ipscience.thomsonreuters.com/m/pdfs/openaccesscitations2.pdf.
11. Teachers perception of factors influencing teaching of mathematics? Akogu Abbai
David, Niger State College of Education, Minna.
12. International Journal of Academic Research Vol. 2. no. 2. March 2010, The Learning
and Students Attitude towards Mathematics Amongst
Engineering Technology Students. Siti Mistima Binti Maat1a, Effandi Zakaria.
13. www.tandfonline.com/doi/abs/10.1080/00201747308601684-by JR Maze - 1973
14. "Systems Biology: the 21st Century Science". Institute for Systems Biology. Retrieved.
15 Learning Environment, Attitudes and Achievement among Middle.www.springerlink.com/
/index/h18358k752803n26.pdf -by SJ Wolf - 2008
16. MM Kennedy - Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 1998 - msu.edu
17.Attitude is everything, By Jim Rohn 2011.

225

226

P.K. Ragunath et al. / Procedia Computer Science 18 (2013) 218 – 229

18. Learning environment, attitudes and achievement among middle-school science
students using inquiry-based laboratory activities
- Research in Science
Education, 2008 Springer.
19. Students' Critical Thinking Skills and Students' Perceptions of the ICT
=digital.library.adelaide.edu.au/dspace/bitstream/2440/.../02whole.pdf
20. Attitudes towards mathematics: What about NESB students - MERGA by A Bishop
www.merga.net.au/publications/counter.php?pub=pub_conf&id.
21. Factors that Affect College Students' Attitudes toward Mathematics E Goody koontz
sigmaa.maa.org/rume/crume2009/Goodykoontz_LONG.pdf
22. Attitudes and the attitude-behavior relation: Reasoned and automatic processes- M
Fishbein - European review of social psychology, 2000 - Taylor & Francis.
23. Advisors' attitudes toward developmental placement and the academic performance and
perceived success of their underprepared community college advisees by Bracken, June
Elizabeth, Ed.D., WEST VIRGINIA UNIVERSITY, 2004, 144 pages; 3152252.
24. SRU Model. New Curriculum Design Model for Bioinformatics Postgraduate program
using Systems Biology Approach, PK.Ragunath, P.Venkatesan, R.Ravimohan.
25. Mill, John Stuart (1998). Utilitarianism. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

227

P.K. Ragunath et al. / Procedia Computer Science 18 (2013) 218 – 229

APPENDIX 1(Pic 1)
Student Placement details for Life sciences group (Input)

Life Sciences

2004
4
2005
5
2006
20
06
6

2007
7
2008
8

228

P.K. Ragunath et al. / Procedia Computer Science 18 (2013) 218 – 229

APPENDIX 2(Pic 2)
Student Placement details for Information Technology group (Input)

229

P.K. Ragunath et al. / Procedia Computer Science 18 (2013) 218 – 229

APPENDIX 3(Pic 3)
Student Placement details for Others group (Input)

Others

2004
20
04
4
20
2005
0 5
2006
6
2007
7
2008
8

