Available online at www.sciencedirect.com

Procedia Computer Science 4 (2011) 1109–1118

International Conference on Computational Science, ICCS 2011

Towards a Virtual Research Environment for International Adrenal
Cancer Research
Richard O. Sinnotta*, Anthony J. Stellb
a

Department of Information Systems, University of Melboourne, 3010 Victoria, Australia
b
National e-Science Centre, University of Glasgow, G12 8QQ, UK

Abstract
For many research areas, the need to collaborate across organizational and in certain cases national boundaries is essential. This
is especially the case when dealing with rare diseases where a lack of data, information and/or sharing of expertise can cause
delays in progressing the understanding and potential diagnosis/treatment of such diseases. Research into adrenal tumours is one
such area where co-ordination of international cancer efforts is essential. The European Network for the Study of Adrenal
Tumours - Structuring clinical research on adrenal cancers in adults (ENS@T-CANCER) project has recently been funded by
the European Union to establish a state of the art Virtual Research Environment (VRE) supporting all aspects of international
research and collaboration into the aetiology, diagnosis and establishing optimal treatment strategies for patients with adrenal
cancer. It is envisaged that this VRE will comprise a portfolio of clinical databases for the different types of adrenal tumours that
exist; support and integrate a seamless federation of adrenal tumour bio-banks with support for bio-sample tracking; support a
wide range of –omics research into adrenal tumours and allow results to be shared amongst collaborators; offer advanced
visualization services, and support several large-scale clinical trials comprising cohorts of patients with different kinds/treatments
of adrenal tumours. This paper outlines the goals of the ENS@T-CANCER project and outlines the on-going implementation
work. We show how security-oriented information can be collected and tracked through the VRE including supporting collection
of clinical data sets and their linkage with associated bio-samples in an ethically-driven framework.
Keywords: Adrenal Tumours; biobanks; virtual research environments; ethics;

1. Introduction
The combination of post-genomic research now possible through high throughput genomic data generation
technologies coupled with the continued growth and application of the Internet and the associated scaling of
hardware/software solutions to cope with the data deluge have lead to a maelstrom of research possibilities in the
health/e-Health arena. The possibilities for in-silico biological research and move towards personalized e-Health
medicine and treatment are now well documented [1,2]. However the possibility to collect and manage increasingly
voluminous and heterogeneous individual-level clinical and biomedical data also raises numerous challenges and

* Corresponding author. Tel.: +61-(0)3-9035-4531; fax: +61-(0)3-9035-8700.
E-mail address: rsinnott@unimelb.edu.au.
1877–0509 © 2011 Published by Elsevier Ltd. Open access under CC BY-NC-ND license.
Selection and/or peer-review under responsibility of Prof. Mitsuhisa Sato and Prof. Satoshi Matsuoka
doi:10.1016/j.procs.2011.04.118

1110

Richard O. Sinnott et al. / Procedia Computer Science 4 (2011) 1109–1118

requirements that must be addressed on technologies and IT solutions put forward: ethics; information governance;
confidentiality and the need for scientifically and ethically justified clinical research are paramount [3]. These issues
are made increasingly complex when dealing with international biomedical research where different countries have
different processes and structures for defining and enforcing ethically-driven research. As such, it is essential that
research and information technology platforms visibly and overtly address the needs of the national bodies tasked
with the responsibility with deciding whether a given research project is in the interest of the individuals involved
and meets the national governance/legal demands on clinical/biomedical data access and usage, as well as meets the
international demands of researchers wishing to conduct ethically-driven research.
There are numerous precedents that have already shown how successful international e-Health collaboration can
be supported [4-6]. However the scope and scale of these projects has by and large, only focused on a subset of the
demands facing the clinical/biomedical research community, and the actual translational impact of these systems
into clinical care has more often that not, not been fully achieved. The ENS@T-CANCER project is a 5-year project
that covers the breadth and depth of post-genomic biomedical research platform requirements covering
establishment of clinical databases of individuals with different forms of adrenal cancer; biobanks for storing and
labeling/tracking of biosamples from patients to be used by biomedical (omics) researchers; visualization support for
improved understanding and analysis of the forms of tumours and their potential metastases, and importantly,
support for large scale clinical trials where patient cohorts are recruited and used to test out the impact of targeted
treatments based upon their genetic profiling.
This paper describes the background to the project as a whole and outlines the current work in progress. In
section 2, we present background to adrenal tumours; the need for an international adrenal tumour network and
outline the scope and involvement of the wider clinical/biomedical research community. In section 3, we focus on
the implementation of the current adrenal cancer databases and how they are being used for a range of studies into
adrenal cancer. In section 4, we outline the way in which the ENS@T-CANCER biobanking capability will be
supported and describe how patient biosamples are linked and tracked with individual level patient data sets. Finally
we describe the clinical trials that are planned and the way in which these will be supported in a user-driven, secure
environment.
2. Background to Adrenal Tumours
The adrenal glands (the adrenal) are located in close vicinity to the upper kidney poles. The weight of the
adrenals in adults is approximately 4g and is not affected by an individual’s age, body weight or sex. The adrenal
consists of two functionally distinct glands covered by a common capsule. The adrenal cortex is the outer layer of
the adrenal gland and makes up approximately 90% of the adrenal weight. In the cortex, adrenal steroids such as the
stress hormone cortisol, the blood pressure hormone aldosterone and adrenal androgens are produced. The adrenal
medulla is located in the inner part of the adrenal gland. Within the medulla, the catecholamines epinephrine and
norepinephrine are produced.
Both the adrenal cortex and medulla play an essential role in the body’s adaptation to major stress. For example,
in response to severe infection, trauma and shock, an individual’s adrenal gland will, under normal circumstances,
secrete enhanced amounts of cortisol and catecholamine. This response is necessary to maintain homeostasis during
stress. In case of adrenal impairment, the stress response will be severely diminished and can ultimately lead to
irreversible shock and in some cases death.
Tumours of the adrenal glands can arise in both the cortex and/or the medulla part of the adrenal gland.
Typically, tumours from the adrenal cortex produce excess of steroid hormones including cortisol and aldosterone
whilst tumours from the adrenal medulla produce excessive amounts of catecholamines. Adrenal tumours can be
either benign or malignant. Often this separation is difficult to make through imaging analysis and requires a variety
genetic analysis to determine. While malignant tumours of the adrenal gland are rare, up to 5% of the population can
have so called adrenal incidentalomas - tumours of the adrenals found incidentally during investigation for an
unrelated condition. The majority of these do not secrete hormones [7].
There are four primary adrenal tumour subtypes: aldosterone producing adenomas (APA); Pheochromocytomas
and Paragangliomas (Pheo/PGL); Non-aldosterone cortical adrenal adenomas (NAPACA), and Adrenocortical
carcinomas (ACC). Each of these subtypes has different manifestations; involves different molecular mechanisms
and ultimately requires different treatment regimes for optimal patient care.

Richard O. Sinnott et al. / Procedia Computer Science 4 (2011) 1109–1118

1111

2.1. Aldosterone Producing Adenomas (APA)
Primary aldosteronism caused by aldosterone producing adenomas is the most frequent form of secondary
hypertension accounting for more than 11% of referred hypertensive patients [8] and gives rise to conditions such as
Conn’s syndrome [9]. Despite the relatively high prevalence of primary aldosteronism, the molecular mechanisms
underlying excess aldosterone production remain unknown. Whilst computed tomography and/or magnetic
resonance imaging are often used to detect the adenoma and/or aldosterone-producing carcinoma, these can give
misleading results regarding the precise cause of excess aldosterone.
2.2. Pheochromocytomas (PHEO) and Paragangliomas (PGL)
Catecholamine-producing tumours may arise in the adrenal medulla (pheochromocytomas) or in extra-adrenal
chromaffin cells (paragangliomas). Their prevalence is about 0.2% in patients with hypertension [10] and 4% in
patients with an incidentally discovered adrenal mass [11]. The tumours themselves may be sporadic or may present
as part of any of several genetic syndromes, e.g. von Hippel-Lindau disease [12]. About 10% of tumours are
malignant either at first operation or during follow-up, malignancy being diagnosed by the presence of metastases at
sites where chromaffin cells should be normally absent, e.g. bones, liver, lungs, lymphnodes.
2.3. Non-aldosterone cortical adrenal adenomas (NAPACA)
Non-aldosterone secreting cortical tumours represent the most common benign adrenal tumour. These may be
truly non-functioning, i.e. not associated with any hormonal excess, and are usually detected incidentally in patients
undergoing radiological investigations (ultrasound, CT, MRI scanning) for other reasons. Malignancy rate in these
lesions is very low - the majority of lesions are less than 3cm in diameter and can be treated conservatively [13].
Rarely the tumours may secrete cortisol. In the most florid example, Cushing's syndrome results and includes
muscle wasting, thinning of the skin with bruising, osteoporosis, hypertension and diabetes mellitus. Removal of the
adenoma is required to cure the condition. More rarely patients may have a genetic problem that results in
autonomous production of cortisol from adenomas within the adrenals, e.g. McCune Albright syndrome [14]. The
adrenals may also become tumorous when the adrenal glands develop an unusual pattern of receptor expression over
and above the normal receptor that controls cortisol production.
2.4. Adrenocortical Carcinomas (ACC)
Adrenocortical carcinoma is a rare malignancy with incompletely understood pathogenesis and poor prognosis.
Patients typically present with hormone excess through a given condition, e.g. Cushing's syndrome, or more often
than not, a local mass that is incidentally discovered (median tumour size > 10cm). In patients not amenable to
surgery, the drug mitotane remains the treatment of choice [15]. Monitoring of drug levels is mandatory for
optimum results in patient treatment, especially when combined with other forms of treatment, e.g. radiotherapy. It
is currently the case that postoperative disease free survival (at t>=5 years) for patients with ACC is below 50%
[16].
Given the rarity of the above kinds of adrenal tumours, the availability of a large collection samples, with
associated clinical, biomedical/-omic data and accompanying treatment information is essential to better understand
the differentiators of these tumour types; their aetiology and their associated molecular mechanisms. This would
allow development of optimal treatment strategies tailoured to individuals. A common platform that facilitates the
collection and analysis of such samples and related clinical/biomedical information is thus highly desirable and is
the focus of the ENS@T-CANCER project.

3. ENS@T Project
The European Network for the Study of Adrenal Tumours (ENS@T – www.ensat.org) was founded in 2002 from

1112

Richard O. Sinnott et al. / Procedia Computer Science 4 (2011) 1109–1118

a grant by the European Science Foundation by putting together three already existing national adrenal networks:
COMETE in France, GANIMED in Germany, and NISGAT in Italy, along with teams from the United Kingdom all
dedicated to the study of adrenal tumours. A core part of the scientific efforts of the ENS@T network has been
based on the establishment of a common registry and associated standardized description of information related to
the different types of adrenal tumours. The data models themselves have been developed throughout the course of
the ENS@T network. These data models follow a similar form including a single patient/clinical information sheet
and numerous related information sheets on biomaterials; follow-up; pathology; treatments; diagnostic procedures
and tumour staging information as shown in Fig. 1.
Biomaterial

Follow-Up

Pathology
Identification
Treatments
Mitotane

Diagnostic
Procedures

Tumor
Staging

Radiotherapy
Surgery

Chemotherapy
Chemoembolisation

Fig. 1. Overview of the ENS@T Data Model Structure

Historically much of this information was collected in a country specific manner and did not encompass all
adrenal tumour types or all related information required. Thus in France, much work was done in the collection of
data sets related to ACC patients. A non-web based database was developed and physically distributed to
collaborating partners (on a CD). It was recognized by the ENS@T network that an improved model of data
collection and distribution was required. To this end, in 2009 the National e-Science Centre (NeSC) at the
University of Glasgow (www.nesc.ac.uk) was appointed to realize a registry comprising four web-based clinical
databases representing each of the adrenal tumour types identified previously and incorporating the extended data
model shown in Fig. 1. The implementation of these databases was undertaken in a rapid prototyping manner and
exploited the body of expertise in security-oriented web based software development expertise of NeSC. This work
began in November 2009 and was completed within three months and is described in [17]. As discussed in [17], in
undertaking this work it was important to recognize that all of the data models had been designed so that they were,
to as great a degree possible, independent of patient specific/identifying information. Thus the Identification form
only required information such as the year of birth and the sex of the individual, along with an identifier for the
clinical centre that was responsible for dealing with the case itself (this may be where the patient is being treated
directly or where they have been referred to). Upon completion of this form, i.e. when entering a given case, a
unique ENS@T-specific identifier is created. It is this identifier that is used to link with all of the associated
information sheets. The generated identifier is the only link to the patient’s actual identity and requires a mapping
file residing at the patient’s hospital to establish that relationship. This anonymisation through data linkage based
model satisfies the information governance requirements of the key protagonists involved and is in line with patientprotecting legislation such as the UK Data Protection Act (1998) [18].
Furthermore, since it was recognized that there would be multiple individuals in multiple countries, a protocol
was defined for the naming convention to be used in the generation of ENS@T-specific patient identifiers. These
identifiers follow a standard format: <Study Number>:<Subject Group>:<Country>:<Center>:<Subject
Number>. As an example of this, the automatically generated identifier 1VFRPA3001 would indicate an identifier
for an individual for study “1”, who was a “Volunteer”, from “France”, at clinical centre “3” in “Paris” with
identifier “001”, i.e. this is the first patient registered from that centre. Other country-specific and centre specific

Richard O. Sinnott et al. / Procedia Computer Science 4 (2011) 1109–1118

1113

codes were defined and fully implemented for the patient specific identification information. This classification
system has been design to be flexible and extensible.
Through follow up information, sites are able to update and track the information and data sets associated with
any individual patient. The user interface for creating an ACC patient record is indicated in Fig. 2.

Fig. 2. ENS@T ACC Record Creation

It should be noted that the web-based registry supports an n-tier service architecture where user interface logic,
e.g. the interface given in Fig. 2 is augmented with services (logical layer) that enforce rules on access and usage of
the associated data (data layer). Each of these layers has associated security levels that restrict access to and usage of
the associated data sets to individual authorized individuals. The technologies that have been applied to define and
enforce this access control are described in more detail in [19-21]. In brief these exploit, role based access control
solutions augmented with user defined security information. As an example of this, an ENS@T clinician is able to
define the level of access to their centre’s patient data records. Thus for example, through ethical considerations it
might only be appropriate for a clinician to allow access to the patient details for biomedical researchers from that
clinic; or for researchers in that country; for researchers across the recognized ENS@T community, or indeed for
wider international researchers investigating adrenal tumours. This pull down menu option is illustrated in Fig. 2. It
should also be recognized that obligations on defining the appropriate level of access control to data sets is left with
the clinicians themselves, i.e. they are completely autonomous in deciding whether to share a data set with local,
national or international collaborators. It is also the case that once a record is added to the registry, it can only be
modified by that data owner, i.e. the contributing clinician.
The registry supports several basic capabilities: adding clinical/biomedical records and associated information;
searching for records based on a set of given criteria, and support for export of data to different formats – typically
CSV files so that they could be included in “local” statistical analysis software or spreadsheets. To leverage the
historic data sets collected through the previous networks (COMETE, GANIMED and NISGET), existing data sets
were directly incorporated into the ENS@T registry. These were extended and harmonized across the different
adrenal tumour types to provide a consistent data model (aligned with Fig. 1). This extension has been an iterative
process, where prototypes of the registry and the web-based data models were used as the basis for community wide
consultation and agreement, i.e. the existing data models were not absolutely agreed and defined for all adrenal
tumour types.
Data validation was directly supported in the registry through use of compulsory and optional fields; ensuring
logical information was given, e.g. the year of birth was not in the future etc, and wherever possible use of
predefined pull down menus lists and options - as opposed to support for text boxes for arbitrary information. This
helped to standardize the information that is given as well as well as simplify the data searching models.
In essence the registry provides a security-oriented matchmaking service. Biomedical (-omic) researchers who
wish to better understand the molecular mechanisms of different forms of adrenal tumours require access to

1114

Richard O. Sinnott et al. / Procedia Computer Science 4 (2011) 1109–1118

biomedical samples. Clinicians dealing with patients in hospitals are the primary source of such biosamples.
Knowledge that a given ACC patient has been undergoing a course of treatment and their response to this treatment
is an extremely valuable set of information that should ultimately guide clinical practice. However, in the postgenomic era it is now the case that the biomedical (‘omic) analysis of samples from patients can lead to novel
insights, treatments and molecular understanding through leveraging post-genomic models and technologies. This in
turn demands international co-ordination and cooperation. The ENS@T work demonstrated such international
coordination and cooperation and ultimately culminated in a major 5-year European Union proposal to establish a
broader framework for adrenal tumour research: ENS@T-CANCER.
4. ENS@T-CANCER Project
The ENS@T-CANCER project involves fifteen clinical/biomedical partners from across Europe and a single
software provider: the University of Melbourne tasked with developing, supporting and maintaining the VRE. It is
worth noting that the University of Melbourne is involved due to the relocation of the Director of NeSC to
Melbourne along with core NeSC staff involved in the ENS@T project. The work on ENS@T-CANCER builds
directly upon the ENS@T work to incorporate a richer and more extensive variety of clinical and biomedical data
sets, bioinformatics support, imaging and visualization capabilities, and the conduct of several major clinical trials.
The VRE is the central point of all adrenal tumour research. Through the VRE biomedical researchers will be
able to discover cases of interest and in principle have access to biosamples for analysis. This point has direct
impact upon ethics. Whilst the ENS@T-CANCER project builds upon the ethical framework for recruiting patients
into the ENS@T registry, given that tissue/biosamples will potentially be distributed to international collaborators a
more demanding ethical framework is required. At the outset of data collection, the patient’s themselves need to be
fully informed of the clinical and potential research use of their data sets, i.e. the system design is based upon
informed consent being established. The patient will be informed that he/she is free to interrupt and/or withdraw
from any resultant ENS@T-CANCER study at any time without stating the reasons. Importantly, the patient will be
reassured that their clinical management will not be affected by their decision to take part or not to take part in any
related study. Exchange of biosamples places unique demands on the coordination and linkage of information within
the VRE and the way in which ethics is realized.
4.1. ENS@T CANCER Biobank Support and Secure Data Linkage
The linkage between patient identifiers in the ENS@T-CANCER registry, e.g. 1VFRPA3001, and identifiers used
for biomaterials needs to be both distinct and completely separated, i.e. it should never be possible to directly
identify (through a given software query or direct observation of a particular software system) that a particular
sample comes from a particular patient through use of the registry or other related IT system. However, it is equally
important that the identifiers for individuals and for biosamples from those individuals are unambiguously related,
i.e. there should be a direct mapping that exists between all samples and an individuals record. A range of
biosamples have been identified that will be collected throughout the ENS@T-CANCER project that need to be
stored, exchanged and ultimately tracked through the VRE as listed in Table 1 along with the shorthand codes used.

Richard O. Sinnott et al. / Procedia Computer Science 4 (2011) 1109–1118

1115

Table 1: ENS@T-CANCER Biosample Types and Codes
Plasma Free Metanephrines

PFM

Urine Free Metanephrines

UFM

Urine Deconjugated Metanephrines

UDM

Plasma Catecholamines

PCA

Urine Catecholamines

UCA

Urine Overnight Sample

UON

Plasma Chromogranin A

CGA

Blood DNA Sample (leukocytes)

DNA

Plasma Sample for Banking

PBK

Urine Sample for Banking

UBK

Tumor Tissue Sample

TUM

The biosamples that are collected will typically be stored in local hospitals/biobanks and utilize local laboratory
information management systems (LIMS) for labeling and tracking. However such systems typically include direct
information on the patients themselves – whether it is a hospital code/number or indeed the patient name and date of
birth. Indeed it is currently the case that many of the ENS@T-CANCER clinical partners do not have their own
LIMS systems, but have a variety of their own ad hoc solutions in place, e.g. hand-written labels for samples kept in
local refrigerators etc. As such a system for generating unique ENS@T-CANCER labels is essential, especially
when these data sets are to be sent to collaborating partner sites for analysis. Given the above the protocol
implemented in the VRE for sample labeling is similar in principle to the protocol in place for generating unique
identifiers for individuals entered into the registry. This is of the form: <Study Number>:<Subject
Group>:<Country>:<Center>:<Subject Number>:<Biosample Code>:<Biosample Identifier>. As an example,
the code 2PFRPA1-3TUM007 indicates a Tumor Tissue Sample label number 007, i.e. the 7th sample derived from
the same tissue specimen (the mass of adrenal tumours is such that it is likely that numerous subsamples can be
dissected from a given tumour that has been removed), for Patient number 003 from clinical centre 1 in Paris France
involved in study 2.
To understand how such labeling will be utilized with the ENS@T-CANCER VRE, we describe a typical
scenario involving a given patient and tracking of their biosamples through the VRE as shown in Fig. 3.
9.
5.

1PFRPA1-3

Clinicians C onse nt
Cl inician A
Paris, Centre 1
(Patient Mr X)

1 PFR PA1-3TU M0 01
8.

ENS@T
Registry

Researchers
12.

R esearcher,
Birmingham UK

13.
6.
1.
4.

1PFRPA1-3TUM001

Biomaterial
IDs

2.

1PFRPA1-3TU M001

11.

BioCentre
Paris

1PFRPA1-3TU M001
=XYZ123
7.

Biomaterial

3.

Local LIMS
(XYZ123)

Ethics
10.

1PFRPA1-3TU M001

Fig. 3. ENS@T-CANCER Biobanking and Data Linkage

1116

Richard O. Sinnott et al. / Procedia Computer Science 4 (2011) 1109–1118

In the first instance (1.) a patient (Mr X) arrives at a clinical hospital – in this case in Paris, France with
symptoms that might indicate a particular adrenal tumour mass. After further investigation and subsequent
operation, the tumour is removed and sent for analysis at the local research laboratory associated with this hospital
in Paris. The centre will typically (2.) generate their own local identifiers (XYZ123) used for sample management
and tracking within the laboratory. This label is typically added to the test tubes/sample dishes in which the sample
is stored (3.). Following analysis, it is established that the sample is a form of ACC and the clinician/hospital is
subsequently advised of this (4.). After discussions with the patient, in addition to the treatment that they will
receive, they are advised of the on-going research within the ENS@T-CANCER project. Subject to their acceptance
(consent) to be involved in project, the clinician enters (5.) related information on the case into the ENS@TCANCER registry (the ACC database). This includes the range of information outlined in Fig. 1. After completion
of data entry, a unique identifier (1PFRPA1-3) is generated through the registry that the clinician keeps a local
record of, i.e. this is the 3rd patient that this clinician has registered from his centre in Paris. The clinician advises the
local research laboratory of this and they use the ENS@T-CANCER VRE to generate a unique identifier
(1PFRPA1-3TUM001) for this patient’s sample (6.) and attach this to the locally kept test tube/dish holding the
sample (potentially alongside other local identification systems used). For simplicity we only consider the tumour
tissue sample here (TUM) and do not consider the numerous other sample/types codes that would typically be
collected as outlined in Table 1. This research laboratory is responsible for keeping track of the link (7.) between the
ENS@T-CANCER generated identifiers (1PFRPA1-3TUM001) and the local in-house identifiers that are used
(XYZ123) – which as stated, may include patient identifying information.
At some later point in time, a biomedical research involved in the ENS@T-CANCER project at the University of
Birmingham, searches (8.) the ENS@T-CANCER registry for ACC patients that have particular characteristics, e.g.
for individuals on certain courses of treatments; with different stages of metastases etc. Assuming a match is found
and possibly after further direct follow up with the clinician involved (9.), a request is made for access to a particular
biosample from this patient for further analysis. Assuming that ethic approval for such a data transfer has been
agreed, a biosample (typically a portion of the tumour that was previously removed) is sent from the laboratory in
Paris to Birmingham (10.). The request and sending/receipt of the biosample are registered and tracked in the VRE
(11.) including information on the sender, requestor and sending/arrival times, along with the nature of the sample
itself – in this case a tumour sample. The biomedical researcher at the University of Birmingham undertakes various
analyses on the sample, e.g. proteomics analysis, and once completed, feeds this information back into the VRE
(12.) for corroboration with the wider research community. Where consensus has been established regarding the
findings of the analysis, this new information derived from the patient sample can potentially be used to directly
impact upon the clinical care and treatment that the patient is currently receiving (13.).
In this scenario, at no time is any patient identifying information sent or received outside of the local hospital
systems in Paris. The researchers in Birmingham do not need to know any further details regarding the patient other
than that provided by the biosample itself and the information present in the registry. Furthermore the knowledge of
sending and receiving of tissue samples is tracked and fully disclosed and available to future auditors. This is an
essential component of the work to ensure that all aspects of ethically motivated and ethically driven research are
being conducted. This includes paying due diligence to data privacy and information governance – both digital and
physical.
The existing registry is based on an n-tier architecture, implemented in JSP using a Tomcat 7 container,
connected to a MySQL database. Standard infrastructure security is applied (firewall port lockdown, container run
using “default-deny” security policies, stealthed Internet visibility, etc). Programmatic security is also applied within
the application code itself – consisting of SQL injection and byte-code input protection, input parameter inspection
and session expiry after 15 minutes of inactivity. Auditing and tracking tools are implemented within the code for
specific queries, and using standard tools such as Statcounter [26] and Google Analytics [27].
To implement the actual linkage described in Fig. 3, the VANGUARD solution will be used (Virtual
ANonymisation Grid for the Unified Access of Remote Data-sets). This is an infrastructure based on the wrapped
interconnection of messages between a viewer and a set of data guardians, mediated by agents, which – using a
series of asymmetric encryption steps – are capable of joining returned results without ever viewing the data itself
(subject to policies agreed between the parties involved). Figure 4 shows the conceptual implementation of the
encrypted messages involved – for more details see [20].

Richard O. Sinnott et al. / Procedia Computer Science 4 (2011) 1109–1118

1117

Fig. 4: The process of encrypted data returned to a viewer from a set of guardians, mediated by an agent and monitored by a banker
component. Q = query, PK = public key of component, PK (subscript) = private key of component, H = identification hash to maintain
consistency of returned results.

5. Conclusions
The ENS@T-CANCER project is now formally starting and will directly shape major research efforts in the area
of adrenal tumour research. A key aspect of the work that will be undertaken will be the conduct of two major
clinical trials: FIRSTMAPP and ADIUVO, both of which have been sponsored by major pharmaceutical companies
to evaluate the drugs sunitinib [22] and mitotane and their effectiveness for Pheo/PGL and ACC patients
respectively. Indeed, since the project has been funded other clinical trials have been identified by partners that have
been agreed. The critical mass of patients and patient information is key to supporting this process and is difficult to
achieve without international collaborative efforts. For example, a study regarding Prospective MonoamineProducing Tumors that has been agreed will require a Phase 1 patient cohort of 2500 for diagnostic screening. After
Phase 2 biochemical confirmation this will result in a potential 400 patients of which it is statistically expected that
200 patients will be diagnosed with the particular disease. The population of the ENS@T-CANCER registry
databases is essential to undertaking such large scale clinical studies. The electronic case report forms (eCRFs) for
this study and the related FIRSTMAPP and ADIUVO trials together with their various phases, will be directly
incorporated into the VRE.
The work that has been undertaken thus far in ENS@T and now starting in ENS@T-CANCER is largely based
on establishment and support of external web-based systems, i.e. outside of particular hospital environments.
Another possibility would be to support automatic extraction of patient information directly from
hospital/biomedical research laboratory systems or indeed supported federated access to patient data existing within
hospital/clinical data management systems. Whilst technically feasible, the challenges in undertaking this model of
data collection are considerably greater than the approach put forward here. These challenges are largely based
around working with disparate IT personnel and policy makers. Such experiences have been captured in numerous
projects and related efforts, e.g. [23-25]. Major efforts are currently on-going in many countries to address the
challenges in access to distributed, heterogeneous clinical data sets, e.g. the National Program for IT within the UK
major UK Connection for Health effort.
Whilst the work on ENS@T-CANCER is very much on-going, it is the case that the project has applied for and
received ethical approval for the work. This process involved the drafting of an ethical approval document outlining
the work as a whole; the need to exchange biosamples; the risks to the patient; the information to be made available
to the patient; the kinds of data that would be collected; and the way in which the system would protect patient
information. This document has subsequently been translated into various languages and presented by the
clinical/biomedical partners to their associated national ethical committees. At present numerous partners have had
acceptance/ethical approval for the project and are subsequently able to share clinical and biomedical data.
At the current time, the ENS@T-CANCER registry includes records on 133 patients with ACC of which 125
patients are alive, and 60 cases have existing biosamples that can be exchanged. The registry also contains
information on 50 patients with Pheo/PGL of which all are currently alive and two have biosamples that have been
collected and can be exchanged.

1118

Richard O. Sinnott et al. / Procedia Computer Science 4 (2011) 1109–1118

Acknowledgements
The European Network for the Study of Adrenal Tumours - Structuring clinical research on adrenal cancers in
adults (ENS@T-CANCER) project has been funded under the European Union Framework 7 Health initiative (grant
agreement no: 259735) and by the European Science Foundation (ESF). We gratefully acknowledge their support.
References
1. Sloot, P.M.A.; Tirado-Ramos, A.; Altintas, I.; Bubak, M.; Boucher, C.; From Molecule to Man: Decision Support in Individualized EHealth, Computer, Nov. 2006, Volume: 39 Issue:11, pp 40 – 46, IEEE Computer Society.
2. Wilson, E.V.; Balkan, S.; Lankton, N.K.; Current Trends in Patients' Adoption of Advanced E-Health Services, 43rd Hawaii International
Conference on System Sciences (HICSS), Jan. 2010
3. Blobel, B.; Comparing approaches for advanced e-health security infrastructures, International Journal of Medical Informatics, Volume 76,
Issues 5-6, "Virtual Biomedical Universities and E-Learning" May-June 2007, pp 454-459.
4. Aneurist project, www.aneurist.org
5. Health-e-child project, http://www.health-e-child.org/
6. EuroDSD project, www.eurodsd.eu
7. Nieman L.K.; Approach to the patient with an adrenal incidentaloma. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 95:4106-4113.
8. Rossi GP, Bernini G, Caliumi C, Desideri G, Fabris B, Ferri C, Ganzaroli C, Giacchetti G, Letizia C, Maccario M, Mallamaci F, Mannelli M,
Mattarello MJ, Moretti A, Palumbo G, Parenti G, Porteri E, Semplicini A, Rizzoni D, Rossi E, Boscaro M, Pessina AC, Mantero F 2006 A
prospective study of the prevalence of primary aldosteronism in 1,125 hypertensive patients. J Am Coll Cardiol 48:2293-2300.
9. Conn’s Syndrome, http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Primary_aldosteronism
10. Anderson GH, Jr., Blakeman N, Streeten DH 1994 The effect of age on prevalence of secondary forms of hypertension in 4429 consecutively
referred patients. J Hypertens 12:609-615
11. Lenders JW, Eisenhofer G, Mannelli M, Pacak K 2005 Phaeochromocytoma. Lancet 366:665-675
12. von Hippel Lindau disease, http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Von_Hippel%E2%80%93Lindau_disease
13. Mansmann G, Lau J, Balk E, Rothberg M, Miyachi Y, Bornstein SR 2004 The clinically inapparent adrenal mass: update in diagnosis and
management. Endocr Rev 25:309-340
14. McCune Albright syndrome, http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/McCune%E2%80%93Albright_syndrome
15. mitotane, http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mitotane
16. Fassnacht M, Allolio B 2009 Clinical management of adrenocortical carcinoma. Best Pract Res Clin Endocrinol Metab 23:273-289
17. Stell, A.J.; Sinnott, R.O.; Jiang, J.; Enabling Secure, Distributed Collaborations for Adrenal Tumor Research, HealthGrid conference, Paris,
France, June 2010.
18. UK Data Protection Act (1998), http://www.legislation.gov.uk/ukpga/1998/29/contents
19. Sinnott R.O.; Ajayi, O.; Stell, A.J.; Data Privacy by Design: Digital Infrastructures for Clinical Collaborations. International Conference on
Security and Privacy, Orlando, USA, 2009
20. Stell, A.J.; Sinnott, R.O.; Ajayi, O.; Jiang, J.; Designing Privacy for a Scalable Electronic Healthcare Linkage System. IEEE International
Conference on Information Privacy, Security, Risk and Trust (PASSAT 2009), Vancouver, Canada, 2009.
21. Sinnott, R.O.; Chadwick, D.; Doherty, T.; Martin, D.; Stell, A.J.; Stewart, G.; Su, L.; Watt, J.; Advanced Security for Virtual Organizations:
Exploring the Pros and Cons of Centralized vs Decentralized Security Models, 8th IEEE International Symposium on Cluster Computing and
the Grid (CCGrid 2008), May 2008, Lyon, France.
22. sunitinib, en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sunitinib
23. Ahmed, S.F.; Rodie, M.; Jiang, J.; Sinnott, R.O.; The European DSD Registry – A Virtual Research Environment, International Journal on
Sexual Development, Special issue on Disorders of Sex Development, “New concepts for human disorders of sex development”, December
30, 2009.
24. Sinnott, R.O.; Ajayi, O.; Stell, A.J.; Supporting Grid Based Clinical Trials in Scotland, Health Informatics Journal Special Issue on Integrated
Health Records, Vol. 14 (2), June 2008.
25. Stell, A.J.; Sinnott, R.O.; Jiang, J. et al Federating Distributed Clinical Data for the Prediction of Adverse Hypotensive Events Journal of the
Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society A, July 2009, 367:2679-2690.
26. Statcounter, www.statcounter.com
27. Google Analytics, www.google.com/analytics

