Available online at www.sciencedirect.com

ScienceDirect
Procedia Computer Science 108C (2017) 2151–2160

International Conference on Computational Science, ICCS 2017, 12-14 June 2017,
Zurich, Switzerland

Towards Data Science Literacy
Towards
Data
Science
Literacy
Towards
Data
Science
Literacy
Christo Dichev and Darina Dicheva
Winston
Salem
State University,
Winston
Salem, NC
Christo
Dichev
and
Darina
Dicheva
Christo
Dichev
and
Darina
Dicheva
dichevc@wssu.edu,
dichevad@wssu.edu
Winston Salem State University, Winston Salem, NC
Winston Salem State University, Winston Salem, NC
dichevc@wssu.edu, dichevad@wssu.edu
dichevc@wssu.edu, dichevad@wssu.edu

Abstract
The growing importance of data competency implies that adequate Data Science course offerings should
Abstract
be
available to all students regardless of their interests, backgrounds and intended major. This paper
Abstract
The growing importance of data competency implies that adequate Data Science course offerings should
describes
the importance
design and of
implementation
of aimplies
coursethat
targeted
at a Data
non-technical
audience
and centered
The growing
data competency
adequate
Science course
offerings
should
be available to all students regardless of their interests, backgrounds and intended major. This paper
TheThis
objective
on
science
literacy,
withregardless
a focus onofcollecting,
processing,
analyzing
using data.
be data
available
to all
students
their interests,
backgrounds
andand
intended
major.
paper
describes the design and implementation of a course targeted at a non-technical audience and centered
describes
design
and implementation
of a course
targeted
non-technical
and centered
is throughthe
general
education
to prime students
at an early
stageatofa their
educationaudience
for the changes
in the
on data science literacy, with a focus on collecting, processing, analyzing and using data. The objective
data. The
objective
on data science
literacy,
with
a focus
on collecting,
processing,
analyzing
usingdata-rich
data-driven
society
and to
provide
them
with skills to
navigate capably
in and
today’s
world.
Our
is through general education to prime students at an early stage of their education for the changes in the
is through general
educationresults
to prime
students
stage
education
for the
changes in the
experience
and evaluation
indicate
thatatit an
is early
realistic
forofa their
diverse
population
of undergraduate
data-driven society and to provide them with skills to navigate capably in today’s data-rich world. Our
students
to acquired
datatoscience
and skills
practical
skills through
a general
education
course.
data-driven
society and
provideliteracy
them with
to navigate
capably
in today’s
data-rich
world. Our
experience and evaluation results indicate that it is realistic for a diverse population of undergraduate
experience and evaluation results indicate that it is realistic for a diverse population of undergraduate
students
to Authors.
acquiredPublished
data science
literacy
and practical skills through a general education course.
©
2017 The
byEducation,
Elsevier
B.V.
Keywords:
Science,
General
Computing,
Data
Analysis,
Statistics,
Visualization,
students
toData
acquired
data
science
literacy
and practical
skills
through
a general
educationPython
course.
Peer-review under responsibility of the scientific committee of the International Conference on Computational Science
Keywords: Data Science, General Education, Computing, Data Analysis, Statistics, Visualization, Python
Keywords: Data Science, General Education, Computing, Data Analysis, Statistics, Visualization, Python

1 Introduction
1
Introduction
Engaging
students in using data to address scientific questions has long been an integral aspect of
1science
Introduction
education. Today’s information technology provides many new mechanisms for collecting,

Engaging students in using data to address scientific questions has long been an integral aspect of
manipulating
and aggregating
in address
additionscientific
to the large
on-linehas
data
repositories,
that provide
Engaging students
in using data,
data to
questions
long
been an integral
aspectthe
of
science education. Today’s information technology provides many new mechanisms for collecting,
opportunity
for newToday’s
kinds ofinformation
student experiences
More important,
today’s world
pours
science education.
technology[1].
provides
many newinmechanisms
for data
collecting,
manipulating and aggregating data, in addition to the large on-line data repositories, that provide the
manipulating in
and
aggregating
data,weather
in addition
to thegovernment
large on-line
data repositories,
that provide
the
continuously
from
social media,
stations,
agencies,
mobile phones,
credit card
opportunity for new kinds of student experiences [1]. More important, in today’s world data pours
opportunityand
forfrom
new the
kinds
of student
experiences
[1]. More
pours
purchases
growing
number
of new devices.
Theimportant,
wealth of in
thistoday’s
data isworld
startingdata
to impact
continuously in from social media, weather stations, government agencies, mobile phones, credit card
continuously
in from
stations,will
government
mobile
phones,
our
everyday life.
Thesocial
extentmedia,
of this weather
impact, though,
depend onagencies,
our ability
to make
sense credit
of the card
data
purchases and from the growing number of new devices. The wealth of this data is starting to impact
purchases
andusefrom
the growing
of new
Theagainst
wealth the
of this
dataThese
is starting
to depend
impact
and to make
of tools
to derivenumber
predictions
anddevices.
verify them
reality.
in turn
our everyday life. The extent of this impact, though, will depend on our ability to make sense of the data
on
spread life.
of knowledge
to leverage
Datawill
Science
andonitsour
benefits
limitations.
ourthe
everyday
The extenton
of how
this impact,
though,
depend
abilityand
to make
sense of the data
and to make use of tools to derive predictions and verify them against the reality. These in turn depend
Science
(DS)
cantobederive
defined
as an interdisciplinary
field
aboutthe
scientific
andData
to make
use of
tools
predictions
and verify them
against
reality.processes
These in and
turnsystems
depend
on the spread of knowledge on how to leverage Data Science and its benefits and limitations.
on
the spread
of knowledge
on how
leverage
Dataforms
Science
its benefits according
and limitations.
to extract
knowledge
or insights
fromtodata
in various
[2].and
Alternatively,
to Technopedia
Data Science (DS) can be defined as an interdisciplinary field about scientific processes and systems
be defined
an interdisciplinary
field
about scientific
processes
andtools
systems
[3],Data
DataScience
Science(DS)
is a can
broad
field thatasrefers
to the collective
processes,
theories,
concepts,
and
to extract knowledge or insights from data in various forms [2]. Alternatively, according to Technopedia
to
extract knowledge
or insights
from data
in various
forms [2].ofAlternatively,
according
to Technopedia
technologies
that enable
the review,
analysis
and extraction
knowledge and
information
from raw
[3], Data Science is a broad field that refers to the collective processes, theories, concepts, tools and
[3], Data
Science
is adefinitions
broad fielddiffer
that in
refers
to theand
collective
theories,
tools
and
data.
Although
these
language
scope, processes,
they both signal
the concepts,
importance
of data
technologies that enable the review, analysis and extraction of knowledge and information from raw
literacy
(as opposed
to technological
and statistical
proficiency)
for promoting
technologies
that enable
the review, analysis
and extraction
of knowledge
and competence
information and
fromskills
raw
data. Although these definitions differ in language and scope, they both signal the importance of data
The latter
an both
ability
of generating
meaningful
for knowledge
extraction
and discovery.
data.
Although these
definitions
differ in language
and assumes
scope, they
signal
the importance
of data
literacy (as opposed to technological and statistical proficiency) for promoting competence and skills
questions,
entails
the need for domain
expertsproficiency)
and data scientists
to workcompetence
together, while
these
literacy (aswhich
opposed
to technological
and statistical
for promoting
and skills
for knowledge extraction and discovery. The latter assumes an ability of generating meaningful
for knowledge extraction and discovery. The latter assumes an ability of generating meaningful
questions, which entails the need for domain experts and data scientists to work together, while these
questions, which entails the need for domain experts and data scientists to work together, while these
1877-0509 © 2017 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V.
Peer-review under responsibility of the scientific committee of the International Conference on Computational Science
10.1016/j.procs.2017.05.240

Christo Dichev et al. / Procedia Computer Science 108C (2017) 2151–2160

2152	

roles are often disconnected. This implies the need of imparting fundamental concepts of data science
to the current student generation, so that they can understand the basics of data-driven research in their
areas and be in a better position to collaborate with data scientists [4]. Having some level of data science
literacy will become an important asset for any type of profession, whether it is in technology, science,
finance, journalism, politics or marketing. Thus, if we are to get data science to benefit our personal and
professional lives, we need to ensure that DS principles and instruments are understood and taken up by
those outside of the data scientist community.
Based on these facts and developments, it is obvious that data science literacy is a fundamental
literacy that should be included at the earliest levels of college education. Even though most
undergraduates won’t be data scientists, they still need to acquire general data science competency.
Understanding data science represents an increasingly important facet of general education, and in
particular for those students who will not pursue a computational or statistical career, but who wish to
understand the society and their environment better. Like information literacy, data science literacy is
emerging as an important component of college undergraduate education. Therefore, all students
regardless of their intended major should have access to a course that develops data competency.
Although universities are increasingly providing DS courses and programs, teaching DS is deferred
to higher-level or graduate courses. The idea of creating a data-science-literate undergraduate
population [5], which through their sheer numbers could have a greater impact on the data driven world,
is still not yet on the immediate agenda of the General Education (GE) curricula. With this in mind, we
proposed, developed, and implemented a new course targeting a non-technical audience and centered
on practical data science literacy, with a focus on collecting, processing, analyzing, and using data for
informed and ethical decision making. The objective is to place DS at the core of the GE Information
Literacy curriculum and to prime students at an early stage of their college education for the coming
changes in the data-driven society and technology. The DS course as part of GE will help participating
students learn to harness the power of data for the benefit of their personal and professional lives. The
challenge is to offer a course attractive to a diverse population of students and interests and that delivers
an innovative curriculum reflecting the radical changes in data technology.
In line with [1], the central questions guiding our course development and implementations were:




What does it mean to be data science literate in the emerging data driven world?
What should we be teaching students to prepare them to participate in today’s workforce and
society as data literate individuals?
How data literacy should be incorporated in the university curriculum?

These questions directed our efforts in deciding on the course objectives, learning goals, topics,
teaching methods and DS tools described in the following sections. They were materialized in an
“Introduction to Data science” course offered in a middle size southern Liberal Arts University in the
US, which breaks new ground in promoting DS among diverse student population. Our experience and
evaluation data gathered from the two offerings of this course indicate that we were successful in
reaching some of our goals: having a diverse population of undergraduate students acquired data science
literacy and practical skills through a GE course that addresses several of the university broad GE
learning outcomes - Information Literacy, Quantitative literacy, and Critical thinking.

2 Course Objectives and Learning Goals
The primary goal of this course is to introduce computational and analytical methods for data
analysis and visualization. The aim is not to produce experts, but get students interested and inspired,
so that they are able to dig deeper into the discipline when motivated by internal or external drives. The
course objectives were derived from the first two guiding questions by addressing the challenges
accompanying curriculum innovations and incorporating emerging disciplines in existing programs.
The first challenge was the dearth of published reports on GE data science courses. (We found only one

	

Christo Dichev et al. / Procedia Computer Science 108C (2017) 2151–2160

publication - [5] - touching this topic.) The second challenge was the lack of agreement on the DS
boundaries. Data science is such an interdisciplinary area that at the present stage it is hard to adhere to
a recognized, unified and systematic definition. Thus, in the initial iteration, we chose the topics
commonly considered as part of DS: data management and processing, data modelling and analysis,
machine learning algorithms, and visualization tools. The selected topics had to be compatible with the
knowledge and skills criteria derived from the guiding questions.
Consistent with [1], we believe that a data-literate individual should be able to collect, evaluate,
analyze and interpret data, present derived results, and take ethically sound action based on them. In
this context, a broad view of data science literacy can be expressed as:
Data science literacy = computational literacy + statistical literacy + machine
learning literacy + visualization literacy + ethical literacy.
Although inclusive as a framework, the corresponding content is impossible to be covered in a single
GE course unless we choose “breadth-first” strategy. While “breadth-first” courses usually cover a wide
range of topics, the depth of topics is necessarily shallow, being constrained by the amount of time
available in a semester-long course. For this reason, if practical DS can be covered at all, it will be
shallow. Such an approach was in conflict with our intention to cultivate data literacy by equipping
students with skills to harness the power of data and to enable them to present persuasive data-driven
arguments, through a combination of conceptual and hands-on learning activities. A viable option was
to take a minimal core from each component along with a framework that integrates the selected set of
“minimal cores” into a coherent whole. This option determined the direction and the scope of our work
on the course design. The set of skills forming the adapted data literacy framework includes:
 Ability to formulate productive questions
 Ability to think computationally
 Ability to think analytically
 Ability to visualize and report summary data.
The core knowledge underpinning these skills and defining our focus areas includes:
 Computational methods
 Data collection and data processing
 Data modeling and statistical analysis
 Visual communication and visualization
The unifying framework selected for integrating these topics is Python. Similarly to [6], the course
differs from typical introductory computing courses that emphasize program design, as we introduce
general programming concepts with an emphasis on data preparation, processing, and presentation. Our
course is designed to cover a digestible for non-technical audience set of topics, from (ethical) data
collection, cleaning, and visualization to prediction and classification, without diving into any one
subject too deeply, by focusing more on computation and less on conceptual background. This was done
to ensure that students would be introduced to important DS topics with sufficient exposure, so that they
could independently explore topics of interest as desired. With a series of offerings of this course we
aim to address the following questions as part of a systematic and comprehensive evaluation.
1. Is it feasible to successfully teach practical DS as part of the general education curriculum at
a liberal arts university?
2. Can we develop an effective course-design model that can be used by others as a foundation
in the development and implementation of introductory (GE) Data Science courses?
3. Can such a course stimulate interest in careers in DS/CS among a diverse student population?
After removing the contextual specifics of the course implementation and taking into account [1],
we formulated the following learning goals for the students completing the course:
 To be able to collect data from different sources and make ethical judgements.
 To be able to use appropriate tools to process and manipulate data.

2153

Christo Dichev et al. / Procedia Computer Science 108C (2017) 2151–2160

2154	







To be able to generate visualizations that communicate interpretations and conclusions.
To be able to explain and use a data distribution and look for correlations and associations.
To be able to evaluate the strength of a conclusion that can be inferred from a particular data set.
To be able to recognize patterns in data that suggest relationships worth investigating further.
To be able to categorize a set of items and group them on the basis of certain properties.

The adopted objectives and learning goals played a critical role in shaping the course structure,
instructional activities, and assessment strategies as discussed in the next section.

3 Course Structure, Resources and Challenges
3.1 Course Structure
This course takes a computational approach. From the student’s viewpoint, each class begins with
an introduction where we present the topics along with dynamically demonstrated computational
concepts or tools. Each week’s material is organized into lessons; each lesson is comprised of a lecture
material with computational examples, discussion and hand-on practice. For most of the lessons, we
provide Jupyter notebooks [7], while in others we leverage freely available, online resources. Each
lesson is paired with out-of-class graded labs. The course ends with group projects. The course topics,
consistent with the core knowledge areas, are grouped accordingly into four areas as follows:








Introduction to computation
o Python basics and arithmetic
o Conditionals and control flow in Python
o Data structures: strings, lists, dictionaries, tuples
o Classes, objects and methods
Data collection and data processing
o Pandas fundamentals, Pandas data structures (Series, DataFrames, Time Series)
o Importing and transforming data
o Working with TXT and CSV Files; Scraping data from the web
o Cleaning data: merge datasets, drop/replace values, handling missing data and outliers
Data modeling and statistical analysis
o Descriptive statistics: distribution, histogram, measures of center, measures of
spread, outliers, skewness and kurtosis
o Point estimates, confidence intervals, hypothesis testing, t-tests
o Linear regression: estimating model coefficients, using it for prediction, correlation
Visual communication and visualization
o Python visualization tools
o Plotting: histograms, boxplots, line/bar/bubble plots, scatterplots, customizing a plot
o Visualization with Seaborn.

Although the topics fall into four areas: computing, data processing, data analysis and visualization,
from teaching perspective boundaries are blurred as the topics are introduced in a blended way - using
a computational approach to learning. The course develops conceptual understanding from ground up
with no prerequisites beyond high school math. It builds on the growing integration between computing,
statistics, data processing and visualization. Students develop computational skills by implementing data
processing or visualization concepts. Also, many statistical concepts are discovered computationally and
then codified symbolically. This approach of developing computational thinking by incorporating data
processing, statistical and visualization concepts allows learning more in less time. Yet, by enabling
students to work hands-on with real data, it enables us to integrate a full grasp of the lifecycle of dealing
with data along with computational and mathematical conception that underlies it.

	

Christo Dichev et al. / Procedia Computer Science 108C (2017) 2151–2160

3.2 The Programming Language and Course Resources
We devoted five weeks to programming aimed at providing students with a framework for thinking
structurally about data. We chose Python as a programming platform based on the following reasons:








It has a shallow learning curve and its syntax and semantics are transparent.
It is accompanied by a rich ecosystem of pedagogical materials.
It is strong on descriptive analytics.
It provides powerful tools for
 Collecting Data
 Cleaning & Transforming Data
 Data visualization.
It is a popular general purpose programming language
 Can be used in various areas after the class is over
 It is also the language of choice for teaching computer science.
It is robust for production use.

Students learn to program and work with data in Jupyter notebooks (enabling browser based
computation in the cloud). Because there is no single textbook that covers all topics adequately, the
course material was compiled from many sources. The computing part covering the essential of Python
programming and Data structures was done based on Think Python [8]. The data processing module
was built around the introductory IPython based Data Science books [9,10] and online materials [e.g.
11] that introduce Python and Panadas tools for data cleaning and data processing. The data analysis
module was based on online materials (e.g. [12, 13]) introducing descriptive statistics, hypothesis testing
and regression analysis. The data visualization module was based on [9, 10], which introduce the power
of visualization, and plotting with Matplotlib and Seaborn. The predictive models for classification and
clustering tasks were covered only conceptually by providing reference to appropriate learning by doing
resources (e.g. [14]). Despite the rich web ecosystem of learning materials, it is challenging to find
material matching a subject with the right level of difficulty, depth, and details.

3.3 Implementation Challenges
Keeping students motivated is a particularly challenging goal in GE courses. We employed several
strategies to strengthen students’ motivation. A recognized way in this context is to keep the students
actively involved in all parts of a class. With respect to lecturing, this means keeping lectures interactive.
Another strategy is through homework/lab assignments that are not only carefully designed to review
and extend the lecture material, but are also fun and keep students interested. A particular challenge in
teaching a GE level data science class is the diversity in the skill levels of the students. One aspect of
this challenge is the difficulty of keeping students with varied computational abilities and backgrounds
on the same page [15]. The high heterogeneity in the students’ backgrounds requires the course material
to be designed so that students with insufficient background can “catch up”, while students with more
advanced background are not bored. A related challenge is maintaining a consistent level of difficulty
and workload when combing together material from a variety of sources. Being an effective instructor
in such an environment means finding a way to push the advanced students to their potential while still
providing a motivating learning experience for the rest.
In this context, a serious challenge is to find assignments that keep all types of students interested
and motivated. In line with the active student involvement principles, our course incorporates a series
of labs paired with every lecture, so that students can apply the knowledge acquired in class. The primary
goal with involving students in intensive lab experience is to assure that they attain level three of the
Bloom taxonomy [16] of the cognitive domain, namely application. Hands-on lab exercises provide the
means to challenge students with such higher order tasks. The secondary goal is to prevent students from
getting lost and losing learning motivation. For labs to work it is imperative that the chosen problem’s

2155

Christo Dichev et al. / Procedia Computer Science 108C (2017) 2151–2160

2156	

difficulty matches the student’s skill level. This suggests identifying problems that allow extensions, so
that the extended versions match the higher skill level of stronger students. Along with involving
students in the learning process, the labs in the course serve as a vehicle for frequent assessment to keep
students on track and get evaluative feedback. They are not intended as a high-stake assessment, but as
an instrument for monitoring student’s understanding and progress. This type of continuous assessment
exposes a substantial amount of information about student conceptions and misconceptions. It also
provides signals when there is a need of revising and adapting learning activities.
In addition to the labs, students had to complete a course project. It is a group project that requires
students to bring together what they have acquired throughout the course and learn how to work
effectively in teams. The project involves data capturing, analysis, interpreting results, and visualization.
For example, one of the projects requires collecting National Basketball Association (NBA) data from
the web, cleaning it, analyzing it and displaying through meaningful graphics the derived statistics
related to individual players, teams and the overall NBA.
We further address the challenges arising from this class environment in several ways and in
particular by:






Closely observing how the skills of our students developed as they worked their way through
the course activities.
Concentrating on the weaker or less-motivated students in an attempt to improve the class on
the whole. (One credible measure of a class’s success is how the weaker students perform).
Demonstrating and discussing interactively example programs, before the students are given
exercises to implement and practice what they have learned.
Regularly reviewing key concepts in different contexts, so as to reinforce them in student minds.
Placing activity problems into the context of real world DS problems in order to let students
see how what they are learning increases their data science skills.

As a whole, the adopted instructional strategy emphasizes discussions, interactive experiences and
hands-on work where the focus is more on applications, and less on background. In summary, our inclass instructional approach can be characterized as:
 Stimulating discussions in class.
 Teaching with examples.
 Teaching with patterns.
 Describing problems in a language-agnostic fashion.
 Teaching transferable ideas and concepts.
 Giving individual attention and personal feedback.
 Applying course adjustment based on students’ progress.

4 Evaluation
The purpose of this evaluation was to determine if the “Introduction to Data Science” has a potential
for a positive impact on students’ DS knowledge and skills. We were interested in evidence indicating
learning gains and also in indicators of potential changes in students’ attitude towards DS. A secondary
objective was to gather relevant information on students’ perception of course structure and organization
that would enable us to look critically on its content and implementation.
The described here evaluation presents measurements combining the assessment data of two
consecutive course offerings – Spring 2016 and Fall 2016 with total of 18 students initially enrolled
(Fall 2015 – 11 students, Spring 2016 – 7 students). In terms of gender - 61% were males and 39% were
females. The major with the greatest representation in the class was Computer Science (CS) (28% of

	

Christo Dichev et al. / Procedia Computer Science 108C (2017) 2151–2160

the students) followed by Information Technology (IT) (18%), Business Administration (12%) and
Psychology (12%). The majority of the students had little or no programming experience and a little
background in statistics. Only five students of the total eighteen students enrolled in the Data Science
class had previous exposure to programming and basic background in statistics (see Table 1).
Student Level
Freshman
Sophomore
Junior
Senior
Student Major
Computer Science
IT
Business Administration
Psychology
Early Education
Exercise Science
History
Nursing
Social Work
Undecided
Table 1. Course Demographics

39%
33%
17%
11%
28%
18%
12%
12%
5%
5%
5%
5%
5%
5%

One commonly used indicator of course effectiveness is the learning gain. Learning gain compares
students’ knowledge (based on their performance) at two points in time. To measure the knowledge and
skills gained from this course we designed pre- and post-course tests. The adoption of the pre/postintervention model of course evaluation was motivated by other science disciplines, e.g. Physics,
Chemistry and Biology, evaluating students’ preconceptions and knowledge gain over the duration of
introductory courses. In such established disciplines, standardized pre- and post-course tests for
evaluating knowledge of a particular set of concepts are normally employed [e.g. 18]. As DS is an
emerging discipline where standardized tests have not yet been developed, we had to resort to an adhock instrument for evaluating the students’ knowledge and skills growth. In some ways the created by
us pre- and post-course test can be viewed as an initial step towards an assessment instrument for
determining the effect of introductory DS courses on student DS knowledge.
The identical pre- and post-course tests were designed after finalizing the course learning goals and
objectives. They consisted of thirty questions addressing the course topics: computing, data processing,
data analysis and visualization with nine additional attitudinal questions. The selection of the
knowledge/skill related questions was based on our perception about the DS concepts that an
undergraduate from non–computer science/IT or statistics major should understand. The attitudinal
questions were seeking answers on the usefulness, relevance and worth of DS in professional and
personal life. The practical purpose of the pre-testing was to determine a baseline level of knowledge
of key concepts and skills prior to engaging in course activities and to compare these results with the
responses to the post test to determine the level of knowledge and skills after completion of the DS
course. The pre- and post-course tests were administered during the first and final weeks of the semester.
There were no course points associated with the pretest. The students whose data is reported here gave
informed consent to the inclusion of their data in the evaluation. When considering the completed preand post-test, the pre course scores ranged from a low of 27 to a high of 84 out of 90 possible, with an
average score of 56.06, while post-test scores ranged from a low of 51 to a high of 90 out of 90 possible,
with an average score of 71.625. Translating this to percentages, the pre-test had a range of 30% to
93.3%, and the post-test had a range of 56.7% to 100% (see Table 2 for tests means).

2157

2158	

Christo Dichev et al. / Procedia Computer Science 108C (2017) 2151–2160

Assessment
CS/IT
Non CS/IT
Overall
Pretest mean
64.125
48
56.062
Posttest mean
75
68.25
71.625
Table 2. Pretest/posttest means for CS/IT, non-CS/IT majors and overall.
T-tests were performed to determine whether the observed differences between the pretest and
posttest scores are statistically significant. As shown in Table 3 the results demonstrate statistically
significant improvement in students’ performance. Ultimately, what matters most is not statistical
significance but whether the size of an effect is meaningful in a practical sense (the learning gain). One
standard way to report the practical impact of the difference from the pretest to the post-test for a group
of learners is to compute the ratio of the difference in mean scores to the standard deviation. This ratio
is often called the effect size or Cohen’s d [17]. This effect size indicates the magnitude of change in
scores, in standard deviation units. A small effect size is considered less than 0.20, a medium effect size
is 0.50, and a large effect size is 0.80 or greater. The large effect size shown in Table 3 indicates that
the DS course had a substantial impact on students’ knowledge gain. In turn, it shows the potential of
general education data science course for fostering data science literacy.
Statistic Evaluation
CS/IT
Non CS/IT
Overall
T-test
1.766286
3.79139
3.90470
P value
0.099134
0.00198
0.00049
Effect Size
0.826661
1.37832
1.04462
Table 3. T and p values and effect sizes for CS/IT, non-CS/IT majors and overall.
Table 2 and Table 3 reveal also that CS majors earned the highest overall pre-test and posttest scores
(means = 64.125, 75), while non CS/IT group earned the greatest gain scores (effect size = 1.044). From
the perspective of the course content and tools, these results suggest also that Python is a viable
framework for fostering data science education.
To assess students’ attitude toward DS and its value for their future career and everyday life, we
included attitudinal questions at the end of the pre/post course test. The questions used a 7-point Likert
scale. The collected responses indicate a striking consistency among students, despite the variety of
background and major pursued. As shown in Table 4, all students entered the course with a positive
attitude towards data science and its practical value and the majority of them ended the course with even
more positive attitude.
Questions
Pretest mean
Data Science is worthless
1.69
Data Science will boost my professional training
6.31
Data Science skills will make me more employable
6.12
Data Science is not useful to the typical professional
2.8
Data Science thinking is not applicable in my life outside my job 2.5
I use Data Science in my everyday life
4.07
Data Science are rarely presented in everyday life
2.5
I will have no application for Data Science in my profession
2.31
Data Science is irrelevant in my life
1.56
Table 4. The attitudinal questions pretest and post-tests means.

Posttest mean
1.18
6.44
6
1.37
2.06
4.07
2.31
1.94
1.56

Our experiences with two cohorts backed by the evaluation results demonstrate that it is feasible to
teach GE Data Science course and provide students with the necessary minimum of computational, data
processing and analytical skills. Such a course opens the door to further learning on that foundation.

	

Christo Dichev et al. / Procedia Computer Science 108C (2017) 2151–2160

5 Discussion and Conclusion
The “Introduction to Data Science” course fills a gap in the ever evolving general education
curriculum. Developing and teaching this course was both a challenge and a fulfilling experience. In
some ways, its implementation is a work in progress as each next course offering tries to address the
challenges identified in the previous ones. The principal challenge was that the students were from
different majors and some of them had little (if not zero) prior programming experience. With such an
uneven group it is highly problematic to find the right balance for students with diverse computing and
analytical abilities and backgrounds [6]. We tried to make the labs not too burdensome for novice
programmers and couple them with potential to keep more advanced students motivated. We also strived
to maintain a consistent level of difficulty and workload when assembling course material from a variety
of sources. Additional problem originating from the GE student population is our lack of understanding
of the non-Computer Science student population, which as stated by Guzdial [19] is less studied than
the population of CS majors. Most of our intuitions and assumptions about designing and teaching this
class are based on experiences of introductory CS courses. The accumulated experience indicates that
the roots of some problems lie in the insufficient knowledge about the actual needs, perceptions,
motivations, and learning strategies of non-CS students who are taking the DS courses.
An interesting observation in this context is that while today’s students are more engaged with, and
exposed to computers and technology on a daily basis (via the internet, social media, computer games,
etc.), they are more detached from the underlying computing processes involved. Previous generations
were brought up using command line interfaces from a young age while many students have only ever
used a GUI interface like Microsoft Windows [15]. Thus there are some very strong mental models that
have to be broken down and replaced, such as the notion that data files are distinct from executable files.
This situation continues to be a challenge with the growing prevalence of mobile devices where the code
which runs the software is hidden behind barriers put up by the operating system interfaces.
Perhaps the key benefit of these courses and the related assessment has been the level of stimulation
we received for further reflection and improvement of the course structure, teaching methods and the
assessment strategy. We are convinced that Python has been a crucial tool that allowed us to design and
implement a practical DS course for a non-technical student population. The early experience indicates
that the course workload could turn away students who are new to programming or those who are
balancing heavy course loads. We plan to devote a larger fraction of the course (eight to nine weeks) to
computation, before moving on to DS area. This part will differ from introductory computer science
classes in that it integrates general computing concepts with an emphasis on data preparation,
processing, inferential thinking and presentation. By improving students’ knowledge of Python’s
statistical capabilities and data structures (e.g. series and DataFrames) it will be possible to provide them
with skills in using Python data science tools (e.g. practical orientation in Python libraries for data
science including Pandas (data preparation and analysis) and statistical libraries, for a shorter period of
time. As an external observation, we think that when appropriate, this course may be paired with a second
non GE Data Science course where motivated students can strengthen their skills.
In terms of the assessment, it is possible that because it was not part of the course grade, student
motivation to engage in the pre- and post-course tests might have been affected. Although they were
encouraged to complete the tests to the best of their ability, it is possible that some students did not, and
their lack of sincerity could have affected the change from pre- to post-course scores. Also, we feel that
the pre-post course questions should be modified to match better the current learning goals.
Data drives discovery, decision making, and innovation. Integrating data literacy into a curriculum
is an opportunity for university education to make an impact on students as they get ready to transition
to the professional world. Our experience demonstrates that it is feasible to teach non-technical student
population practical DS skills and cultivate “evidence-based” mindset by introducing the topics from the
core areas in a blended way. We hope that our experience has the potential to be used by other instructors
and academics in the development and implementation of general education data science courses.

2159

Christo Dichev et al. / Procedia Computer Science 108C (2017) 2151–2160

2160	

6 Acknowledgements
This work is supported by the projects NSF DUE-1432257 and 1432438: IUSE Collaborative
Research: Data Computing for All: Developing an Introductory Data Science Course in Flipped Format
(09/01/2014-08/31/2017).

References
1.

Building Global Interest in Data Literacy: A Dialogue-Workshop Report (EDC’s Oceans of Data
Institute (ODI)), Education Development Center, Inc. 2016.

2.

Wikipedia (https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Data_science).

3.

Techopedia (https://www.techopedia.com/definition/30202/data-science).

4.

Y. Gil, “Teaching parallelism without programming: A data science curriculum for non-CS
students,” in Education for High Performance Computing Workshop (EduHPC), 2014, pp. 42–48.

5.

Schuff, D., “Data Science for All: A University-Wide Course in Data Literacy,” forthcoming in
A. Deokar, A. Gupta, L. Iyer, and M. Jones (Eds.), Annals of Information Systems: Analytics and
Data Science: Advances in Research and Pedagogy, Springer, 2017.

6.

Brunner RJ, Kim EJ. Teaching Data Science. International Conference on Computational Science
2016, ICCS 2016, 6-8 June 2016, San Diego, California, USA.

7.

Project Jupyter. http://jupyter.org (Retrieved Jan. 2017).

A. Downey. Think Python. O’Reilly Media, Inc., 2012.
Rossant C. Learning IPython for Interactive Computing and Data Visualization. Packt Publishing,
2015.
10. Rossant C. IPython Interactive Computing and Visualization Cookbook. Packt Publishing, 2014.
8.
9.

\

11. Cleaning data in Python. http://data.library.utoronto.ca/cleaning-data-python (Retrieved Jan. 2017).
12. Basic and inferential statistics http://hamelg.blogspot.com/2015/ (Retrieved Jan. 2017)
13. Introduction to Linear Regression
https://github.com/justmarkham/DAT4/blob/master/notebooks/08_linear_regression.ipynb
(Retrieved Jan., 2017).
14. Machine learning with Python: A Tutorial https://www.dataquest.io/blog/machine-learningpython/(Retrieved Jan., 2017).
15. J. Hardin, R. Hoerl, Nicholas J. Horton, D. Nolan, B. Baumer, O. Hall-Holt, P. Murrell, R. Peng, P.
Roback, D. Temple Lang & M. D. Ward. Data Science in Statistics Curricula: Preparing Students
to “Think with Data”, The American Statistician, 69:4, 343-353, 2015.
16. Bloom BS. Taxonomy of educational objectives - Handbook 1-The Classification of Educational
Goals. 2nd ed. Addison Wesley Publishing Company; Longman, NY: 1984.
17. Cohen, J. "A power primer". Psychological Bulletin. 112 (1): 155–159, 1992.
18. Anderson D. L. Fisher K. M. Norman G. J. Development and evaluation of the Conceptual
Inventory of Natural Selection. Journal of Research in Science Teaching 39: 952–978.
19. Guzdial, M. Computing Education Must Go Beyond Intuition: The Need for Evidence-Based
Practice. BLOG@CACM (February 22, 2015).

