Procedia Computer Science
Volume 51, 2015, Pages 552–561
ICCS 2015 International Conference On Computational Science

Modeling Deﬂagration in Energetic Materials using the
Uintah Computational Framework
Jacqueline Beckvermit1∗, Todd Harman1 , Andrew Bezdjian1 , and Charles Wight2
1

University of Utah, Salt Lake City, Utah, U.S.A
Weber State University, Ogden, Utah, U.S.A.

2

Abstract
Predictive computer simulations of highly resolved large-scale 3D deﬂagrations and detonations
are dependent on a robust reaction model embedded in a computational framework capable of
running on massively parallel computer architectures. We have been developing such a model
in the Uintah Computational Framework, which has exhibited good strong and weak scaling
characteristics up to 512K cores[16]. Our focus is on predicting a Deﬂagration to Detonation
Transition (DDT) when a large number of energetic devices are present. An example of this
is a semi-tractor-trailer loaded with thousands of mining boosters that rolled over, ignited and
went through a DDT. Our current reaction model adapts components from a) Ward, Son and
Brewster[22] which incorporates the eﬀects of pressure and initial temperature on deﬂagration,
b) Berghout et al.[9] to model burning in cracks of damaged explosives, and c) Souers[20] for
describing fully developed detonation. The reaction model has been subjected to extensive
validation against experimental tests. Current eﬀorts are focused on the eﬀects of varying the
grid resolution on multiple aspects of deﬂagration and the transition to detonation.
Keywords: Detonation, DDT, Deﬂagration, Multiscale Modeling, Deﬂagration Propagation

1

Introduction

In August of 2005, a truck carrying 16,000 kilograms of seismic boosters overturned, caught
ﬁre and detonated in Spanish Fork Canyon, Utah. The damage was catastrophic, causing
a crater 10 meters deep by 24 meters wide with burning debris found up to a quarter of a
mile away. It was apparent by the size of the crater that the explosion transitioned from a
deﬂagration into a fully developed detonation. This research focuses on developing a science
based reaction model incorporated into the Uintah Computational Framework[1] to simulate
large scale transportation accidents. Our model captures the appropriate chemistry and physics,
including the temperature and pressure sensitivity of the burn rate, detonation propagation,
Shock to Detonation Transition (SDT) and Deﬂagration to Detonation Transition (DDT). Using
∗ j.beckve@chem.utah.edu

552

Selection and peer-review under responsibility of the Scientiﬁc Programme Committee of ICCS 2015
c The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V.

doi:10.1016/j.procs.2015.05.321

Modeling Deﬂagration in Energetic Materials

Beckvermit, Harman, Bezdjian and Wight

Figure 1:
Schematic showing the three regions involved
in the combustion of solid
explosives.

this advanced computational framework, we can simulate the conditions necessary for a DDT
to occur in much larger systems. With this computational tool, packaging protocols can be
simulated to decrease the probability of detonation while transporting explosives.
The Uintah Computational Framework, developed at the University of Utah, is a collaborative eﬀort within the Chemistry, Mechanical Engineering and Computer Science departments.
The framework contains algorithms for modeling ﬂuid structure interactions with MPM, ICE,
and MPMICE[11, 12, 13], involving multiple materials, solid → gas exothermic reactions and
a variety of constitutive models and equations of state. MPMICE solves the mass, momentum
and energy conservation equations for the ﬂuids and solids. Our reaction model is a source term
in these equations, speciﬁcally the amount of converted mass. The solid → gas reaction models,
which utilize the ﬂuid structure interactions of MPMICE, have been validated for the explosives 1,3,5,7-octahydro-1,3,5,7-tetranitro-1,3,5,7-tetrazocine (HMX) and PBX-9501 (95 percent
HMX with 5 percent of a plastic bonding agent). In this paper we have focused on these
explosives due to the abundance of experimental data available. This paper describes a reaction model which is used within Uintah’s MPMICE component to calculate the propagation of
conductive and convective deﬂagration needed to simulate a DDT.

2

Deﬂagration in Solid Explosives

With the combustion of explosives there are three reaction zones/regions. The ﬁrst is the
condensed phase, where there is a large temperature increase from the luminous ﬂame and
where intermediates species are formed. The second is the dark zone as illustrated in Figure
1. Within this zone, the intermediate products are comparatively unreactive, causing a time
delay for the radicals to build up in concentration before ignition in the luminous ﬂame[3]. The
height of the dark zone above the condensed phase is very important in determining the ﬂame
structure at low pressures and the burn rate at high pressure. This height is known as the
ﬂame standoﬀ distance, which plays a large role in the transition into convective deﬂagration.
As intermediate product gas concentrations and relative pressures are increased, the luminous
ﬂame moves closer to the condensed phase, decreasing the ﬂame standoﬀ distance and increasing
the burn propagation and solid → gas mass conversion rate (burn rate). The third region is the
bright zone, known for its luminous ﬂame. This region is characterized by a large temperature
increase, resulting from HCN and NO reacting to ﬁnal products. The temperature in this zone
can approach the adiabatic limit[3].
In the combustion of high explosives, there are two types of deﬂagration: conductive and
convective. In a conductive deﬂagration, heat is transferred between the products of reaction
and the surface of the explosive. This deﬂagration is observed to have relatively slow ﬂame
propagation velocity. For PBX-9501 undergoing a conductive deﬂagration the ﬂame propagation
553

Modeling Deﬂagration in Energetic Materials

Beckvermit, Harman, Bezdjian and Wight

speed is a few cm/s, varying slightly with pressure[19]. As the pressure of the system increases
the ﬂame standoﬀ distance will decrease, increasing the propagation speed of the deﬂagration.
At relatively high pressures the ﬂame standoﬀ distance will decrease to a point that the ﬂame
can propagate into the cracks and pores of the solid material, transitioning into convective
deﬂagration. This pressure is known as the critical pressure[9], and is inversely dependent on
the porosity of the material. Convective deﬂagration is a very important mode in the combustion
of high explosives because of its tendency to transition into a detonation. Above the critical
pressure, hot product gases propagate into the damaged solid, igniting the material within.
This results in signiﬁcantly faster burning velocities. For PBX-9501 the convective deﬂagration
velocities have been measured between 400 m/s to 1500 m/s[8].
Convective deﬂagration is very important to understanding a Deﬂagration to Detonation
Transition (DDT). It has been observed that in a monolithic condensed phase explosive, a
DDT occurs from the coalescence of pressure waves formed from convective deﬂagration. As
burning occurs within the material, pressure waves propagate outward and grow in strength
until a shock to detonation transition occurs[4]. This phenomena, in solid explosives, has been
observed experimentally[4, 21] and in computational experiments[4, 15]. Understanding and
accurately modeling conductive/convective deﬂagration is required to predict the behavior of
10s-1000s of reacting explosive devices.

3

Modeling Deﬂagration of HMX Based Explosives

Within Uintah, multiple reaction models have been combined with various constitutive material
models to represent many aspects of combustion. Uintah’s Deﬂagration to Detonation model,
DDT1, is a multi-material, multiphase model used to describe the slow propagations of deﬂagration and the high energy release rates of detonation. We use the ViscoSCRAM[6] constitutive
model to describe crack development or material damage in the condensed phase with respect
to pressure, allowing for convective deﬂagration. The Ward, Son and Brewster (WSB)[22] burn
rate model describes the mass ﬂux of combustion, this is coupled with a reactive ﬂow model,
JWL++[20], to model detonation.
The WSB model[22] utilizes simple kinetics and is a commonly used approach to model
steady combustion of explosive materials. It utilizes an iterative solution to determine the
rate of mass conversion and is dependent on the pressure and temperature, while assuming
global kinetic reactions. The WSB model was derived out of Los Alamos National Labratory
to deﬁne the steady deﬂagration rate of HMX and similar explosives, in one dimension. This
model assumes a high activation energy with unimolecular, irreversible, zeroth order thermal
decomposition of the condensed phase. The gas phase reactions are considered second order
with negligible activation energy. Good agreement is shown in the gas phase temperature between HMX undergoing a conductive deﬂagration and self deﬂagrating nitramines, when the
activation energy is assumed to be negligible. With this model the ﬂame standoﬀ distance,
pressure and temperature dependence on the burn rate agree well with experimental data[22].
The assumption that the gas phase has a negligible activation energy is justiﬁed by the gas
phase reactions being radical chain reactions. This chemistry is easily explained with a hydrogen/oxygen combustion system. In these systems there is an activation energy associated
with the initiation/branching step but the recombination/termination step is temperature insensitive, resulting in a negligible activation energy. This is similar to the chemistry seen with
radical gas phase reactions in the steady combustion of HMX. The main assumptions in the
WSB model are 1) the speciﬁc heat of the gas phase and the condensed phase are equal, 2) there
is no mass diﬀusion assumed in the condensed phase, 3) the gas phase follows the ideal gas law,
554

Modeling Deﬂagration in Energetic Materials

Beckvermit, Harman, Bezdjian and Wight

4) the condensed phase is considered incompressible and 5) there is no pressure dependence
associated with the heat release of the condensed phase, only the gas phase.
The WSB model uses a simpliﬁed two phase chemistry model, in which the solid explosive
(A) is converted to gas phase intermediates (B) which react to form the ﬁnal products (C).
A(solid) → B(gas) → C(gas). Therefore only two phases of the combustion are modeled; the
condensed and gas phases. The melt layer present in many explosives is assumed to have little
impact on the overall combustion and is therefore ignored. This model has a large pressure
dependence associated with the conductive heat transfer; as mentioned before, this greatly
aﬀects the rate of gas phase reactions. The mass burn ﬂux is computed using Equations 1 and
2, where mb is the rate of mass converted in kg/(m2 s), and Ts is the calculated condensed
phase surface temperature.
mb (Ts ) =

κc ρc Ac RTs2 exp(−Ec /RTs )
Cp Ec [Ts − T0 − Qc /2Cp ]

Ts (mb , P ) = T0 +

1/2

Qc
Qg
+
x (mb ,P )
Cp
Cp (1 + xgcd (m
)
b)

(1)
(2)

The surface temperature of the solid is dependent on the initial bulk solid temperature, T0 .
An increase in the surface temperature is a result of the condensed phase reacting to intermediates, and the conductive heat transfer from the luminous ﬂame reactions. In determining the
mass burn ﬂux and surface temperature the ﬂame standoﬀ distance, xg , convective-diﬀusive
length, xcd , and the Damkohler number, Da , must be determined as seen in Equations 3,4, and
5. Equations 1 and 2 are solved iteratively until a convergence criteria is met. For use in Uintah,
this model has been modiﬁed to include three dimensional eﬀects by including the surface area
of a cell and the total mass within the cell[23], see Equations 6, and 7. This model has been
validated against experimental data for a wide range of pressures at initial solid temperatures
of 273K, 298K and 423K[18].
xg (mb , P ) =

2xcd (mb )
2

mb + 4Da (mb , P ) − mb
κg
xcd (mb ) =
mb Cp

Da (mb , P ) =

B g M W 2 Cp P 2
xcd (mb )2
R 2 κg

M B = Δt ∗ BF A ∗ mb
BF A =

Δx ∗ Δy ∗ Δz
(Δx|gx | + Δy|gy | + Δz|gz |) max(g1(1/3) )

(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)

The WSB model utilizes the crack propagation results from the ViscoSCRAM constitutive
evaluation to model the transition into convective deﬂagration as deﬁned by Berghout[9]. The
critical pressure, Pc , is dependent on the crack radius or porosity, w, and computed using
Equation 8.
(8)
Pc2.84 w2 = 8x108
The ViscoSCRAM constitutive model was developed for the explosive PBX-9501 to describe
crack development and the formation of hot spots in damaged materials. It is a combination
555

Modeling Deﬂagration in Energetic Materials

Beckvermit, Harman, Bezdjian and Wight

of Maxwell’s visco-elastic model developed by Addessio et al.[2] and the Statistical Crack Mechanics model[10], developed at Los Alamos National Laboratory. ViscoSCRAM was developed
to model the mechanical behavior of brittle explosives under non-shock conditions accounting
for the viscoelastic response, statistical fracture mechanics and hot spot ignition. The growth
of the cracks in a solid explosive are dependent on the initial crack radius, crack growth rate,
ﬁve Maxwell elements and other parameters allowing for random distribution of cracks[6]. This
model has been ﬁt to match experimental relaxation times as determined by the visco-elastic
response[6]. More about Uintah’s validated reaction and material models can be found at[18].

3.1

Conductive Deﬂagration Model

The WSB model, described in Section 3.0, shows good agreement with experimentally measured
mass burn rates over a wide range of initial solid temperatures[18]. Before Equations 1-5 are
solved, certain conditions in the computational cells need to be satisﬁed. Those conditions
include:
• The computational cell must be on the surface of the explosive, or the product gas pressure
in a surrounding cell must be above the critical pressure for convective deﬂagration.
• There must be a surrounding cell with a signiﬁcant amount of material above the ignition
temperature. For PBX-9501 the ignition temperature is 550 K.
Once these criteria are satisﬁed, the cell will react converting solid HMX → gas via Equations
1-5.
As discussed above the original one dimensional WSB model was extended to three dimensions, allowing for Equations 1-5 to be calculated over a ﬁnite cell of reactant[23]. This
extension introduced a grid resolution dependence. The WSB model computes the mass converted during a ﬁnite amount of time using Equations 1, and 2. This rate is then multiplied
by the burn front area of the cell, BF A, and the change in time, Δt, using Equation 6. For
conductive deﬂagration the burn front area is calculated by the surface of the cell exposed to
air using Equation 7. Where Δx, Δy, and Δz are the length of the ﬁnite volume grid cell
in the x, y, and z directions and gx , gy , and gz are the components of the normalized density
gradient[23]. This allows for only the surface of the explosive to deﬂagrate, making the burn
rate of conductive deﬂagration independent of the cell size.
The WSB Equations 1-5, and the criteria for burning initiation has been shown to compute
the correct conductive mass burn rate, however the propagation velocity of the deﬂagration
front was orders of magnitude faster than the measured velocities. This overdriven velocity was
due to the discretization of the domain into cells of a ﬁnite size and the cell ignition criteria
described above. We discovered that cells adjacent to a burning cell could ignite before the
deﬂagration traversed across the burning cell. This “skipping” or “jumping” of the reaction
was dependent on cell spacing and timestep size.
To mitigate this non-physical propagation we added an “induction period” before mass could
be consumed. This “induction period” is meant to emulate the amount of time needed for the
hot gases to ﬂow through the cell before igniting the next one. In doing so the propagation of
deﬂagration will be constant for all cell sizes, eliminating a resolution dependence. The length
of the “induction period” is dependent on the product gas pressure in the surrounding cells and
the grid resolution. Son et al.[19] experimentally measured the propagation velocity of a ﬂame
on the surface of PBX-9501 and found it to follow Equation 9, where Pd is the dimensionless
pressure (P /P0 , P0 =0.1 M P a). This equation was used in the determination of the “induction
556

Modeling Deﬂagration in Energetic Materials

Beckvermit, Harman, Bezdjian and Wight

Figure 2: Pressure dependence of the conductive deﬂagration propagation. Simulated two dimensional results (diamonds)
compared to experimental data (triangles)
determined by Son et al.[19].

Figure 3: Instantaneous convective deﬂagration propagation vs time for a 1 dimensional simulation. This plot shows the large
decrease in propagation velocity with the
“induction period” correction seen by the
green points. The blue shaded region is
experimentally determined propagation of
convective deﬂagration for PBX-9501[8].

period”, Equation 10, where Δx is the average length of the cell and A is a constant used
to control the propagation velocity. For conductive deﬂagration A=1, following the equation
determined by Son et al.[19]. The addition of an “induction time” corrected the deﬂagration
propagation velocity on the surface of PBX-9501 as shown in Figure 2.
Sf = 0.259Pd0.538
τ=

3.2

ΔxA
Sf

(9)

(10)

Convective Deﬂagration Model

The propagation of a convective deﬂagration is a complex phenomena and there is no empirical
correlation to describe the ﬂame propagation into cracks or pores. For PBX-9501 the propagation velocity in cracks has been experimentally measured to be between 400 and 1500 m/s[8].
Our model for deﬂagrating PBX-9501 has been validated against experimental data for multiple pressures, initial temperatures and grid resolutions for conductive deﬂagration[18, 17]. An
abundance of research has been directed at understanding convective deﬂagration[14, 5, 7], but
there are still many unknowns and no empirical correlations similar to Equations 1-5 and 9
to evaluate the mass burn rate and propagation velocity. We therefore assume that the WSB
model is valid in this regime and compute the mass burn rate and propagation velocity using
Equations 1-6, 9 and 10. The constant A was determined using a one dimensional simulation
where a stick of PBX-9501 was thermally ignited at elevated pressures, to ensure convective deﬂagration. The propagation of the deﬂagration was measured by the amount of time it took for
the burn front to travel a known distance through the material. A was varied until simulation
results matched the experimental data to within the bounds of uncertainty. In our simulations
557

Modeling Deﬂagration in Energetic Materials

Beckvermit, Harman, Bezdjian and Wight

Figure 4: Illustration of a grid cell doubling in resolution resulting in the surface area doubling seen by the red cell
faces.
using Δx = 2 mm, A = 0.0002 gave the most accurate convective deﬂagration propagation
velocity. This constant will change with each explosive and has only been determined for PBX9501. Figure 3 shows the decrease in propagation velocity with the addition of an “induction
period” correction, as shown by the green line. The blue shaded region are the experimental
results of Berghout et al.[8].
With convective deﬂagration the reaction occurs inside the reactant, therefore the burn
front area was assumed to be one sixth of the surface area of the cell, introducing a resolution
dependence. By calculating the burn front area this way, the total mass burned for a given
volume would double when increasing the resolution of a cell by two. Figure 4 illustrates this
phenomena as seen by the area of the red cell faces doubling. To account for this, the burn
front area for convective deﬂagration is calculated using Equation 11, where BF Aref is the
reference burn front area. The elimination of the normalized density gradient was attributed to
the fact that convective deﬂagration occurs in cells which are not on the surface, therefore the
normalized density gradient in a homogenous material will cause the denominator of Equation 7
to equal Δx for a square cell. By evaluating the burn front area of convective deﬂagration with
respect to a reference resolution the grid dependence was eliminated. The reference resolution of
2mm was chosen for our simulations because the ﬂame propagation and conductive burn rates
for this resolution lie within the experimental data and the resolution is large enough to run
petascale simulations without loss of ﬁdelity[17]. Until further experimental research is done to
fully understand the mass burn rate with convective deﬂagration this approach, to the best of
our knowledge, accurately represents convective deﬂagration and decreases the non-linearity in
the simulations.
BF Anew =

3.3

Δx ∗ Δy ∗ Δz
BF Aref

(11)

Grid Convergence Study

A grid convergence study was performed to ensure that the time to detonation of deﬂagrating
PBX-9501 was no longer exhibiting a resolution dependence. This study utilized all reaction
models, equations of state, and material models needed to represent a DDT. For this study a
2D stick of PBX-9501 was thermally activated at ambient pressure with a bulk temperature of
298K; 5 diﬀerent grid resolutions were examined ranging from 4mm to 0.25mm. The time from
thermal activation to detonation for each resolution was analyzed. Clear convergent behavior
can be seen in Figure 5 as resolutions approached 0.5mm. Although convergence criteria can
be met at a 0.25mm resolution, running large 3D simulations at a ﬁne mesh size can be very
computationally expensive. Thus, all of the simulations for this research used a resolution of
2mm. By increasing the grid resolution from 0.25mm to 2mm large 3D simulations can be
run using 512 times less computing power with only a 8% error associated with the time to
detonation. Extensive research has been done on the eﬀects of increasing the resolution on the
burn rate and the detonation propagation[17]. We have determined that the rate of reaction
for conductive[17] and convective deﬂagration have no dependence on the resolution and the
denotation velocity is not aﬀected by the increase of resolution until cells are 8mm or larger[17].
558

Modeling Deﬂagration in Energetic Materials

Beckvermit, Harman, Bezdjian and Wight

Figure 5: Convergence study results on the time to denotation as a function of the resolution.

4

Conclusion

Modeling the Deﬂagration to Detonation Transition in solid explosives is very diﬃcult. The
addition of an “induction period” to the Uintah DDT1 model has allowed for a more accurate
representation of the ﬂame propagation velocity for conductive and convective deﬂagration.
The new burn front area calculation has eliminated the resolution dependence of the mass burn
rate for convective deﬂagration. With these changes Uintah accurately predicts a Deﬂagration
to Detonation Transition in solid PBX-9501 and HMX. Large scale simulations would not be
possible without the use of the global kinetic reaction model and a non-resolution dependent
burn model.
Current eﬀorts are focused on analyzing a large scale 3D simulation run on 64,000 cores on
DOE’s Mira. This simulation consists of 968 million particles in 206 million cells representing
1/8th of the semi-tractor-trailer involved in the 2005 accident. These results will give us a better
understanding into the physical mechanisms of DDT in large arrays of explosives and will be
used to determine a safer packaging conﬁguration to suppress the probability of transportation
accidents in the future.

Acknowledgments
Uintah was developed by the University of Utah’s Center for the Simulation of Accidental
Fires and Explosions (C-SAFE) and funded by the Department of Energy, subcontract No.
B524196. This work was supported by the National Science Foundation under subcontract
No.OCI0721659. An award of computer time was provided by the Innovative and Novel Computational Impact on Theory and Experiment (INCITE) program. This research used resources of the Argonne Leadership Computing Facility at Argonne National Laboratory, which
is supported by the Oﬃce of Science of the U.S. Department of Energy under contract DEAC02-06CH11357 (sub-award Uintah Safety) . This research used resources of the Oak Ridge
Leadership Computing Facility at the Oak Ridge National Laboratory, which is supported by
the Oﬃce of Science of the US DOE under contract DE-AC05-00OR22725 (sub-award ENP009).
This work also used the Extreme Discovery Environment (XSEDE), which is supported by NSF
559

Modeling Deﬂagration in Energetic Materials

Beckvermit, Harman, Bezdjian and Wight

grant OCI1053575 (sub-award TGMCA08X004).

References
[1] http://www.uintah.utah.edu.
[2] F. Addessio and J. Johnson. A Constitutive Model for the Dynamic Response of Brittle Materials.
Journal of Applied Physics, 67:3275–3286, 1990.
[3] W. R. Anderson, N. E. Meagher, and J. A. Vanderhoﬀ. Dark Zones of Solid Propellant Flames:
Critically Assessed Datasets, Quantitative Model Comparision, and Detailed Chemical Analysis.
Combustion and Flame, 158:1228–1244, 2011.
[4] B. Asay, editor. Shock Wave Science and Technology Reference Library, volume 5 pages 483-489.
Springer, 2010.
[5] B. W. Asay, S. F. Son, and J. B. Bdzil. The Role of Gas Permeation in Convective Burning.
International Journal of Multiphase Flow, 22(5):923–952, 1996.
[6] J. G. Bennett, K. S. Haberman, J. N. Johnson, B. W. Asay, and B. F. Henson. A Constitutive
Model for the Non-Shock Ignition and Mechanical Response of High Explosives. Journal of the
Mechanics and Physics of Solids, 46(12):2303–2322, 1998.
[7] H. L. Berghout, S. F. Son, and B. W. Asay. Convective Burning in Gaps of PBX 9501. In
Procceedings of the Combustion Institute, volume 28, pages 911–917, 2000.
[8] H. L. Berghout, S. F. Son, L. G. Hill, and B. W. Asay. Flame Spread Through Cracks of PBX
9501 (a Composite Octrahydro-1,3,5,7-Tetranitro-1,3,5,7-Terazocine-Based Explosive). Journal of
Applied Physics, 99:114901–7, 2006.
[9] H. L. Berghout, S. F. Son, C. B. Skidmore, D. J. Idar, and B. W. Asay. Combustion of Damaged
PBX 9501 Explosive. Thermochimica Acta, 384(261-277), 2002.
[10] J. K. Dienes, J. Middleditch, J. D. Kershner, Q. H. Zuo, and A. Starobin. Progress in Statistical
Crack Mechanics: An Approach to Initiation. In 12th International Detonation Symposium, San
Diego, CA, August 2002.
[11] J. E. Guilkey, T. B. Harman, and B. Banerjee. An Eulerian-Lagrangian Approach for Simulating
Explosions of Energetic Devices. Computers and Structures, 85:660–674, 2007.
[12] J. E. Guilkey, T. B. Harman, B. A. Kashiwa, J. Schmidt, and P. A. McMurtry. An EulerianLagrangian Approach for Large Deformation Fluid-Structure Interaction Problems, part 1: Algorithm Development. In Fluid Structure Interactions II, pages 143–156, Cadiz, Spain, 2003. WIT
Press.
[13] T. Harman, J. E. Guilkey, B. A. Kashiwa, J. Schmidt, and P. A. McMurtry. An EulerianLagrangian Approach for Large Deformation Fluid-Structure Interaction Problems, Part 2: MultiPhysics Simulations within a Modern Compuational Framework. In Fluid Structure Interactions
II, pages 157–166, Cadiz, Spain, 2003. WIT Press.
[14] K. K. Kuo, A. T. Chen, and T. R. Davis. Convective Burning in Solid-Propellant Cracks. AIAA
Journal, 16(6):600–607, 1978.
[15] A. Macek. Transition from Deﬂagration to Detonation in Case Explosives. Journal of Chemical
Physics, 31(1):162–167, 1959.
[16] Q. Meng, A. Humphrey, J. Schmidt, and M. Berzins. Investigating Applications Portability with
the Uintah DAG-based Runtime System on PetaScale Supercomputers. In Procceedings of SC13:
International Conference for High Performance Computing, Networking, Storage and Analysis,
pages 96:1–96:12, 2013.
[17] J. R. Peterson, J. Beckvermit, T. Harman, M. Berzins, and C. A. Wight. Multiscale Modeling
of High Explosives for Transportation Accidents. In XSEDE ’12: Proceedings of 2012 XSEDE
Conference, New York, NY, 2012. ACM.

560

Modeling Deﬂagration in Energetic Materials

Beckvermit, Harman, Bezdjian and Wight

[18] J. R. Peterson and C. A. Wight. An Eulerian-Lagrangian Computational Model for Deﬂagration
and Detonation of High Explosives. Combustion and Flame, 159:2491–2499, 2012.
[19] S. F. Son and H. L. Berghout. Flame Spread Across A Surface of PBX 9501. In American Institute
of Physics, pages 0–7354–0341–4, 2006.
[20] P. C. Souers, S. Anderson, J. Mercer, E. McGuire, and P. Vitello. JWL++: A Simple Reactive
Flow Code Package for Detonation. Propellants, Explosives, Pyrotechnics, 25:54–58, 2000.
[21] C. M. Tarver, T. C Goodale, R. Shaw, and M. Cowperthwaite. Deﬂagration-to-Detonation Transition Studies for Two Potential Isomeric Cast Primary Explosives. In 6th Symposium (International) on Detonation, Coronado, CA, 1976.
[22] M. Ward, S. F. Son, and M. Brewster. Deﬂagration of HMX with Simple Kinetics: A Gas Phase
Chain Reaction Model. Combustion and Flame, 114:556–568, 1998.
[23] C. A. Wight and E. Eddings. Science-Based Simulation Tools for Hazard Assessment and Mitigation. International Journal of Energetic Materials and Chemical Propulsion, 8(373-389), 2009.

A

Nomenclature

A
Ac
Bg
BF A
BF Anew
BF Aref
Cp
Da
Ec
gx
gy
gz
mb
MB
MW
P
Pc
Pd
Qc
Qg
R
Sf
Ts
T0
w
xcd
xg
κc
κg
ρc
τ
Δt
Δx
Δy
Δz

Induction time coefficient
Condensed phase frequency factor
Gas phase frequency factor
Burn front area
New burn front area
Reference burn front area
Specific heat of the condensed phase
Damkohler number
Condensed phase activation energy
x component of the normalized density gradient
y component of the normalized density gradient
z component of the normalized density gradient
Mass flux
Mass burned per timestep
Molecular weight
Pressure
Critical pressure
Dimensionless pressure
Chemical heat release from condensed phase reaction
Chemical heat release from gas phase reaction
Ideal gas constant
Flame propagation
Surface temperature of the condensed phase
Initial temperature of condensed phase
Crack radius
Convective-diffusive length
Gas phase flame thickness
Condensed phase thermal conductivity
Gas phase thermal conductivity
Density of condensed phase
Induction time
Change in time
Length of cell in the x direction
Length of cell in the y direction
Length of cell in the z direction

1.637x1015
1.6x10−3

1/s
m3 /(kg · K 2 · s)
m2
m2

0.002

m

1.4x103

J/(kg · K)

1.76x105

J/mol

3.42x10−2

kg/(m2 · s)
kg/s
kg/mol
Pa
Pa

P /P0 P0 = 0.1M P a
4.0x105
3.018x106
8.314

0.2
0.07
1.34x103

[23]
[23]

[23]
[22]
[23]
[23]
[23]
[23]
[22]
[23]

J/kg
J/kg
J/(K · mol)
cm/s
K
K
m
m
m
W/(m · K)
W/(m · K)
kg/m3

[9]
[8]
[23]
[23]
[22]
[8]
[22]
[22]
[9]
[23]
[22]
[23]
[23]
[23]

s
s
m
m
m

[23]
[23]
[23]

561

