Procedia Computer Science
Volume 29, 2014, Pages 672–682
ICCS 2014. 14th International Conference on Computational Science

Change Detection and Visualization of Functional
Brain Networks using EEG Data
1

Vijayalakshmi R1, Naga Dasari2, Nandagopal D2*, Subhiksha R1, Bernie
Cocks2, Nabaraj Dahal2, Thilaga M1

Department of Applied Mathematics and Computational Sciences, PSG College of Technology,
Coimbatore, India
2
Division of IT, Engineering and Environment, University of South Australia, Adelaide, Australia
rvpsgtech@gmail.com, Nanda.Nandagopal@unisa.edu.au

Abstract
Mining dynamic and non-trivial patterns of interactions of functional brain networks has gained
significance due to the recent advances in the field of computational neuroscience. Sophisticated data
search capabilities, advanced signal processing techniques, statistical methods, complex network and
graph mining algorithms to unfold and discover hidden patterns in the functional brain network
supported with efficient visualization techniques are essential for making potential inferences of the
results obtained. Visualization of change in activity during cognitive function is useful to discover and
get insights into the hidden, novel and complex neuronal patterns and trends during the normal and
cognitive load conditions from the graph/temporal representation of the functional brain network. This
paper explores novel methods to detect and track the dynamics and complexity of the brain function. It
also uses a new tool called Functional Brain Network Analysis and Visualization (FBNAV) tool to
visualize the outcomes of various computational analyses to enable us to identify and study the
changing neuronal patterns during various states of the brain activity using augmented/customised
Topoplots and Headplots. The change detection algorithm tracks and visualizes the cognitive load
induced changes across the scalp regions. These techniques may also be helpful to locate and identify
patterns in certain abnormal mental states resulting due to some mental disorders such as stress.
Keywords: Functional brain network, Cognition, Mutual Information, Visualization, Change Detection

1 Introduction
The styles Data mining, a discovery process classifies and summarizes the data into useful
information by exploring the relationships between the data, eventually uncovers the patterns and
trends in the contents of the information (Jiawei, 2005) (Kaufmann & Rousseeuw, 2005) and
*

672

This work is being supported by the Cognitive Neuro-Engineering laboratory (CNEL), University of South Australia

Selection and peer-review under responsibility of the Scientiﬁc Programme Committee of ICCS 2014
c The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V.
doi:10.1016/j.procs.2014.05.060

Change Detection and Visualization of Functional Brain Networks ...

Vijayalakshmi et al.

visualizes the information content (Kard, Mackinlay, & Scheiderman, 1999) of the patterns and
images. The outcomes of computational analyses of large amounts of complex data in the forms of
graphs, lattices and sequences in various scientific experiments could be better explored and
understood using appropriate visualization techniques. Computer visualization is highly dependent on
the data visualization technique chosen and an inappropriate technique may result in misinterpretation
of the data that may lead to an incorrect/no decision (Johnson & Hansen, 2004)(Kard, Mackinlay, &
Scheiderman, 1999)(Thomas & Cook, 2005). The study of brain function expressed as coordinated
neural activity using electroencephalography (EEG) analysis not only allow scientists to develop new
theories regarding overall brain function, but also may help identify potential new treatments for
neurological disorders as well. By examining the EEG records using advanced computational
techniques, the communication between small neuronal collections (clusters) and other distant
assemblies in the brain’s cortex can be studied. Recent developments in the quantitative analysis of
complex networks, based largely on graph theory, have been rapidly translated to the studies of brain
network organization. The brain’s functional systems have features of complex networks such as
small-world topology and highly connected hubs. Graph topology can be quantitatively described by a
wide variety of complex network measures such as centrality, clustering coefficient and efficiency and
are hence used in this work for the analysis of EEG data (Koschu tzki, Lehmann, Peeters, Richter,
Tenfelde-Podehl, & Zlotowski, 2005) (Freeman, 1979). Software tools such as NetDraw that
integrates Pajek and Mage, a 3D network visualization tool are Social Network Visualization and
Analysis tools that are capable of only visualizing the network topology not the network metrics. The
processing and analysis of EEG data in time domain in terms of its signal amplitude has led to many
discoveries regarding the functional characteristics of various areas of the brain. The field of
computational neuroscience demands enhanced tools to quantify changing patterns of neuronal
interactions during cognitive activity and visualize the brain’s activity to understand and draw useful
conclusions on various functional aspects of the complex brain network despite the availability of the
common data visualization techniques such as decision tree, scatter plot, dendrogram, histogram, etc.
EEGLAB, an interactive Matlab toolbox offers a wealth of methods for visualizing and modeling
event-related brain dynamics (Delorme & Makeig, 2004). Topoplot function available in EEGLAB is
basically designed for visualizing power values in the default scale -1 to +1 mapped to the intensity of
the color at a particular region. It plots a topographic map of a scalp data field in a 2-D circular view
using interpolation on a fine Cartesian grid. The Headplot function plots a spherically-splined EEG
field map on a semi-realistic 3-D head model. In order to get a better idea of how the brain regions
function during different states, a three dimensional visualization called Headplot is used to display
the power of the signal in the color scale of -1 to +1. It also allows 3D rotation of the head image. This
work integrates complex network metrics, with the enhanced Topoplot and Headplot functions for
better understanding of functional brain network dynamics.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 outlines an overview of the literature of
visualization techniques to emphasize the need for data visualization. Section 3 describes the proposed
FBNAV tool that uses a novel methodology to detect the changing neural patterns during cognition
and the visualization techniques used. Section 4 presents the results and discussions on the proposed
techniques and Section 5 concludes with a summary discussion including important future research
directions for functional brain network analysis and visualization.

2 Tools for Visualizing Brain activity
The human brain is a complex system that exhibits rich spatiotemporal dynamics. While early
attempts to analyze EEG data relied on visual inspection of EEG records, the availability of huge
volume of data generated from EEG recordings drove the need for applying automation based on
pattern classification techniques with considerable success. Data visualization tools in general aim at

673

Change Detection and Visualization of Functional Brain Networks ...

Vijayalakshmi et al.

reducing the information overload by intelligent abstraction and visualization of the features of interest
relating to a particular state. One of the problems connected with the evaluation of EEG signals is that
it necessitates visual checking of such a recording by a Neuro-Physiologist and computer-aided data
analysis and visualization might be of great help to check long-term EEG recordings (Rieger, Kosar,
Lhotska, & Krajca, 2004).
VisBrain, developed for EEG data analysis involves a concept of dynamic 3D volumetric shape for
showing how the electrical signal changes through time. Brainstorm, a collaborative, open-source
application dedicated to MEG/EEG/sEEG/ECoG data analysis (visualization, processing and
advanced source modeling), shares a comprehensive set of user-friendly tools with the scientific
community using MEG/EEG as an experimental technique. It takes as input the MEG/EEG recordings
and provides options for preprocessing (epoching, detection of bad trials/bad channels, baseline
correction etc.,) and visualization (time series displays, data mapping on 2D/3D surfaces). It also
provides MRI visualization (generate surfaces from MRI volume) head modeling, source modeling
etc. BCILAB, an open-source MATLAB-based toolbox was built to address the need for BCI (Brain
Computer Interface) methods development and testing. The straight forward use of BCILAB to obtain
results compatible with the current BCI literature was demonstrated. (Kothe & Makeig, 2013).
It becomes apparent that efficient EEG visualization techniques facilitate the understanding of data
sets through an appropriate choice of visual metaphor. Despite various techniques often create distinct
imagery, emphasizing particular data characteristics or visualization goals, the existing EEG
visualizations do not always provide the desired insight (Anderson, Potter, Matzen, Shepherd, Preston,
& Silva, 2011). The visualization expert must not only determine an appropriate technique for the type
of data, but also ensure the chosen method will answer the questions posed by domain experts. The
following section discusses the proposed methodology used for change detection followed by
functional brain network visualization.

3 Functional Brain Network Visualization
The graph based computational network analysis quantitatively characterizes the structural and
functional architectures of the brain by modeling the electrodes (covering brain regions) as nodes
(vertices), and the physical connections (synapses or axonal projections) or functional
association/coherence among brain regions as edges (links) between them as presented by Bullmore
and (Bullmore & Sporns, 2009) (Newman, 2010) (Smit, Stam, Posthuma, Boomsma, & deGeus,
2008). Applying graph theory–based network analysis to explore brain connectivity patterns facilitates
characterizing functional connectivity patterns (Bullmore & Sporns, 2009) (Rubinov & Sporns, 2010).
In particular, a class of graph theory–based social network measures called centrality measures are
used to assess the centrality or functionally influential brain regions is receiving significant attention
(Koschu tzki, Lehmann, Peeters, Richter, Tenfelde-Podehl, & Zlotowski, 2005). Since centrality
measures take into account a given region’s relationship with the entire functional connectivity, these
measures allow us to capture the complexity of the functional connectivity of the brain as a whole.
The networks obtained using the nonlinear metrics for various states are an efficient representative to
measure and quantify cognitive activity in EEG based on the complex network centrality analysis
(Freeman, 1979). A detailed description of the proposed FBNAV tool and the novel methods for
visualizing the results obtained using various computational techniques applied on EEG data in two
and three dimensional spaces are described in the following sections.

674

Change Detection and Visualization of Functional Brain Networks ...

Vijayalakshmi et al.

3.1 Functional Brain Network Analysis and Visualization (FBNAV)
Tool
Our approach includes graph theoretical analysis, information theory and statistical measures of
complex networks to provide quantitative insights into detecting patterns and identifying significant
changes in functional brain networks during cognitive load conditions. The multichannel EEG data is
processed and graph databases in time and frequency domains are constructed using efficient linear
and non-linear statistical measures such as mutual information (Nandagopal, et al., 2013). The graphs
of baseline activity are compared with that of cognitive load conditions using various procedures.
Categorical data is a statistical data type consisting of categorical variables, used for observed data
whose value is one of a fixed number of nominal categories, or for data that has been converted into
that form, for example as grouped data. The observations of categorical data are summarized as counts
or cross tabulations, or of quantitative data, where observations might be directly observed counts of
events happening or they might counts of values that occur within given intervals (Le, 2009). The
changing neural patterns are analyzed and visualized after converting the graph data into categorical
attributes using a categorical analysis algorithm. Applying complex network metrics on the graph
databases (weighted and binary) clearly show changing patterns over time and during different brain
states demonstrating the behavior of functional brain networks. Visualization of the results using our
extended Topoplot and Headplot portray the computational results of neural interactions of the
multiple channels of electrodes thereby providing a better understanding of the functional association
of various brain regions in terms of these network metrics.
The FBNAV tool aims at providing techniques that are helpful in identifying the changing patterns
in neuronal clusters during cognition by applying a novel procedure to convert the pair-wise nonlinear
mutual information into categorical values, applying complex network metrics on the functional brain
networks constructed using non-linear statistical metrics and compare the results obtained with the
baseline activity using the enhanced visualization techniques. The framework of the proposed FBNAV
tool is illustrated in Figure 1.

675

Change Detection and Visualization of Functional Brain Networks ...

Vijayalakshmi et al.

Figure 1: Functional Brain Network Analysis and Visualization Tool Framework

3.2 Data Collection and Pre-processing
The EEG data collected from healthy adult males under University of South Australia HREC
approval (30855) is used for this study. EEG data collected from eight subjects namely P1 through P8
for baseline state of Eyes Open (EOP) and Cognitive Load state with audio distraction (Cog1) and
audio and video distraction (Cog2) has been used. All participants were aged between 25-50 years
and provided informed consent prior to participation. EEG data were acquired through a Nuamps
EEG amplifier using Curry V7 software (Dumermuth, 1974). Channel names used for various
analyses were based on the International 10-20 System: FP1, FP2, F7, F3, Fz, F4, F8, FT7, FC3, FCz,
FC4, FT8, T7, C3, Cz, C4, T8, TP7, CP3, CPz, CP4, TP8, T5, P3, Pz, P4, P8, O1, Oz, O2.
Pre-processing of the EEG data prior to analysis was done by band pass filtering from 0.5Hz to
70Hz. A notch filter of 50Hz was also applied during data collection to prevent contamination of the
signal by environmental electrical interference. Eye-blink artifacts were reduced using a VEOL
threshold of approximately 105 µV and further corrected post-recording in the Curry 7 software using
Independent Component Analysis (ICA). Bad blocks were initially removed manually following
visual inspection. Further removal of bad blocks was done with EEGLAB software from UCSD
which runs with MATLAB in the background (Delorme & Makeig, 2004).
The pair-wise association between each node with every other node measured using the
linear/non-linear measures of Pearson product-moment correlation coefficient (r)/magnitude squared
coherence (MSC)/Normalized Mutual Information (NMI) were considered as the edges (Estevez,

676

Change Detection and Visualization of Functional Brain Networks ...

Vijayalakshmi et al.

Tesmer, Perez, & Zurada, 2009). The resulting phase correlation graphs of eyes open (EOP) and
cognitive load (CogLoad) events were stored in a graph database. These graphs were then analysed to
identify and quantify the changing neuronal patterns during cognitive load condition.

3.3 Change Detection
In general, EEG of a human subject can be analyzed for various brain states – the baseline activity
when the subject does no specific task and various levels of cognitive loads when a specific task such
as responding to audio or video stimuli or both is assigned to the subject. It is of value to identify the
regions of the brain that have increased activity during cognitive load, to find out the percentage of
increase in activity, and to visualize this increased activity mapping to the brain surface. The NMI of
the region surrounding each electrode is computed for both baseline and cognitive loads. Extensive
analyses on the EEG data to measure qualitative as well as quantitative differences between the
baseline and various cognitive load activities would provide insights in to better understanding of the
changing brain activity.
The proposed change detection algorithm demonstrates the changing behaviour of the brain
regions by representing the relationships of the NMI values in ordinal scale. The NMI values in the
graph database for baseline and cognitive load conditions are converted in to k (user defined)
categorical bins with integer labels {1, 2, …,k} based on the global maximum and minimum values in
the NMI matrices of EOP and CogLoad states together. The algorithm for change detection applied on
categorical data is outlined as follows.
Algorithm: Change Detection
Input:Graphs of Eyes Open(EOP) and Cognitive Load (CogLoad) states
Output: Topoplot and Headplot depicting Cognitive Change
(i) Compute Normalized MI matrix for all pairs of electrodes for EOP, NMI(EOP)
(ii) Compute Normalized MI matrix for all pairs of electrodes for CogLoad, NMI(CogLoad)
(iii) Find maximum and minimum NMI values of NMI(EOP) and NMI(CogLoad), global
maximum (GlobalMAX) and global minimum (GlobalMIN) respectively.
GlobalMAX=max(max(NMI(EOP)), max(NMI(CogLoad))
GlobalMIN=min(min(NMI(EOP)), min(NMI(CogLoad))
(iv) Convert NMI values in EOP and CogLoad in to ordinal scale using ‘k’ bins of equal intervals
using GlobalMAX and GlobalMIN and construct the corresponding categorical matrices
EOPCat and CogLoadCat respectively
(v) Construct Cognitive Change (CogChange) matrix from the difference between EOPCat from
CogLoadCat obtained from Step (iv). The range of values in CogChange matrix is -(k-1) to
(k-1)
(vi) Plot the average cognitive change for each electrode using Topoplot/Headplot
The advantage of the change detection algorithm is that it works as a normalization measure to
categorise the NMI values in a common scale and is helpful for making comparisons across subjects.

3.4 Two Dimensional Data Visualization
The two dimensional visualization is often used to establish precise relationships that enable
analysis of details and precise navigation and distance measurements. Topoplot in EEG Lab is
commonly used for the two dimensional visualization of the power values of EEG data. The Topoplot
function has been extended to enable visualization of various network metrics and is described in the
following subsection. The topological parameters of the complex network can measure and assess the
state of the brain network (including global efficiency, clustering coefficient, shortest path length,
node degrees, small-world property, betweenness, transitivity, synchronization etc.) (Bullmore &
Sporns, 2009). To visualize these complex network metrics effectively, the Topoplot and Headplots
can be extended appropriately. The existing Topoplot fails to show the minor variations in these

677

Change Detection and Visualization of Functional Brain Networks ...

Vijayalakshmi et al.

results obtained. For instance, the important measure of local structure of a network which can be
calculated for individual nodes or for the entire network is the clustering coefficient(CC) that varies
between 0 and 1. High clustering coefficients means that neighbouring nodes are well interconnected
implying redundancy in connections, which protects the network against random error, i.e. the loss of
an individual node will have little impact on the structure of the network. Figure 2(a) and 2(b) show
the existing Topoplot and the extended Topoplot to visualize the clustering coefficient values of the
electrodes computed for a functional brain network as shown in Table 1.
Electrodes
FP1
FP2
F7
F3
Fz
F4
FP1

CC
0.90
0.80
0.00
0.30
0.59
0.51
0.90

Electrodes
F8
FT7
FC3
FCz
FC4
FT8
F8

CC Electrodes CC
1.00
T3
0.40
0.50
T4
0.88
0.85
TP7 0.70
0.74
TP8 0.59
0.55
C3
0.91
1.00
Cz
0.86
1.00
T3
0.40

Electrodes
C4
CP3
CPz
CP4
T5
P3
C4

CC
0.83
0.59
0.59
0.81
0.73
0.00
0.83

Electrodes
Pz
P4
T6
O1
Oz
O2
Pz

Table 1: Clustering Coefficients of Electrodes for Subject P2

It can be noted from Figure 2(a) that the regions of the brain around the electrode sites Fz, F4,
Fcz have similar color code meaning that these electrodes have almost the same clustering
coefficient. Since, the regions of the brain around these electrodes show slight variations from each
other, to visualize these minor changes accurately, the Topoplot function is enhanced for visualizing
complex network metrics. Inputs to the Extended Topoplot function are the data vector and electrode
locations. Data vector is a single column vector that has the corresponding data computed from the
complex network metrics for each electrode location. The implementation of the extended Topoplot
is such that the scale is adjusted based on the complex network metric used to visualize the changes
across the electrode sites depicting the complex network metric under study accurately. Figure 2(b)
shows a clear distinction among the brain regions surrounded by Fz, F4, Fcz using the extended
Topoplot that visualizes clustering coefficient values of Table 1.

The efficiency of these plots for comparison between baseline activity and cognitive load based on
complex network metrics are discussed in Section 4.
Figure 2(a): Topoplot

678

Figure 2(b): Extended Topoplot

3.5 Three Dimensional Visualization
Three Dimensional visualization is used to gain a qualitative understanding, facilitate surveying a
three dimensional space, and better understanding of interactions around the three dimensional shape.
Although the extended Topoplot described in section 3.4 provides an efficient picture of the complex
network metrics, it is a two-dimensional visualization technique. When the existing Headplot is used
to visualize complex network metrics, it also has the same disadvantages as Topoplot. Figure 3(a)
shows the different views of an existing Headplot to visualize clustering coefficient results shown in
Table 1.

Figure 3(a): Head Plot

Figure 3(b): Extended Headplot

From Figure 3(a), it is noted that it has the same scaling problem as that of Topoplot. To resolve
the problem in visualizing the complex network metrics using the Headplot an extended Headplot is
used as shown in Figure 3(b) for visualizing clustering coefficient of the various electrode sites. It
shows a clear distinction among the brain regions surrounded by Fz, F4, and Fcz.

4 Results and Discussion
It is evident from the histograms of the different states of brain activity that the frequency of NMI
values in the high valued bins is relatively high during cognitive load when compared to the baseline
state making it evident that the rate of information exchange in terms of NMI values is high in the
cognitive load state. The frequency distributions of the NMI values plotted across the data range 0 to 1
in to 4 bins arranged in increasing order of NMI values as shown in Figure 4 illustrates the changes in
the frequencies of various states of brain activity for subject P1. During EOP state the number
(frequency) of NMI values in the second bin is more when compared to that in the third bin. On the
other hand, during the cognitive load state with audio distraction (CogAdo/Cog1) and video
distraction included in addition to audio (CogAdoVdo/Cog2), the third bin has more values. This
depicts the fact that during cognitive activity, the frequency of exchange of information is high when
compared to that during baseline activity.

To measure this changing NMI values a novel change detection algorithm as described in Section
3 is applied. It first transfers the NMI values in the matrices of various states in to the ordinal scale
constituting four categories. The change in cognitive activity of each pair of electrode is computed by
Figure 4: Histogram for Frequency distribution of electrodes during EOP, Cog1 and Cog2

679

Change Detection and Visualization of Functional Brain Networks ...

Vijayalakshmi et al.

comparing the EOP and the respective cognitive load states and is represented as the CogChange
matrix and is plotted using Headplot in the range of -3 to +3. The change detection algorithm transfers
the NMI values in the matrices of EOP, Cog1/Cog2 states in to the ordinal scale constituting k=4
categories represented as EOPCat and CogCat respectively. The change in cognitive activity of each
pair of electrode is then computed by comparing the EOPCat and the respective CogCat matrices and
is stored in the cognitive change matrix represented as CogChange. The Topoplots of EOPCat and
CogCat matrices and the actual change during cognition represented by CogChange matrix for subject
P1 are shown in Figure 5(a) and Figure 5(b) respectively. These plots show the relatively high NMI
values during cognitive load when compared to the baseline activity at various electrode positions.
These plots show the relatively high NMI values during cognitive load when compared to the baseline
activity at various electrode positions.

Figure 5: Change Detection: EOP, CogAdo, and CogAdoVdo

Figure 6 shows the eight different views of degree centrality plotted for the subject P1 for the
states EOP and Cog1 respectively.

Figure 6: Degree centrality of the subject P1 for EOP Vs. Cog1

The functional brain network and associated changes detected during cognitive stimulation provide
a set of metrics to quantify brain function. The functional brain network together with its topology
illustrated in the above visualization give a better understanding of the activity of the brain regions
since it allows the rotation of the images in different perspectives. These results demonstrate not only
the efficacy of the analysis and visualization aspects of the FBNAV in unveiling the dynamics of the
brain function particularly during cognitive activity but may also contribute to better understanding of
neurophysiological states of brain. The FBNAV system as a bed side tool may assist Neurologists,
clinical neurophysiologist and Neuro Scientists to develop a deeper understanding of brain responses
to cognitive tasks. The visualization aspect of the FBNAV may pave way for further exploration of its

680

Change Detection and Visualization of Functional Brain Networks ...

Vijayalakshmi et al.

clinical application particularly in the neurophysiological assessment of cognitive impairment and
hence diagnosis of any related mental health issues. The clinical usefulness the FBNAV system could
be improved by appropriately modifying the algorithms for real time processing and visualization.

5 Conclusion and Future Work
The research work uses techniques from information visualization to explore time-varying
multichannel EEG data. The proposed FBNAV tool takes preprocessed EEG data as input and
computes statistical measures and complex network metrics and visualizes them in two and three
dimensional spaces. In addition, given the EEG data for baseline activity and during cognitive load,
the cognitive load induced changes across the scalp regions are detected and vizualised. This would
significantly help assess the level of cognitive activity taking place in the brain during a task. Further
work is planned to not only fine tune the analysis and visualization tool but most importantly explore
its clinical application by testing the tool against large data sets.

References
Anderson, E. W., Potter, K. C., Matzen, L. E., Shepherd, J. F., Preston, G. A., & Silva, C. T.
(2011). A User Study of Visualization Effectiveness using EEG and Cognitive Load. IEEE Symposium
on Visualization, 30.
Bigdely, S. N., Kreutz, D. K., Kothe, C., & Makeig, S. (2013). EyeCatch: Data-Mining over half a
million EEG independent components to construct a fully-automated eye-component detector.
National Centre for Biotechnology Information, 5845.
Bullmore, E., & Sporns, O. (2009). Complex brain networks: graph theoretical analysis of
structural and functional systems. Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 10, 186-198.
Bullmore, E., & Sporns, O. (2009). Complex brain networks: Graph theoretical analysis of
structural and functional systems. Nature Reviews, 67, 735-748.
Carlisle, D. (2010, April). graphicx: Enhanced support for graphics. Retrieved from
http://www.ctan.org/tex-archive/ help/Catalogue/entries/graphicx.html
Chaovalitwongse, W., Pardalos, P. M., Iasemidis, L. D., Suharitdamrong, W., Shiau, D. S., Dance,
L. K., et al. (2007). Data Mining in EEG: Application to Epileptic Brain Disorders. In Data Mining in
Biomedicine (Vol. 7, pp. 459-481). Springer US.
Delorme, A., & Makeig, S. (2004). EEGLAB: an open source toolbox for analysis of single-trial
EEG dynamics including independent component analysis. Journal of Neuroscience, 134, 9-21.
Dumermuth, G. (1974). Quantification and analysis of the EEG. Schweiz Arch Neurol Neurochir
Psychiatr, 115(2), 175-92.
Estevez, P. A., Tesmer, M., Perez, C. A., & Zurada, J. M. (2009). Normalized Mutual Information
Feature Selection. IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks.
Fekete, J., & Plaisant, C. (2002). Interactive Information Visualization of a Million Items.
Proceedings of IEEE Symposium on Information Visualization 2002, (pp. 117-124). Boston.
Freeman, L. C. (1979). Centrality in Social networks: Conceptual Clarification. Social Networks,
1, 215-239.
Healey, C. G., Booth, S. K., & Enns, J. T. (1995). Visualizing Real-Time Multivariate Data Using
Preattentive Processing. ACM Transactions on Modelling and Computer Simulation, 5, 190-221.
Honey, C. J., Sporns, O., Cammoun, L., Gigandet, X., Thiran, J. P., Meuli, R., et al. (2008).
Predicting Human Resting-State Functional Connectivity from Structural Connectivity. Proceedings
of National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, 106, pp. 2035-2040.

681

Change Detection and Visualization of Functional Brain Networks ...

Vijayalakshmi et al.

Jahankhani, P., Revett, K., & Kodogiannis, V. (2007). Data Mining and EEG Dataset with an
Emphasis on Dimensionality Reduction. Computational Intelligence and Data Mining, (pp. 405-412).
Honolulu.
Jiawei, H. (2005). Data Mining: Concepts and Techniques. Morgan Kaufmann.
Johnson, C., & Hansen, C. (2004). Visualization Handbook. Orlando, FL, United States of
America: Academic Press, Inc.
Juozapavicius, A., Bacevicius, G., Bugelskis, D., & Samaitiene, R. (2011). EEG Analysis Automatic Spike Detection. Nonlinear Analysis: Modelling and Control, 16, 375-386.
Kard, S. T., Mackinlay, J. D., & Scheiderman, B. (1999). Readings in Information Visualization:
Using Vision to Think. San Francisco: Morgan Kaufmann.
Kaufmann, L., & Rousseeuw, P. J. (2005). Finding Groups in Data: An Introduction to Cluster
Analysis. Wiley Series in Probability and Statistics.
Koschu tzki, D., Lehmann, A., Peeters, L., Richter, S., Tenfelde-Podehl, D., & Zlotowski, O.
(2005). Centrality indices, Network analysis: methodological foundations. New York:Springer-Verlag
, 16-61.
Kothe, C. A., & Makeig, S. (2013). BCILAB: A Platform for Brain-Computer Interface
Development. Journal of Neural Engineering, 10.
Kulish, V., Sourin, A., & Sourina, O. (2004). Human Electroencephalograms seen as Fractal Time
Series: Mathematical Analysis and Visualization. Computers in Biology and Medicine, 36, 291-302.
Le, C. T. (2009). Applied Categorical Data Analysis and Translational Research (2nd Edition ed.).
Wiley Publications.
Nandagopal, N. D., Vijayalakshmi, R., Cocks, B., Dahal, N., Dasari, N., Thilaga, M., et al. (2013).
Computational Techniques for Characterizing Cognition using EEG - New Approaches. 17th
International Conference in Knowledge Based and Intelligent Information and Engineering Systems KES2013.
Newman, M. (2010). Networks: An Introduction. Oxford University Press.
Rieger, J., Kosar, K., Lhotska, L., & Krajca, V. (2004). EEG Data and Data Analysis
Visualization. In Biological and Medical Data Analysis (Vol. 3337, pp. 39-48). Springer Berlin
Heidelberg.
Rubinov, M., & Sporns, O. (2010). Complex network measures of brain connectivity: uses and
interpretations. Neuroimage, 52, 1059-1069.
Smit, D., Stam, C., Posthuma, D., Boomsma, D., & deGeus, E. (2008). Heritability of “smallworld” networks in the brain: a graph theoretical analysis of resting state EEG functional connectivity.
Human Brain Mapping, 29, 1368-1378.
Sourina, O., Sourin, A., & Kulich, V. (2009). EEG Data Driven Animation and Its Application. In
Computer Vision/Computer Graphics Collaboration Techniques (Vol. 5496, pp. 380-388). Springer
Berlin Heidelberg.
Tadel, F., Baillet, S., Mosher, J. C., Pantazis, D., & Leahy, R. M. (2011). Brainstorm: A UserFriendly Application for MEG/EEG Analysis. Computational Intelligence and Neuroscience , 13.
Thomas, J. J., & Cook, K. A. (2005). Illuminating the Path: The Research and Development
Agenda for Visual Analytics. National Visualization and Analytics Ctr.

682

