Procedia Computer Science
Volume 29, 2014, Pages 2121–2126
ICCS 2014. 14th International Conference on Computational Science

Hierarchical emulation & data assimilation into
the sediment transport model
Nugzar Margvelashvili1, Eddy Campbell2, Laurence Murray2 and Emlyn1
Jones
1

2

CSIRO Marine and Atmospheric Research, Australia
CSIRO Mathematical & Information Science, Australia
Nugzar.margvelashvili@csiro.au
Abstract

Synthetic observations of the suspended sediment concentration in an idealised
macro-tidal estuary are assimilated into the 3d sediment transport model. The
assimilation scheme relies on fast and cheap surrogates of the complex model (called
emulators) to update the model’s state variables and its 2 parameters. A scenario with a
hierarchically structured emulator is contrasted to the scenario with a more conventional
non-hierarchical emulator. Numerical experiments indicate that for a given size of the
ensemble an emulator which replicates a hierarchical structure of the model tends to
provide a better approximation of that model. Improving the quality of the emulator
translates into the improved quality of the assimilation products.

1 Introduction
Fine-resolution nonlinear multi-disciplinary ocean models are computationally expensive and
take days, weeks and longer to simulate ocean processes over the time-scales relevant to
managemenet and research practices. These models are complex and difficult to calibrate. Often
only a handful of the model trajectories is available and large number of scenarios relevant to the
management or research objectives remain untested. Within the eReefs project, for example (the
five-year collaborative study aiming at a comprehensive coastal information system for the iconic
Great Barrier Reef, http://www.bom.gov.au/environment/activities/coastal-info.shtml), integrated
hydrodynamic, sediment transport and biogeochemical models can take weeks to simulate one

Selection and peer-review under responsibility of the Scientiﬁc Programme Committee of ICCS 2014
c The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V.

doi:10.1016/j.procs.2014.05.196

2121

Hierarchical emulation and data assimilation ...

Margvelashvili et al.

year. These computational expenses translate into the limited capacity of such models to underpin
decision-support for a wide range of management scenarios.
Emulators are fast and cheap approximations of complex models that run orders of
magnitude faster than the original model (simulator). Emulators have been successfully used as a
substitute for complex models in many industrial optimisation problems (Sacks et al., 1989). In
the field of the ocean modeling the progress in this direction is much less advanced largely
because of the high complexity of the ocean models. Despite this impediment, in recent years a
number of promising approaches to emulation of ocean models have been published in scence
literature (van der Merwe et al. 2007; Mattern et al., 2012; Margvelashvili and Campbell , 2012).
In this paper we employ emulators to assimilate synthetic observations of the suspended
sediment concentration in an idealised macro-tidal estuary into the 3d sediment transport model.
A scenario with a hierarchically structured emulator is contrasted to the scenario with a more
conventional non-hierarchical emulator. Numerical experiments indicate that replicating a
hierarchical structure of the model into its emulator reduces uncertainty of the emulator and
improves the quality of the data-assimilation products.

2 Method and scenarios
2.1

Sediment transport model

The sediment transport model simulates sinking, deposition and resuspension of multiply sizeclasses of suspended sediment (Margvelashvili et al., 2009). The model solves advection-diffusion
equations of the mass conservation of suspended and bottom sediments, and is driven by a fineresolution, non-linear, non-stationary, free-surface, hydrostatic approximation hydrodynamic
model (Herzfeld., 2006). Sediment particles settle on the seabed due to the gravity force and
resuspend into the water column whenever the bottom shear stresses, exerted by waves and
currents, exceed the critical shear stress of erosion. The resuspension and deposition fluxes are
parameterised with the Ariathurai and Krone (1976) formula. Estimates of the bottom shear stress,
required by this formula, are derived through the Grant and Madsen boundary layer model
(Madsen, 1994). Bottom roughness is scaled by ripple dimensions (Grant and Madsen, 1982)
which are considered the model input parameters. Sediments in benthic layers undergo vertical
mixing due to bioturbation, represented by local diffusion.
The numerical grid for sediment variables in the water column coincides with the numerical
grid for the hydrodynamic model. Within the bottom sediments, the model utilises a time-varying
sediment-thickness-adapted grid, with the top active sediment layer having constant thickness, and
the thickness of deeper layers varying with time to accommodate the deposited sediment.
Horizontal resolution within sediments follows the resolution of the water column grid.
The sediment transport model is initialised with a prescribed uniform distribution of sediments
in benthic layer, and zero initial concentration of the suspended sediment. The concentration of the
suspended sediment is set to a constant value at the upstream river boundary. At the marine
boundary the model utilises a free-flow boundary condition when the direction of currents is
downstream and no inflow of sediments when the direction of currents reverses.

2.2 Emulation and assimilation scheme
The emulation and assimilation scheme, in general, follows the approach of Margvelashvili &
Campbell (2012). The method involves ensemble forecasting step followed by the dimension

2122

Hierarchical emulation and data assimilation ...

Margvelashvili et al.

reduction, error-subspace propagation and Monte Carlo Markov Chain (MCMC) sampling steps
delivering updated parameters of the model into the final, analysis step. Observations are
assimilated sequentially in time over the predefined time-window (ti,ti+1 ). The model is initialised
with a prior distribution of parameters. After the forecast step the model dimension is reduced
through the Singular Value Decomposition (SVD) and then the Gaussian Process Modelling
(GPM) is employed to map decomposition coefficients from time ti to time ti+1 (i.e. GPM
implements an error-subspace propagation step). GPM and SVD give a fast and computationally
inexpensive approximation of the model called an emulator. Observations are assimilated into
this emulator through the combined Residual Sampling (RS, see Lui and Chen, 1998) and
Differential Evolution (DE, see Ter Braak, 2006) MCMC steps. Updated parameters initialize the
model analysis.

2.3 Numerical experiments
The model simulates suspended sediment transport in an idealised macrotidal estuary comprised
of a 2d vertical channel and 3d open coastal water (Figure 1). The water column is coupled to a
3d benthic layer of sediment deposits through the sediment resuspension and deposition fluxes.
Two classes of sediments are considered (C1 and C2) each having specific initial distribution in
the water column and in the seabed and specific boundary conditions.
Observations (obtained from the twin model run) are available only for the sum of C1 and C2
concentrations called Total Suspended Solids (TSS). These observations are given as 2 daily
snapshots of surface TSS (truth) contaminated with a measurement error (stdev 50% of the
value).
The model ensemble comprises 24 members. Spatial distributions are approximated through the
decomposition of the model solution into 3 basis functions per a state variable and per a timewindow. The assimilation scheme updates 4 state variables (2 classes of sediment in the water
column and 2 classes of sediment in the seabed) and two model parameters (settling velocity and
ripple height).

Figure 1: Time series of simulated TSS (top); a snapshot of simulated surface TSS (middle); and a snapshot
of simulated vertical cross section of TSS (bottom).

2123

Hierarchical emulation and data assimilation ...

Margvelashvili et al.

2.4 Scenarios
Two assimilation scenarios are considered, one with a hierarchical emulator of TSS and another
one with a non-hierarchical emulator (fig. 2). The nonhierarchical emulator expresses TSS at
observation time (ti+1) as a function of 4 state variables (suspended and benthic concentrations of
C1 and C2 at time ti ) and 2 parameters (settling velocity and ripple height). Each state variable is
approximated by 3 basis functions which results in a 14 dimensional design space (4x3+2).
A hierarchical emulator represents TSS at observation time (ti+1) as a function of C1 and C2
concentrations both taken at the same time (ti+1). C1 and C2 are in turn represented as functions
of the corresponding initial states and parameter at ti . C1, for example, is given as a function of
its initial distribution in the water column and in the seabed and 2 parameters. The maximum
dimension of the design space in this case is 8 (2x3+2).

Figure 2: Hierarchical (left) and non-hierarchical structures of the emulator

3 Results and Conclusions
Figure 3 illustrates comparison between emulated and true values of the SVD coefficients for the
first three modes of the decomposition. The quality of both hierarchical and non-hierarchical
emulators tends to deteriorate towards the higher modes of the decomposition (from left to right).
The hierarchical emulator provides persistently better fit to the model as compared to the nonhierarchical emulator.

Figure 3: Emulated decomposition coefficients of TSS fields vs true values for the first three modes of SVD
(red filled circles represent scenario with a hierarchical emulator).

The quality of the assimilation products have been assessed by estimating uncertainty of the model
parameters (Fig. 4) and evaluating ensemble mean error of the inferred TSS (Fig. 5). A
hierarchical emulator tends to produce lower spread of the estimated parameters and smaller bias

2124

Hierarchical emulation and data assimilation ...

Margvelashvili et al.

of the mean values. Replicating a hierarchical structure of the model into its emulator also
improves the quality of the inferred TSS fields (Fig. 5).

Figure 4: Estimated mean (thick colored lines) and the range of settling velocity vs truth (black lines) for
scenarios with hierarchical (left) and non-hierarchical emulators.

Figure 5: Ensemble mean error of the estimated TSS for the scenario with a hierarchical emulator (red) and
scenario with a non-hierarchical emulator (blue line with circle markers)

To conclude, the results of our study suggest that having imposed additional constraints on the
emulator through the hierarchical structuring of the dependencies between the state variables and
the parameters, improves the quality of the emulator and reduces uncertainty of the assimilation
products.

Acknowledgments
This work was funded through CSIRO CSS TCP “Biogeochemical Cycles” project and CSIRO
WfO Flagship. We also thank CMAR Coastal Modelling Group for access to an idealized estuary
model http://www.emg.cmar.csiro.au/www/en/emg.html

References
Ariathurai, R., Krone, R. B., (1976). Finite element model for cohesive sediment transport. J.
Hydraul. Div. ASCE, 104, HY2, pp. 323-328.
Grant, D., Madsen, O., (1982). Movable bed roughness in unsteady oscillatory flow. J. of
Geophysical Research, V. 87, N C1, pp. 469-481.

2125

Hierarchical emulation and data assimilation ...

Margvelashvili et al.

Herzfeld, M., (2006). An alternative coordinate system for solving finite difference ocean models.
Ocean Modelling, 14, pp. 174-196.
Lui, J., Chen, R., (1998). Sequential MonteCarlo methopds for dynamical systems. J. Amer. Stat.
Assoc., 90, 567-576.
Madsen, O. S., (1994). Spectral wave-current bottom boundary layer flows, in Coastal
Engineering 1994 Proceedings, 24th International Conference Coastal Engineering Research
Council/ASCE, pp. 384-398.
Margvelashvili, N., (2009). Stretched Eulerian coordinate model for coastal sediment transport.
Computers and Geosciences, 35, 1167-1176.
Margvelashvili, N., Campbell, E., (2012). Sequential data assimilation in fine resolution models
using error-subspace emulators: theory and preliminary evaluation. Journal of Marine Systems,
90, 13-22.
Margvelashvili N., Andrewartha J., Herzfeld M., Robson B., Brando V. (2013). Satellite data
assimilation and estimation of a 3d coastal sediment transport model using error-subspace
emulators. Journal Env. Modelling and Software, 40, 191-201.
Mattern, J.P., Fennel, K., Dowd, M., (2012). Estimating time-dependent parameters for a
biological ocean model using an emulator approach. Journal of Marine Systems 96-97, 32-47.
Sacks, J., Welch, W., Mitchell, T., Wynn, H., (1989). Design and analysis of computer
experiments. Statistical Science 4 (4), 409-423.
Ter Braak, C., (2006) A Markov Chain Monte Carlo version of the genetic algorithm Differential
Evolution: easy Bayesian computing for real parameter spaces Stat Comput 16, 239–249.
Van der Merwe, R., Leen, T., Lu, Z., Frolov, S., Baptista A. (2007). Fast neural network
surrogates for very high-dimensional physics-based models in computational oceanography.
Neural Networks 20, 462-478.

2126

