Procedia Computer Science
Volume 51, 2015, Pages 2157–2167
ICCS 2015 International Conference On Computational Science

Towards a Design Support System for Urban Walkability
Ivan Blecic, Arnaldo Cecchini, and Giuseppe A. Trunﬁo
Department of Architecture, Planning and Design, University of Sassari, Alghero, Italy
{ivan,cecchini,trunfio}@uniss.it

Abstract
In the paper we present an urban design support tool centered on pedestrian accessibility and
walkability of places. Diﬀerently from standard decision support systems developed for the purpose of evaluating given pre-deﬁned urban projects and designs, we address the inverse problem
of having the software system itself generate hypotheses of projects and designs, given some
(user-provided) objectives and constraints. Taking as a starting point a model for evaluating
walkability, we adapt the NSGA-II multi-objective genetic algorithm to produce the front of
non-dominated design alternatives to satisfy certain predeﬁned constraints. By way of example,
we brieﬂy present an application of the system to a real urban area.
Keywords: design support system, walkability, multiobjective genetic algorithm, urban design

1

Introduction

A range of formal methods have been proposed for the evaluation of the quality of urban space.
We also have recently constructed a planning decision-support system, Walkability Explorer
(WE), based on one such evaluation model focusing on the notion of walkability [2, 1], conceptualised in terms of (urban) capabilities. The point, through calculating a walkability score,
was to capture elements of how, how far and where to, people can walk from each point in
urban space. Rather than considering only walking distances and the availability of potential
attractors in space, this walkability score also incorporates qualitative features of urban environment relevant for people’s choice and willingness to walk, such as aspects of urban design,
physical features of the street network and land-use patterns along possible walking routes.
The use of such evaluation models as tools for the assessment of urban projects is straightforward: to estimate the eﬀectiveness of a project in terms of walkability, one codiﬁes both the
current situation and the project into the system, runs the model to compute walkability scores,
and then compares the results. But, what would it amount to to turn this around and address
the inverse problem? Here arises an interesting prospect to have the system itself generate
hypotheses of projects, given some (user-provided) objectives and constraints. There seems to
reside a potential for developing not only evaluative, but also such generative procedures, in
other words, to develop not only tools for assessing projects, but for designing them.
Selection and peer-review under responsibility of the Scientiﬁc Programme Committee of ICCS 2015
c The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V.

doi:10.1016/j.procs.2015.05.489

2157

Towards a Design Support System for Urban Walkability

Blecic, Cecchini and Trunﬁo

In this paper we present our ﬁrst take of that inverse problem, by oﬀering a possible transposition of our approach to evaluating walkability into one such generative procedure. This,
it turns out, remarkably increases operational and computational complexity. Given the, in
principle, large amount of combinatorial options and thus a vast search space of solutions, the
problem calls for speciﬁc search heuristics which proves to be an intricate challenge. There are
many diﬀerent routes one may try to take here. The proposal hereby presented must be seen
as a preliminary exploration of one among many such possible routes.

2

Evaluating Designs

To evaluate walkability [10], WE assumes that residents at diﬀerent points in the urban space
can walk through the street network to destinations of interest. Destinations are divided into
separate categories each representing a diﬀerent type of “urban opportunity” (e.g. green areas,
commercial and retail, services, etc.). The pedestrian behaviour is modelled as a maximisation
problem. We assume that a resident living at a point in space will walk to available destinations
a certain number of times, and will from that derive some beneﬁt β deﬁned by the following
constant elasticity of substitution (CES) function:
n

β(x) =
i=1

xρi

1
ρ

(1)

where n is the number of available destinations, xi is the number of times the resident visits
the i-th destination and 1/(1 − ρ) is the elasticity of substitution among destinations. The
constraint imposed upon the pedestrian is:
n

c i xi ≤ μ

(2)

i=1

where ci is the cost the pedestrian foregoes to reach the destination i, and μ is the available
budget with a conventional constant value.
The urban street network is represented by a graph G = E, V , where E is a set of edges and
V is a set of nodes (i.e. vertices) connected by edges. A path from an origin to a destination is
thus a set of interconnected edges of the graph G. Besides their length, we describe edges on
further attributes relevant for shaping the quality of the pedestrian accessibility, characteristics
such as physical features, urban design, presence (or absence) of variety of urban activities.
These attributes serve to model the “cost” of a path used in the constraint expression (2). We
deﬁne the cost of a path of p edges as:
⎡
⎞1 ⎤
⎛
p

c = c0 +

lk η k
k=1

with

⎢
ηk = ⎣1 − ⎝

na

r

γj ark,j ⎠

⎥
⎦

(3)

j=1

where c0 is a ﬁxed cost, lk is the length of the k-th edge in the path, and ηk is a cost factor. In
the latter na is the number of attributes, ak,j ∈ [0, 1] is the value of that edge’s j-th attribute,
γj = 1) and r is a parameter with 1/(1 − r) being
γj is the weight of the attribute (with
the elasticity of substitution among attributes. The expression above yields unit variable cost
of 1 when all attributes are at their lowest value (i.e. 0), and approaches 0 when attributes
approach the highest value of 1.
2158

Towards a Design Support System for Urban Walkability

Blecic, Cecchini and Trunﬁo

detail, given the set of destination nodes D, ﬁrst we modify the graph representing the street
network to account for all the Δηk included in P; then we use the procedure described above for
¯ Subsequently, we deﬁne the walkability
computing a walkability score wi for each node ni ∈ S.
¯
¯
score Walkability(S | P) of S as the average value of all wi .
Moreover, we assume that, for each edge ek , there exists a function Eﬀort k that provides
the minimum eﬀort (e.g., in terms of money, time, consensus etc.) required to achieve a given
decrease Δηk of the cost factor. Such a function may simply be estimated by experts, on the
basis of the condition of the street, which is represented by its current vector of attributes ak .
Alternatively, it can be pre-computed using an optimization process on the basis of Equation
(3) and by attributing an eﬀort to each variation of the attributes ak,j . We deﬁne the eﬀort
Eﬀort(P) of a design P as the sum of all the eﬀorts required by its edges.
The typical design problem consists of devising a set P which maximizes the beneﬁt
Walkability(S¯ | P) with the minimum Eﬀort(P). This could be accomplished through a trialand-error process in which the WE’s user ‘manually’ modiﬁes some suitable edges of the street
network and uses the automatic procedure described above to evaluate how such changes aﬀect
the walkability in the area of interest. However, the search space (i.e. the set of all possible
P below a given total eﬀort) is typically huge. Also, the eﬀects of edge changes on a complex
graph are not always straightforwardly intuitive and some suitable solutions may be non-trivial.
For these reasons, such a process based on trials and errors would hardly result in eﬃcient and
satisfactory design solutions.
In this paper, we propose an automatic process to support devising a design of walkability
improvements, as deﬁned by Equation (5). We formulate the design problem as the following
bi-objective constrained optimization problem:
⎧
Walkability(S¯ | P)
⎪
⎨ max
P⊂Π
min Eﬀort(P)
(6)
⎪
⎩ P⊂Π
η¯k < ηk + Δηk < 1 ∀ ek , Δηk ∈ P
where η¯k indicates the minimum achievable value for the cost factor of ek . Such minimum
values should be estimated on the basis of the physical conditions of the streets.
Problem (6) may be tackled by transforming it into a single-objective one through some
aggregation of the two functions Walkability and Eﬀort, with some parameters (i.e. weights)
grounded on the decision maker’s preferences. A major issue with such an approach is that it
requires an explicit statement of preferences on the two objectives by the decision makers prior
to the solution process, which must be repeated if the preferences change. For these reasons,
the approach adopted in this study consists of maintaining the two separate objectives and
generating a set of solutions to be presented to the decision maker for consideration. With
this approach we construct a set of non-dominated (or eﬃcient) solutions [11] using a suitable
metaheuristic. Then, the solution eventually chosen by the decision maker is obtained by
examining and exploring the various trade-oﬀs between the achieved walkability improvement
and the corresponding eﬀort in the set of non-dominated solutions. This latter phase can be
carried out in a systematized way as in the Surrogate Worth Tradeoﬀ method [8].

3.1

Evolutionary Optimization of Designs

In the current version of WE, the metaheuristic adopted for solving problem (6) is the multiobjective Genetic Algorithm [4, 7] NSGA-II [5], which has been extensively investigated and
successfully tested [5, 9, 3]. In particular, we have adapted the NSGA-II algorithm to our
purpose, by devising speciﬁc recombination and mutation operators.
2162

Towards a Design Support System for Urban Walkability

Blecic, Cecchini and Trunﬁo

The GA is used to evolve a randomly initialized population of np candidate designs. Each
design P is encoded as an array of integers p. In particular, each component pi of p encodes
both the id of a street edge and the corresponding variation Δη of its cost factor. To limit the
size of the search space, without any signiﬁcant inﬂuence on the accuracy of results, for Δη we
allow only a limited number of diﬀerent values in the interval ]−1, 0[.
To avoid the aggregation of multiple objectives, the comparison of two candidate solutions
in the multi-objective GA is achieved using the concepts of Pareto’s optimality and dominance.
In particular, considering the optimization problem (6), we say that Pi dominates Pj if the ﬁrst
is not inferior to Pj in both objectives, and, additionally, there is at least one objective where
it is better
Before the beginning of the optimization process, we perform an analysis of walkability considering the source nodes in S¯ and the current state of the urban street network. In particular,
in order to speed up the subsequent process, for each node in S¯ we store the data structures
obtained by the Dijkstra’s shortest path algorithm during such a preliminary walkability assessment (i.e. in practice we keep the cheapest paths from each origin node in S¯ to each node
in the graph).
The initial population is composed of np random individuals, each with a diﬀerent number
of edges within a preﬁxed maximum: each edge of a candidate solution is randomly drawn from
a suitable set E ∗ ⊂ E. Ideally, in order to speed up the convergence process, E ∗ should not
include streets with very low probability of aﬀecting the walkability to maximise. In the current
implementation, we construct E ∗ as follows: ﬁrst we include all the cheapest paths between each
couple of nodes ni ∈ S¯ and dj ∈ D; then, we make a ﬁrst order expansion of E ∗ by including
all the edges linked to the edges already in E ∗ . The cost factor improvement Δη of each edge
in the initial population is chosen at random in accordance with the constraint in problem (6).
The recombination operator, which is applied with probability c , is deﬁned as follows: ﬁrst
we decode the two selected ‘parents’ pi and pj into the two candidate solutions Pi and Pj ,
respectively; then we compute the set P¯ = Pi ∪ Pj ; subsequently, we randomly split the set
P¯ into two new candidate solutions Pi∗ and Pj∗ ; ﬁnally, the latter individuals are encoded and
stored into the oﬀspring population. After the recombination operator, for each oﬀspring P ∗
we apply the following mutation operators:
• edge removal : each edge of the individual can be removed with probability

r;

• edge insertion: an edge can be added to the individual with probability a . To promote a
gradual exploration of the graph, the additional street edge is randomly chosen between
the elements of E linked to an edge which is already included in P ∗ . The value of Δη for
the new edge is randomly initialized taking into account the constraint in problem (6);
• random variation of cost factor reduction: for each element e, Δη ∈ P ∗ , the value of
Δη is randomly changed, in accordance with the bound constraint, with probability v .
To evaluate the new individuals at each generations, we use an incremental update of the data
structure obtained during the preliminary walkability assessment. To this purpose, we adopted
the algorithm proposed in [12] which allows to avoid repeating a complete Dijkstra’s search for
¯
each node in S.

4

Preliminary Results on a Case Study

To evaluate its feasibility, the approach described above was applied to a dataset representing
Alghero, a town of about 40,000 inhabitants, in North-East Sardinia (Italy). To generate the
2163

Towards a Design Support System for Urban Walkability

5

Blecic, Cecchini and Trunﬁo

Conclusions and Future Work

Two main conclusions may be drawn from this preliminary exploration of the possibility of a
design support system. There seems to be a promising perspective for tools which not only
evaluate but also assist urban design processes, centred on accessibility and walkability of
places. It is important to note that this goes beyond the problems of standard road network
graph optimization since, as we have seen in our case, it involves “thicker” and multidimensional
description of the urban environment.
On the other hand, such multidimensionality signiﬁcantly raises the bar of modelling and
computational complexity. Although we have shown a possible route of reduction of the problem
to make it computationally more tractable, further investigation is necessary to more systematically explore if and which other approaches and search heuristics may perhaps prove to be
better suited for the task. Given the potential service such tools may oﬀer for the future urban
design and planning, it seems to us a research line worth pursuing.

References
[1] Ivan Blecic, Arnaldo Cecchini, Tania Congiu, Giovanna Fancello, and Giuseppe A. Trunﬁo. Evaluating walkability: A capability-wise planning and design support system. International Journal
of Geographical Information Science, (in press), 2015.
[2] Ivan Blecic, Arnaldo Cecchini, Tanja Congiu, Giovanna Fancello, and Giuseppe A. Trunﬁo. Walkability explorer: An evaluation and design support tool for walkability. volume 8582 of Lecture
Notes in Computer Science, pages 511–521. Springer, 2014.
[3] Ivan Blecic, Arnaldo Cecchini, and Giuseppe A. Trunﬁo. A decision support tool coupling a causal
model and a multi-objective genetic algorithm. Appl. Intell., 26(2):125–137, 2007.
[4] C.A. Coello Coello, D.A. Van Veldhuizen, and G.B. Lamont. Evolutionary Algorithms for Solving
Multi-Objective Problems. Kluwer Academic Publishers, 2002.
[5] Kalyanmoy Deb, Samir Agrawal, Amrit Pratap, and T. Meyarivan. A fast and elitist multiobjective
genetic algorithm: NSGA-II. IEEE Trans. Evolutionary Computation, 6(2):182–197, 2002.
[6] E.W. Dijkstra. A note on two problems in connexion with graphs. Numerische Mathematik,
1(1):269–271, 1959.
[7] C.M. Fonseca and P.J. Fleming. An overview of evolutionary algorithms in multiobjective optimization. Evolutionary Computation, 3(1):1–16, 1995.
[8] Yacov Y. Haimes and Warren A. Hall. Multiobjectives in water resource systems analysis: The
surrogate worth trade oﬀ method. Water Resources Research, 10(4):615–624, 1974.
[9] Mikkel T. Jensen. Reducing the run-time complexity of multiobjective eas: The nsga-ii and other
algorithms. IEEE Trans. Evolutionary Computation, 7(5):503–515, 2003.
[10] A.D. Livi Smith and K. J. Clifton. Issues and methods in capturing pedestrian behaviours, attitudes and perceptions: Experiences with a community based walkability survey. In Transportation
Research Board, Annual Meeting, 2004.
[11] V. Pareto. Cours d’Economie Politique, volume I, II. F. Rouge, Lausanne, 1896.
[12] G. Ramalingam and Thomas Reps. An incremental algorithm for a generalization of the shortestpath problem. Journal of Algorithms, 21(2):267 – 305, 1996.

2167

