Procedia Computer Science
Volume 29, 2014, Pages 659–671
ICCS 2014. 14th International Conference on Computational Science

Motor learning in physical interfaces for computational
problem solving
Rohan McAdam
Centre for Complex Systems, Charles Sturt University, Panorama Ave, Bathurst, 2795, Australia
rmcadam@csu.edu.au

Abstract
Continuous Interactive Simulation (CIS) maps computational problems concerning the control of dynamical systems to physical tasks in a 3D virtual environment for users to perform.
However, deciding on the best mapping for a particular problem is not straightforward. This
paper considers how a motor learning perspective can assist when designing such mappings. To
examine this issue an experiment was performed to compare an arbitrary mapping with one
designed by considering a range of motor learning factors. The particular problem studied was
a nonlinear policy setting problem from economics. The results show that choices about how a
problem is presented can indeed have a large eﬀect on the ability of users to solve the problem.
As a result we recommend the development of guidelines for the application of CIS based on
motor learning considerations.
Keywords: virtual reality, simulation, dynamical systems, problem solving, motor learning

1

Introduction

Nonlinear dynamical systems models are used in many ﬁelds, from physics to geology, biology,
economics, and sociology. Techniques for analyzing and controlling such systems is an active
area of research, but there are still many cases where existing techniques either do not apply
or, where they do apply, can be diﬃcult for non-specialists to use. Humans, however, are able
to understand and manipulate complex nonlinear dynamical systems in the context of physical
movement [18]. Continuous Interactive Simulation (CIS) aims to leverage this ability in order to
solve problems concerning the control of arbitrary dynamical systems. In essence, CIS presents
a dynamical system to users as an object in a virtual 3D environment whose behaviour is driven
by a simulation of the system. Users are able to steer the object by manipulating parameters of
the system in real time through physical action. Control problems become tasks in which the
goal is to steer the object in speciﬁed ways. CIS turns what would otherwise be a computational
problem requiring specialist knowledge and tools into a physical skill anyone can try their hand
at. Previous work has described the basic mechanisms of CIS [9], the exploration of system
Selection and peer-review under responsibility of the Scientiﬁc Programme Committee of ICCS 2014
c The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V.
doi:10.1016/j.procs.2014.05.059

659

Motor learning for problem solving

McAdam

Figure 1: A simple CIS environment. Each axis of a stereoscopic three-dimensional visual scene
represents a state variable of an arbitrary dynamical system. The position of a ball represents
the current state of the system, x. The ball moves through space as the state of the system
evolves. Three translational axes of haptic pen are mapped onto the control variables of the
system, u. As the user moves the pen the control variables change, inﬂuencing the unfolding
dynamics of the system and the motion of the ball. The box represents a target state for the
system, x∗ . The problem of how to drive the system to the target state appears to a user as a
physical skill – “put the ball in box”. This simple CIS environment supports systems of up to
three state variables and three control variables.

properties in a non-linear mechanical system [11], and the solution of a control problem in a
nonlinear biological system [10].
There are many decisions to make when presenting a problem to users in a CIS environment.
What features of the system should be presented to users? How should those features be
presented? How should the participation of users in the problem solving process be organised?
How much time do they need to solve a problem? How should that time be organised? Ideally,
we would like a set of guidelines that help make these sorts of decisions in a systematic way that
improves the likelihood that users will be able to produce useful solutions to a given problem.
Since the human ability to learn new physical skills is underpinned by the process of motor
learning it would seem natural to consider a motor learning and performance perspective as
a basis on which to develop guidelines for the application of CIS. This paper examines how a
motor learning perspective can assist in determining how to map a problem to be solved into a
CIS environment.
This paper is organised as follows. Section 2 characterises problem solving in CIS in motor
learning terms. Section 3 outlines motor learning factors that may aﬀect the problem solving
process. Section 4 introduces a particular problem in economic dynamics used to explore the
problem solving process in this paper. Section 5 describes an experiment in which users solve
the problem using two diﬀerent presentations of the problem – a default presentation and a
presentation modiﬁed according to the motor learning considerations outlined in section 3.
Finally, section 6 provides a discussion of the results and their implications for the future
development of CIS.
660

Motor learning for problem solving

2

McAdam

Problem solving as motor learning

Consider a continuous dynamical system of the general form
x˙ = f (x(t), u(t), t)

(1)

where f is a function of a vector of variables, x, that represent the state of the system,
a vector of control variables, u, and time1 . For models of real world systems this function is
generally nonlinear and may involve additional complexities such as various forms of constraints,
delays, or disturbances.
Many problems concerning such systems involve determining the controls, u∗ (t), that steer a
system toward a desired state, x∗ , often with additional requirements such as doing so as quickly
as possible, as smoothly as possible, or with as little control action as possible. There are a
variety of analytic and computational techniques that may be applied to a problem like this,
such as feedback control, model-based control, and optimal control, although these techniques
often involve assumptions or technical complexities that limit their application. CIS turns such
a problem into a physical task by representing the current state of the system, x, with attributes
(location, orientation, size, colour, etc) of objects in a 3D virtual environment. As a simulation
of the system proceeds, these objects move and change according to the dynamics of the system.
Users directly and continuously manipulate the control variables, u, using a continuous input
device (haptic pen, gesture tracking etc) in order to inﬂuence the motion of the objects and, if
possible, steer the system toward the desired state, x∗ . If a user is able to steer the system to
the desired state their movement actions in doing so constitute a solution to the problem, u∗ (t).
The general arrangement of the particular CIS environment used in this paper is illustrated in
ﬁg 1.
In the study of human movement control a task in which the goal is to steer a continously
changing system over a period of time with respect to some reference is known as a continuous
tracking task [14]. In fact, the general arrangement shown in ﬁg 1 in which the state of a dynamic
system is represented by objects in a computer-based visualization with user interaction via a
continuous input device is commonly used in the study of human tracking tasks. The key
diﬀerence is in the choice of underlying system dynamics and task to be performed. In human
tracking studies the dynamics and the details of the task are typically chosen to illuminate
particular aspects of human movement behaviour, such as speed versus accuracy tradeoﬀs. In
CIS the dynamics and task are determined by the problem under study.
A movement action with a particular goal is referred to as a skill [8]. In general, humans are
not preprogrammed to perform particular skills. Instead, humans have an innate capacity to
acquire the ability to perform a skill through the process of motor learning. The key observable
characteristic of the motor learning process is systematic improvement in skill performance with
repeated practice that persists over time. CIS presents a problem as a skill in which the goal
is to manipulate a system in a speciﬁed way. As with any novel physical situation users will
need to acquire the necessary skill to solve the problem through practice. If a user can learn
the necessary skill they can then generate solutions to the problem through performance of the
skill. Motor learning is, in eﬀect, the problem solving mechanism in CIS.

1 CIS is not limited to dynamical systems deﬁned in this way. Any system that can be simulated in discrete
time steps can be used.

661

Motor learning for problem solving

3

McAdam

Factors aﬀecting motor learning and performance

There are a great many factors that can aﬀect motor learning and performance. Here we focus
on those that relate to a user’s direct experience of a physical situation, such as whether its
response to movement action meets their expectations based on experience in other situations,
how quickly it responds to movement action, and the eﬀect of human perceptual biases. To
begin to explore the relevance of these factors to the application of CIS we focus on the basic
decisions to be made when mapping a problem into the CIS environment shown in ﬁg 1. These
decisions include the selection, ordering, and scaling of state and control variables, and the rate
at which the simulation proceeds in real time. The following is a brief summary of these factors.
1. Selection of state variables – Which of the state variables should be included in the visual
representation of the system’s state? All of them or a subset?
2. Ordering of state variables – To which axes in the visual representation should the selected
state variables be assigned?
3. Scaling of state variables – What region of the system’s state space should be included in
the visual representation?
4. Selection of control variables – Which of the control variables should be mapped onto the
haptic pen for user manipulation? All of them or a subset?
5. Ordering of control variables – To which axes of the haptic pen should the selected control
variables be assigned?
6. Scaling of control variables – What ranges of the control variables should be assigned to
the range of movement of the haptic pen?
7. Simulation time scale – How many time periods, t, should be simulated per real time
second?
The decisions made for each of these have a direct bearing on the the user’s experience of the
system by changing the direction, extent, and speed of motion of the ball and the direction and
sensitivity to control input. In motor learning and performance terms these aspects impact on
important factors such as stimulus-response compatibility, movement degrees-of-freedom, speed
versus accuracy, control stability, perceptual complexity and perceptual biases. The following
is a brief summary of these factors and their relation to the decisions that need to be made
when presenting a problem in CIS.
1. Stimulus-reponse compatibility – Stimulus-Response (S-R) compatibility refers to the extent to which the response of a system matches the expectations of a user [13]. When
presented with a novel situation a user has no alternative but to base their actions on
their experience in similar situations. While a user is unlikely to have encountered the
dynamics of an arbitrary dynamical system before, the physical arrangement of the CIS
interface of ﬁg 1 is not unfamiliar – an object on a computer screen and an input device
with which to manipulate it. In such situations there is a population stereotype that leads
users to expect that on-screen objects will move in the same direction as the input device
[17]. Users will very likely approach any system presented in this CIS environment with
this same expectation. It will be more diﬃcult for users to learn how to manipulate the
system if it behaves contrary to this expectation. S-R compatibility in our CIS environment is determined in large part by the order in which variables are assigned to axes in
the visual scene and on the input device.
662

Motor learning for problem solving

McAdam

2. Movement degrees-of-freedom – The complexity of movement actions has an impact on
motor learning and performance. Each control variable assigned to the input device
introduces an additional movement degree-of-freedom. Coordinating movement becomes
more diﬃcult as the degrees-of-freedom increase requiring additional learning eﬀort [1].
3. Speed vs accuracy – There is a well-known tradeoﬀ between speed and accuracy in human
movement. Information processing limitations in the central nervous system make it more
diﬃcult to perform tasks that require both speed and accuracy [4, 12]. The speed or accuracy required to solve a particular problem is determined by the scaling of state variables
and the rate at which the simulation proceeds. Scaling state variables determines the size
of target regions. The rate at which the simulation proceeds determines how quickly the
system will respond to movement actions and hence the rate at which movement actions
need to be made.
4. Control stability – The user and the dynamical system they are controlling form a coupled
control system. The stability of this coupled system depends on matching the response
of the dynamical system to the characteristics of the human motor control system. Instabilities such as user induced oscillations can arise when the system responds too quickly
to user control input making the system harder to control [7].
5. Complexity of the visual scene – The complexity of a visual scene has an impact on both
the mental eﬀort required to process the scene [16] and the ability of a subject to attend
to the speciﬁc features in the scene that are relevant to solving the problem at hand [19].
The primary source of this complexity in our simple CIS environment is the number of
state variables selected for inclusion in the visual scene. Each additional state variable
adds an extra dimension to the motion of the ball. It may be possible to exclude certain
state variables if they do not provide information that is relevant to solving a particular
problem2 .
6. Perceptual biases – Human visual perception is a complex phenomenon and there are a
number of biases that aﬀect perception of motion in space. Of particular relevance here
are biases concerning perception of motion along the z axis. In general, perception of
motion along the x and y axes is less prone to bias and state variables should be assigned
to these in preference to the z axis [16].
This is, of course, a scant outline of a complex subject and there are numerous other factors
that aﬀect motor learning, but it is suﬃcient to get a sense for the sorts of factors brought to
light by taking a motor learning perspective on problem solving in CIS. If the motor learning
perspective is an appropriate foundation on which to base guidelines for the application of CIS
we would expect that the ability of users to solve a problem would be enhanced by presenting the
problem in a way that takes factors such as these into account. The following sections outline
an experiment to investigate the relevance of motor learning considerations to the practical
application of CIS to the solution of a problem in the control of a non-trivial nonlinear dynamical
system.

2 Selecting a subset of state variables would be required in cases where the number of state variables exceeds the number of dimensions provided by the CIS environment, which is three in our simple example CIS
environment.

663

Motor learning for problem solving

Policy A (stable)

α
0.03

a
1.03

McAdam
b
0.60

g
0.05

s
1

β
0.001

γ
1

λ
0.08

rˆ
1

0.9

θ
5

τ
0.06

Table 1: Parameters of the dynamic IS-LM system.

4

Getting to grips with economics

In order to investigate the problem solving process in CIS we chose a non-trivial non-linear
dynamical system from economics – a dynamic IS-LM model with delayed collection of tax
revenues [2]. The dynamical system is deﬁned using the following system of delay diﬀerential
equations
⎧
|Y (t)|a
⎪
⎪
⎪Y˙ (t) = α A |r(t)|b + g − s[(1 − (1 − )τ )Y (t) − τ Y (t − θ)] − τ [(1 − )Y (t) + Y (t − θ)] ,
⎪
⎨
λ
r(t)
˙ = β γY (t) + r(t)−ˆ
⎪
r − M (t) ,
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎩ ˙
M (t) = g − τ (1 − )Y (t) + Y (t − θ) .

(2)
The state of the system, x, is deﬁned by the vector [Y, r, M ] whose elements represent
investment, interest rates, and money supply respectively. The parameters α, a, b, g, s, β, γ, λ,
and rˆ represent various economic features. The parameters τ , , and θ represent tax policy – tax
rate, the proportion of tax revenues aﬀected by delayed collection, and the delay in collection
respectively. Under the economic settings shown in table 1 (Policy A) the system settles into a
stable equilibrium at x∗ = [8.3351, 0.2403, 4.5954] from an initial condition of x = [5.0, 5.0, 2.0].
If, under a new policy (Policy B), the time delay in collecting tax revenues, θ, is increased
from 5 to 20 time periods the behaviour of the system changes and the previously stable
equilibrium becomes an unstable equilibrium [2]. The problem we investigate here is, under
this new policy, achieve the same economic outcome that would have been achieved under
Policy A. Since the system is unstable under Policy B this will only be possible through active
control of, in this case, the tax rate. In other words, we want to stabilize the system at x∗
through manipulation of the parameter τ , where 0.03 ≤ τ ≤ 0.09. We add an additional
requirement that we want the system stablized as quickly as possible. This problem can be
stated mathematically as ﬁnding a tax policy, τ ∗ (t), that minimizes the error of the system
from the desired state, i.e., minimize
T
0

|x∗ − x(t)|dt

(3)

over the time period T .
This problem was mapped into the CIS enviroment shown in ﬁg 1 in which the position
of the ball in space represented the state of the system. The ball was initially placed at the
initial condition, x0 . Once the simulation was started the ball moved according to the evolving
dynamics of the system. The simulation was performed using a Runge-Kutta 4th order solver
with delayed variables. The position of the haptic pen was mapped to the value of the taxation
rate, τ . As the user moved the pen, the taxation rate changed altering the evolving dynamics
of the system. A box was placed at the target state, x∗ . The task for the user was to “put the
ball in the box as quickly as possible and keep it there”. The speciﬁc details of how the problem
was mapped into the CIS environment was the subject of the experiment described below.
664

Motor learning for problem solving

5

McAdam

Experiment

In order to explore the relevance of motor learning considerations to problem solving in CIS
an experiment was conducted in which users were presented with one of two presentations of
the problem. In the ﬁrst, users were presented with a default presentation of the problem in
which somewhat arbitrary choices were made for each of the decisions described in section 3.
In the second, these decisions were made by taking the relevant motor learning considerations
into account.

5.1

Default problem presentation

In the default presentation of the problem decisions on variable selection, ordering and scaling,
and the time scale of the simulation were made as simply as possible. All state and control
variables were included. State variables were mapped to the x, y, and z axes of the visual
representation in the order in which they appear in equation 2. The state variables were scaled
so that the region surrounding the initial condition and the equilibrium state ﬁlled the visual
scene. The range of control variable, τ , was mapped to the full range of movement of the x
axis of the haptic pen and the pen was constrained with force feedback to move only in the
x direction. The time scale of the simulation was set so that 20 time periods were simulated
in 1 second of real time, which allowed the stable version of the system (Policy A) to settle
into equilibrium in 10 seconds of real time – a reasonable period for a task users would need
to repeatedly practise. The ball was placed initially at x0 and the target box was placed at
x∗ . The instruction to the subjects was to “put the ball in the box as quickly as possible and
keep it there”. The task ended if a subject managed to stabilize the system (kept the center of
the ball inside the box) for 40 consecutive simulated time periods or terminated automatically
if the subject failed to stabilize the system after 200 simulated time periods (2 seconds and 10
seconds of real time, respectively). This default presentation of the system is summamrised in
table 2 and illustrated in ﬁg 2.

5.2

Modiﬁed problem presentation

The default presentation was modiﬁed according to the considerations outlined in section 3
based on observations during a small pilot study in which two subjects attempted to solve the
problem using the default presentation.
In the region of the unstable equilibrium the system maintains an approximately constant
value of r, regardless of changes in the tax rate, τ . For this reason, the variable r was dropped
from the presentation of the system, which then became two-dimensional in the variables Y
and M , with Y mapped to the x-axis of the display and M mapped to the y-axis. This
simpliﬁcation was useful for three reasons. Firstly, it reduced the complexity of the visual scene
making it easier for subjects to attend to the information relevant to solving the problem at
hand. Secondly, the motion of the ball was now entirely in the x-y plane avoiding any perceptual
biases associated with the z-axis. Finally, it helped with the biggest concern expressed by the
pilot subjects – a signiﬁcant degree of S-R incompatibility in the response of the system.
Subjects, naturally, ﬁrst approach the IS-LM system with the basic expectation that moving
the pen will cause the ball to respond in the same direction. The default presentation of the
system violates this basic expectation in two ways. Firstly, the pen only moves in one dimension
(left-right), but the ball that it controls moves in three dimensions. Subjects initially assumed
that to control a ball moving in three dimensions they would need to be able to move the pen in
three dimensions. Reducing the presentation from three to two dimensions lessens this concern.
665

Motor learning for problem solving

State variables
Selection
Ordering
Scaling
Control variables
Selection
Ordering
Scaling
Time scale

McAdam

Y , r, M
Y ⇒ x, r ⇒ y, M ⇒ z
0 ≤ Y ≤ 10, 0 ≤ r ≤ 10,
0 ≤ M ≤ 10
τ
τ ⇒x
0.03 ≤ τ ≤ 0.09
1 real time second = 20t

Table 2: Default problem presentation

Figure 2: Subject’s view of the default problem presentation. Labels and freeze frame reconstruction of system trajectory under the
stable Policy A shown for illustration.

Secondly, moving the pen to the right caused the ball to accelerate toward the left, and vice
versa, the opposite of what users were expecting. Reversing the sign of the mapping of the
input variable, τ , to the x-axis input device addressed this concern3 .
Finally, under the default simulation time scale the pilot subjects tended to overshoot and
undershoot the target position in a series of oscillations that were diﬃcult to eliminate. Under
the modiﬁed presentation the time scale of the simulation was reduced so that 1 second of real
time corresponded to 10 periods of simulated time in order to slow the response of the system
to subject input and reduce the likelihood of subject induced oscillations in the motion of the
ball.
Again, the instruction to the subjects was to “put the ball in the box as quickly as possible
and keep it there”. If they managed to stabilise the system for a period of four seconds the task
terminated. The task terminated automatically after 20 seconds. These longer time periods
were to ensure the same simulated time periods under the modiﬁed time scale. This modiﬁed
presentation of the system is summarised in table 3 and illustrated in ﬁg 3.

5.3

Method

The experiment employed a standard motor learning retention test methodology in which subject performance was recorded over an initial series of skill acquisition trials and then again 24
hours later in a series of retention trials [14]. 28 subjects were recruited from a population of
oﬃce workers aged between 25 and 50. 25 subjects were male and 3 female. All subjects but 2
were right handed. All subjects had normal stereoscopic vision. The subjects were randomly
assigned to either the default or the modiﬁed presentation with 14 subjects in each group.
Each subject was asked to perform the task of “putting the ball in the box as quickly as
3A

666

similar result could also have been achieved by changing the signs of the state variable ordering.

Motor learning for problem solving

State variables
Selection
Ordering
Scaling
Control variables
Selection
Ordering
Scaling
Time scale

McAdam

Y, M
Y ⇒ x, M ⇒ y
0 ≤ Y ≤ 10, 0 ≤ M ≤ 10
τ
τ ⇒ −x
0.03 ≤ τ ≤ 0.09
1 real time second = 10t

Table 3: Modiﬁed problem presentation

Figure 3: Subject’s view of the modifed problem presentation. Labels and freeze frame reconstruction of system trajectory under the
stable Policy A shown for illustration.

possible” 80 times in the initial acquisition session. The 80 acquisition trials were performed
in four blocks of 20 trials with a 60 second break between blocks. Subjects were then asked
to return 24 hours later to perform an additional 20 retention trials. There were no prepractice trials – subjects were exposed to their assigned presentation from the very ﬁrst trial.
Subject performance on each trial was calculated using equation 3. Subjects were not given
any information about the nature of the underlying system. None of the subjects had any
background in economics or non-linear systems analysis.

5.4

Statistical analysis

Individual subject performance was recorded on every trial and averaged over each block of trials. Motor learning was assessed within each presentation using a repeated measures analysis of
variance (ANOVA with Greenhouse Geisser correction) with trial block as the repeated measure
[6]. Additonal pair-wise comparisons of block means were made with Bonferroni adjustment
for multiple comparisons. The alpha level for all statistical tests was 0.05.

5.5

Results

Of the 14 subjects assigned to the default presentation 11 could be said to have learned to solve
the problem in that they were able to steer the ball toward the target box and keep it either
in the box or in its general vicinity without the ball escaping from the region of the unstable
equilibrium. Fig 4a shows the median performance on the 80th trial for the default presentation.
Three subjects were unable to eﬀectively control the ball at all, even after 80 trials of practice.
The results of these three subjects were excluded from the results. The performance of the
remaining 11 subjects over the 5 blocks of trials is summarized in ﬁg 4b. Mean performance
improved over the 5 blocks of trials, F(2.7, 27.0) = 34.7, P < 0.001. This improvement in
performance persisted into the retention trials. Indeed, performance improved continued to
improve in the retention trials with the mean error in Block 5 (M=240.59, SD=106.87) less
than Block 4 (M=303.42, SD=136.99), P = 0.036.
667

Motor learning for problem solving

McAdam

800
10

700
600

6
4
2
0

0

50

100
Time

150

200

Integrated Error

M, r, Y

8

500
400
300
200

Tau

0.09

100

0.03

0

50

100

150

Time

(a)

200

0

Block1

Block2

Block3

Block4

Block5

Trial Block

(b)

Figure 4: Results for the default presentation (a) Median subject performance on the 80th
acquisition trial. The system state trajectory shown in the top plot. Dotted lines show target
values. The control input generated by the subject is shown in the bottom plot. (b) Box plot
of subject performance over time.
Of the 14 subjects assigned to the modiﬁed presentation 11 were able to readily solve the
problem after a relatively short number of practice trials with a high degree of reliability. Fig
5a shows the median performance on the 80th trial for the default presentation. One subject
was unable to learn how to control the ball at all. One subject withdrew from the trial due to
ill health and one subject failed to return for the retention trials. The results of these three
subjects were excluded from the results. The performance of the remaining 11 subjects over
the 5 blocks of trials is summarized in ﬁg 5b. In this case there is a very marked and rapid
improvement in performance over Blocks 1 to 3 both in terms of average performance and
variance. Analysis over blocks 3 to 5 shows no further improvement during the acquisition
trials nor deterioration into the retention trials, F(1.368, 13.68) = 3.3, P = 0.0816.
Comparison of performance at the end of the acquisition trials (Block 4) between the default
presentation (M=303.42, SD=136.99) and modiﬁed presentation (M=95.07, SD=9.32) reveals
a signiﬁcantly better ﬁnal performance with the modiﬁed presentation (Welsch-t = 16.73, p <
0.001).

6

Discussion

In terms of the problem subjects were asked to solve the results of the experiment show that is
indeed possible to stabilise the unstable economic system described in section 4 by manipulating
the taxation rate. This non-trivial problem in non-linear economic dynamics was solved through
physical interaction, with a subject’s movement actions providing the solution to the problem,
i.e., a tax policy, τ (t). Further examination and interpretation of the solutions produced is
not dealt with here. Nor do we attempt to compare the solutions produced by subjects with
solutions produced using other techniques4 . Instead, we focus on the process by which subjects
came to be able to solve the problem.
First and foremost, the results illustrate the importance of practice in improving the solutions produced by subjects. Subjects progressed from having basically no ability to solve
4 Such

668

a comparison was performed in [10].

Motor learning for problem solving

McAdam

800
10
700
600

6
4
2
0

0

50

100
Time

150

200

500
400
300
200

Tau

0.09

0.03

Integrated Error

M, r, Y

8

100
0
0

50

100
Time

(a)

150

200

Block1

Block2

Block3

Block4

Block5

Trial Block

(b)

Figure 5: Results for the modiﬁed presentation (a) Median subject performance on the 80th
acquisition trial. The system state trajectory shown in the top plot. Dotted lines show target
values. The control input generated by the subject is shown in the bottom plot. Note that the
trial terminated at about t=95 once the subject had stabilised the system for 40 consecutive
time periods. (b) Box plot of subject performance over time.
the problem to being able to solve the problem with some reliability. The rate of improvement and ultimate quality of solution varied between presentations, but in both cases solutions
improved systematically with more practice. This improvement is consistent with the characteristics of human motor learning for continuous tracking tasks – power law-like improvement
in performance with practice, and strong retention of skill over time [5].
The results of the experiment clearly demonstrate that the details of how a problem is presented can have a very large impact on the ability of subjects to solve the problem. The subjects
using the modiﬁed presentation produced better solutions with less practice than the subjects
using the default presentation. The modiﬁed presentation included a number of changes to the
presentation of the problem, but the results of the experiment do not allow us to discriminate
the individual eﬀects of these changes. They were, however, all motivated by motor learning
and performance considerations, which suggests that the application of CIS would beneﬁt from
the development of systematic guidelines based on these sorts of considerations.
The results also showed that while the modiﬁed presentation clearly produced better solutions more quickly, the solutions produced by subjects using the default presentation did
improve over time and continued to improve into the retention trials. Perhaps with more practice the solutions produced by these subjects may have approached those of the subjects using
the modiﬁed presentation. Indeed, the best performance on the ﬁnal acquisition trial using
the default presentation (87.2) compares favourably with the median performance on the ﬁnal
acquisition trial using the modiﬁed presentation (88.3). This shows that good performance is
possible with the default presentation. We might expect that other subjects would also attain
this level of skill with more practice. This is an important result as more complex problems
will result in more complex tasks for subjects to perform, even with the most careful design. In
such problems we would expect subjects to require more time to learn the required skills. Monitoring subject performance during this process may provide an indication of whether further
improvement may be possible. For example, the performance of subjects using the modiﬁed
presentation plateaued in Block 3 with no further improvement through to Block 5 suggesting
that further practice would be unlikely to produce better solutions. It should also be acknowledged that a small number of subjects never “got the hang” of controlling the ball and were
669

Motor learning for problem solving

McAdam

unable to produce any useful solutions, even with the modiﬁed presentation. There is no guarantee that an individual subject will be able to solve a problem and using a group of subjects
will improve the chances of getting useful results.
The key role that practice plays in solving problems in CIS raises two important issues.
The ﬁrst concerns the conditions of practice – the extent and form of instruction, the amount
and quality of practice, feedback on performance. The second concerns how to recruit and
retain the users whose motor learning eﬀorts provide the means of solving problems. A user’s
involvement may require a signiﬁcant commitment of time and eﬀort and there is the obvious
question of what is in it for them. The subjects’ response to the problem solving experience
in this experiment varied signiﬁcantly. There were a number who expressed frustration at the
diﬃculty of the task, particularly with the default presentation, but there were also a signiﬁcant
number who seemed to enjoy the challenge of learning a new skill. The current popularity of
physical skill-based computer games suggests that CIS could use gamiﬁcation as a way of
engaging users in the problem solving processs. The skills needed to solve problems in CIS are
likely to be more challenging than those needed for a game designed purely for entertainment
and may require more motivation and on the part of the user. User motivation may be helped
by informing them of the nature and importance of the skill they are trying to learn [14]. A
good example of this “serious gaming” approach is the online game FoldIt [15] around which a
community of skilled participants has developed that attempt to solve protein folding problems
using their skills of spatial reasoning. This approach has yielded some important results that
have eluded conventional computational techniques [3].

7

Conclusion

CIS enables a form of problem solving that is qualitatively diﬀerent to more conventional
computational techniques having at its disposal the considerable resources of the mechanisms
underlying human motor learning. While it would be a stretch to say that the subjects in this
study learned anything explicit about economics, the experimental data suggests that they did
acquire the knowledge of system dynamics required to solve this particular problem in economic
management. That knowledge has its expression in movement action.
Getting the most out of CIS as a problem solving tool will require careful attention to the
factors that facilitate and enhance the process of developing the physical skill required to solve
a problem. Further research aims to develop a more comprehensive set of guidelines based on
motor learning and performance considerations to help maxmize the likelihood that subjects
will be able to solve a given problem.

References
[1] N. A. Bernstein. On dexterity and its development. In M.L. Latash, editor, Dexterity and Its
Development. Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, 1996.
[2] L. De Cesare and M. Sportelli. A dynamic IS-LM model with delayed taxation revenues. Chaos,
Solitons & Fractals, 25(1):233–244, 2005.
[3] Christopher B Eiben, Justin B Siegel, Jacob B Bale, Seth Cooper, Firas Khatib, Betty W Shen,
Foldit Players, Barry L Stoddard, Zoran Popovic, and David Baker. Increased diels-alderase
activity through backbone remodeling guided by foldit players. Nature biotechnology, 30(2):190–
192, 2012.
[4] Paul M Fitts. The information capacity of the human motor system in controlling the amplitude
of movement. Journal of experimental psychology, 47(6):381, 1954.

670

Motor learning for problem solving

McAdam

[5] E.A. Fleishman and J.F. Parker. Factors in the retention and relearning of perceptual-motor skill.
Journal of Experimental Psychology, 64(3):215, 1962.
[6] Sarah A Fraser, Karen ZH Li, and Virginia B Penhune. A comparison of motor skill learning and
retention in younger and older adults. Experimental brain research, 195(3):419–427, 2009.
[7] R. Jagacinksi and J. M. Flach. Control Theory for Humans: Quantitative Approaches to Modeling
Human Performance. Lawrence Earlbaum Associates, 2003.
[8] R. Magill. Motor learning and control: concepts and applications. McGraw Hill, 2007.
[9] R. J. McAdam. Continuous interactive simulation: Engaging the human sensory-motor system in
understanding dynamical systems. Procedia Computer Science, 1(1):1685–1692, 2010.
[10] R. J. McAdam and K. V. Nesbitt. Movement-based interfaces for problem solving in dynamics.
In P. Seltsikas, D. Bunker, L. Dawson, and M. Indulska, editors, Proceedings of the Australiasian
Conference on Information Systems ACIS 2011 - ”Identifying the Information Systems Discipline”,
page Paper 34, Sydney, Australia, 30th November - 2nd December 2011 2011.
[11] R. J. McAdam and K. V. Nesbitt. Leveraging human movement in the ultimate display. In
Proceedings of the 13th Australian User Interface Conference, pages 11–20, Melbourne, Australia,
January 2012.
[12] R´ejean Plamondon, Adel M Alimi, et al. Speed/accuracy trade-oﬀs in target-directed movements.
Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 20(2):279–303, 1997.
[13] R.W. Proctor and K.P.L. Vu. Universal and culture-speciﬁc eﬀects of display-control compatibility.
The American journal of psychology, 123(4):425–435, 2010.
[14] Richard A Schmidt and Tim Lee. Motor Control and Learning. Human kinetics, 5 edition, 2011.
[15] University of Washington. Foldit: Available online via http://fold.it/portal/, 2010.
[16] C.D. Wickens. Spatial awareness biases. Technical report AHFD-02-6/NASA-02-4, Aviation Human Factors Division Institute of Aviation, University of Illinois, 2002.
[17] Christopher D Wickens. Information processing. In G. Salvendy, editor, Handbook of human
factors and ergonomics, pages 117–161. John Wiley & Sons Oxford,, England, 2012.
[18] D. M. Wolpert, Z. Ghahramani, and J. R. Flanagan. Perspectives and problems in motor learning.
Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 5(11):487–94, 2001.
[19] S. Yantis. Stimulus-driven attentional capture. Current Directions in Psychological Science,
2(5):156–161, 1993.

671

