Procedia Computer Science
Volume 80, 2016, Pages 507–517
ICCS 2016. The International Conference on Computational
Science

Combining Microsimulation and Agent-Based Model for
Micro-Level Population Dynamics
Jang Won Bae1 , Euihyun Paik1 , Kiho Kim1 , Karandeep Singh1,2 , and Mazhar
Sajjad1,2
1

2

Department of BigData Intelligence Research, Electronics & Telecommunications Research
Institute (ETRI), Daejeon, South Korea
jwbae@etri.re.kr, ehpaik@etri.re.kr, khkim@etri.re.kr, karandeep.singh@etri.re.kr,
sajjad@etri.re.kr
Department of Computer Software, Korea University of Science and Technology (UST), Daejeon,
South Korea

Abstract
Population dynamics illustrates the changes of the size and age composition of populations.
Modeling and simulation techniques have been used to model the population dynamics, and the
developed models are utilized to design and analyze public polices. One classic modeling method
is microsimulation. The microsimulation describes the population dynamics at the individual
level, and actions conducted by the individuals are generated by stochastic process. An emerging
method is agent-based model, which rather focuses on the interactions among individuals and
expects to see unexpected situations created from the interactions. Their similar but diﬀerent
approaches can make them to complement weak points of the opponent in population dynamics
analysis. From this perspective, This paper proposes a hybrid model structure combining
microsimulation and agent-based model for modeling population dynamics. In the proposed
model, the microsimulation model takes a role to depict how an individual chooses its behavior
based on stochastic process parameterized by real data; the agent-based model incorporates
interactions among individuals considering their own states and rules. The case study introduces
Korean population dynamics model developed by the proposed approach, and its simulation
results show the population changes triggered by a variance of behavior and interaction factors.
Keywords: population dynamics model, agent-based model, microsimulation model, hybrid population
dynamics model

1

Introduction

Population dynamics is used to understand the changes that occur in the population over the
course of time, so it helps us to estimate the future population composition and establish
political strategies for the future. For limiting the scope of this paper, we limit the meaning
Selection and peer-review under responsibility of the Scientiﬁc Programme Committee of ICCS 2016
c The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V.

doi:10.1016/j.procs.2016.05.331

507

Combining MSM and ABM for Micro-Level Population Dynamics Bae, Paik, Kim, Singh, and Sajjad

of the population changes as the variation of size, or age distribution of individuals comprising
the population, or movement of the individuals from one place to the other. Such population
changes are diﬃcult to measure because they are closely associated with the collective behavior
of individuals. Even if we deﬁne the individual behaviors relating with the population dynamics,
they are intricately relevant to individual personality and social factors.
Understanding the population dynamics recently has received great attention from governments as well as researchers. For example, many countries have the low-fertility problem [14];
while Niger have very high fertility rates (6.89 children per woman), the average fertility rates
in OECD countries is 1.74, which indicates the overall populations are decreasing [2]. The lowfertility problem could be the clue of other economical, industrial, social problems [22]. Many
countries built birth encouragement policies to alleviate these problems, but most of them have
not led meaningful results [22]. Such failures may indicate that there needs the analyses on
population dynamics from multiple perspectives.
To analyze the population dynamics, various analysis techniques have been applied. Microsimulation model (MSM) is one classical method to model the population dynamics at a
micro-level. Speciﬁcally, MSM describes individuals in population with micro population data
(e.g, census data) and simulates their behaviors with transition probabilities developed from
the population statistics (e.g., fertility rate). When the simulation ends, MSM provides the
projection of future population by aggregating the simulated individuals’ data. Agent-based
model (ABM) is considered as an emerging method to analyze population dynamics. Similar
as MSM, ABM is based on individuals (or agents), but it has more focuses on the interactions
among individuals (e.g., deciding a marriage partner). Hence, the objective of ABM is to see
a unexpected situation (or emergence) created by encouraging the interactions and to provide
insights to analyze that situation.
Two approaches have similar concepts on individual-level modeling. In other words, they
both take the bottom-up approach to replicate the population dynamics, and each individual
holds heterogeneous properties. Having said that, they also have diﬀerent characteristics in the
individual descriptions: In MSM, rich detailed data are utilized for individual behaviors, yet
the interaction and feedback among individuals are often missing; in ABM, however, individual
behaviors are translated into the process of interaction and feedback, which inﬂuences on other
behaviors. Moreover, this could lead to an emergence of population dynamics that could provide
invaluable insights.
Keeping their modeling characteristics in mind, there arises a need for a mechanism which
incorporates positive points of both techniques. In this sense, this paper proposes a hybrid
model structure consisting of both ABM and MSM. This composition is enabled by the bridge
between them (i.e., individual-level modeling). Moreover, by the virtue of this bridge, their
weak points would be compensated by the opponent’s strong points. Speciﬁcally, the hybrid
model for population dynamics describes an individual in the population, and the behavior
and interactions are separately handled by MSM and ABM methods, respectively. Using the
hybrid model, we expect to provide additional but precious information about the population
dynamics as well as to estimate the future population structure.
This paper introduces the development of Korean population dynamics model as a case
study of the proposed method. We designed an individual with separating its behaviors as
MSM components and interactions as ABM components. Also, Korean population statistics
and micro population data are utilized for the better replication. The simulation results from
the developed model illustrate how the future population structure of Korea would change
when the fertility rate (i.e., behavior factor) and the marriage rules (i.e., interaction factor) are
varied.
508

Combining MSM and ABM for Micro-Level Population Dynamics Bae, Paik, Kim, Singh, and Sajjad

The rest of this paper is organized as follows: Chapter 2 introduces related works about the
population dynamics model; Chapter 3 explains how the proposed model is structured and its
future usages, and chapter 4 presents a case study about the development of Korean population
dynamics model with the proposed method and its simulation results and analyses; then, the
paper is concluded in Chapter 5.

2

Backgrounds

This chapter provides the background about microsimulation and agent-based modeling, and
introduces previous population dynamics models developed by both techniques.

2.1

Microsimulation Model for Population Dynamics

Microsimulation model (MSM) pioneered by Orcutt was applied to analyze socio-economic
policies [16]. He identiﬁed and represented individual entities in the socio economic system with
changing their behaviors as time evolved. MSM describes a target system at the individuallevel, so the system dynamics are represented as the aggregation of individuals (i.e., bottom-up
approach)[11]. With the bottom-up approach, population dynamics models developed by MSM
were utilized as the evaluation tool of public polices [15].
MSM for the population dynamics generally requires a large sample of data from population
census or survey, such as age at ﬁrst childbirth, household income, etc. and uses this data to
impart properties (or states) to individuals. The idea is simply to represent the constituent
units with individual characteristics, which comes from real data rather than the average values.
MSM is initialized by deploying this synthetic population where individual characteristics are
associated with a particular unit or individual so that the distributions of the virtual world
population are in conformance with the real one. With this initialization, an individual in MSM
is simulated by its behavior executed by transition probabilities parameterized with population
statistics. When the simulation ends, the simulation results are provided as the aggregation of
individual properties.
Many population dynamics models have been developed in many countries for estimating of the future population and public policies: DYNASIM3 (USA), DYNACAN (Canada),
MOSART (Norway), SESIM (Sweden), SAGE (UK), DYNAMOD (Australia), and DESTINIE
(France). These models held similar structure —individuals are initialized with micro population data, and they decide their actions based on the transition probabilities.

2.2

Agent-Based Model for Population Dynamics

Agent-based model (ABM) consists of autonomous agents (or individuals) that decide their
action with their own conditions, environment where the agents are situated, and their interactions. The interaction is considered as a key factor since it enables to analyze complex
population dynamics [7]. The origin of ABM can be tracked back to Von Neumann machine
[21]. Famous starting examples of ABMs are the segregation model by Schelling [18] and John
Conways Game of Life [8]. Particularly during the lasts two decades, ABM has been improved
from the theoretical perspectives, such as hierarchical and dynamic structure [5], and its application range has been widely spread, such as social science [9], biology [3], disaster response [4]
and economics [13].
ABM is focused on the interactions of individuals to see unexpected situations (i.e., emergence) of a system. The main assumption under ABM is that interactions can produce the
509

Combining MSM and ABM for Micro-Level Population Dynamics Bae, Paik, Kim, Singh, and Sajjad

system behavior which is more than the aggregated sum of the individualistic activities. The
emergence generated from ABM is expected to suggest the distinguished angles to a target
system. There have been a variety of ABMs about understanding population dynamics. The
agent based social simulation for population dynamics was initiated by Billari and Prskawetz [7].
Most of the previous works have been proposed in demographic contexts from the interaction
perspectives, such as family formation [7], migration [12], residential mobility [6], household
dynamics [10].

3

Combining MSM and ABM for Population Dynamics

MSM and ABM hold a common ground that they focus on the micro-level description to represent the real phenomena. Meanwhile, they also diﬀer in the methods for modeling individual
behaviors. This chapter explain the their similarities and diﬀerences, and these characteristics
would become the possibility and necessity of their hybrid model for population dynamics.

3.1

Micro-Level Population Dynamics

Population dynamics shows us how population evolves and changes over a course of time.
Demography has studied about the population dynamics, and its researchers see that the population changes are originated from behaviors and interactions of people in the population, such
as fertility, migration, matrimony, mortality, etc. [17]. Micro-level population dynamics models
follow demographic approaches: the proposed model describes an individual in population, and
it behaves with their own states.

Figure 1: Modeling population dynamics from the micro-level perspective: behaviors and interaction of individuals
Figure 1 shows how we model an individual in population from the micro-level perspective. Among the individual behaviors and interactions considered in the Demographic view,
we selected those that are strongly relevant to variations of the population size: mortality
(behavior decreasing population size (- population)), fertility (behavior increasing population
size (+ population)), migration (behavior increasing or decreasing population size (+/- population)), and matrimony (interaction strongly related with the fertility behavior). Therefore,
the future population can be estimated by aggregating individuals who hold those behaviors
and interactions.

3.2

Hybrid Model Structure for Population Dynamics

MSM and ABM have been widely used in modeling the population dynamics at the microlevel, but their interests are diﬀerent: individual behaviors for MSM and interactions for ABM.
510

Combining MSM and ABM for Micro-Level Population Dynamics Bae, Paik, Kim, Singh, and Sajjad

However, population dynamics does not depend on one side only, but both. For example, the
population size is varied by fertility, mortality, and migration behavior, but those behaviors are
strongly related with the interactions with others, such as the relationship between fertility and
matrimony. We considered that when the population dynamics are depicted by not only direct
factors but also indirect ones, that model could generate an emergence for more understanding
and insights for the future population.
Modeling Approach
Modeling Level
Individuals
Interaction
Behavior Modeling
Objectives
Data Dependency
Complexity

Micro-Simulation Model
Agent-Based Model
Bottom-up
Individual level
Heterogeneous
Rarely considered
Readily considered
Stochastic process
Rule-based or inference
Projections
Emergence
Highly dependent
Less dependent
Lower
Higher

Table 1: Common and diﬀerent features from micro-simulation model (MSM) and agent-based
model (ABM)
To discover the way to integrate MSM and ABM, we unfolded their characteristics, which
is summarized in Table 1. We found there are common grounds between them: the bottomup approach. The bottom-up approach is understood as the integration of simple building
blocks to give rise to bigger ones. In both MSM and ABM, the individuals act as the building
blocks for the population dynamics. Moreover, each individual is initialized using the individual information obtained from micro population data, which enables the individuals to be
heterogeneous.
They have distinguished features as well. While the interactions are less highlighted in MSM,
they are signiﬁcant parts in ABM. These diﬀerent interests are followed from their objectives;
the goal of MSM is to see the future projection if the present tendency of individuals continues,
so it often uses transition probabilities for their behavior decisions. However, the eﬀorts of
ABM are to discover an emergence for understanding and ultimately managing the system, so
it often concentrates on how to develop the interactions. Most interactions of ABMs are started
from assumptions, social norms, previous research results, and they are getting calibrated with
respect to the simulation results.
Their objective also lead the diﬀerences of their behavior modeling, data dependency, and
complexity. MSM describes an individual behavior using stochastic process with the transition
probabilities, which also means that it is highly dependent on the real data. Its modeling
complexity are relatively lower due to its simple operations of individuals. On the other hand,
individuals in ABM usually act based on their own rules or inferences, which indicates that it
is less dependent on the real data. About the complexity, ABM requires more resources and
time, since it would deal with the interactions of individuals.
Based on the common parts of MSM and ABM, we designed the hybrid model structure
consisting of them for population dynamics. There was an early work about the hybrid method
of MSM and ABM [19], and we improved it from the perspective of 1) the combining method
with their general model structure and 2) the beneﬁts created from their objectives. In the
proposed method, we separate the behaviors and interactions of individuals related with the
population size, such as fertility, mortality, and migration as behaviors and ﬁnding a marriage
partner as an interaction. To model these behaviors and interactions, the states, transition
511

Combining MSM and ABM for Micro-Level Population Dynamics Bae, Paik, Kim, Singh, and Sajjad

probabilities, and rules of individuals should be developed. Governments in these days gather
and provide micro information and statistics of their population for analyzing plenty of political
and social issues, so we can utilize that information to build the individual components.
To implement the interactions, assumptions based on the research interests, social norms
in a target society, and the results of the previous research could be utilized. By relating
those behaviors and interactions, a set of individual would form a population, and population
dynamics from this model enables us to see and examine the future population and the following
changes with varying social factors. Figure 2 illustrates the conceptual design of individual
model, the procedure to develop a population dynamics model using the proposed method, and
the usage of micro-level population dynamics models, e.g., policy evaluation.

Figure 2: Structure of the proposed hybrid model with real-data and its future usage

4

Case Study: Korean Population Dynamics Model

Applying the proposed modeling method, we developed a Korean population dynamics model
(KPDM). In the following subsections, we explain how the KPDM was developed using various
real data and present an estimation of the future population structure with varying model
parameters.

4.1

Development of Korean Population Dynamics Model using Hybrid Model

The Korean population dynamics model (KPDM) consists of individuals mirroring the real-data
for the initial population of individuals and individual behaviors.
4.1.1

Stochastic process for individual behavior

The hybrid model describes population dynamics with individuals in the population, so how the
individuals are deployed and characterized in Korea is critical to estimate the future population.
512

Combining MSM and ABM for Micro-Level Population Dynamics Bae, Paik, Kim, Singh, and Sajjad

Moreover, each individual should be originated from Korean population information. Korean
government opened various type of statistics through Korean Statistical Information Service
(KOSIS) [1]. One service provided by KOSIS is Korean micro-population data that illustrate
the individual information of about 890,000 individuals (2% of Korean population) including
biological, social, family, environmental properties. Among the individual properties, KPDM
utilized those that are relevant to individual fertility, mortality, migration, and matrimony (see
Figure 3 (a)).
To distinguish the relevant features, we referred to the population statistics provided by
KOSIS. The population statistics provides not only general population statistics (e.g., such as
the size of population group) but the number of the demographic events with several conditions
(e.g., the number of dead people conditioned by age, sex, employment, and marriage status).
With these provided statistics, we built up the probability of individual behaviors with the
associated conditions, and those conditions are deﬁned as individual states. Hence, we can
describe the next behavior of an individual with its transition probabilities and states through
the Monte-Carlo method (i.e., generating random number and checking if the number is below
the probability or not).

Figure 3: (a) Individual states relevant to individual behaviors and interaction; (b) relationships
between individual states, and behaviors and interaction

4.1.2

Rule-based individual interactions

Contrary to the other behaviors, matrimony requires the interplay with other individuals; in
other words, to make a marriage, there need lots of communications between the marrying
couple. Moreover, their rules (or social norms) for the matrimony would take important roles
in the future population dynamics. It is because the fertility rate is largely associated with
the marriage (especially in Korea) and the properties of the bride (e.g., biological and social
status). However, most of the previous works covers the marriage with less interactions [20].
KPDM is designed to describe individual interactions using ABM component in the hybrid
model structure. Figure 4 illustrates how KPDM handle the marriage interactions: 1) According
to the population statistics about the marriage, each individual would decide to ﬁnd its spouse
candidates; 2) when others heard about the searching for a marriage, they respond to the
request if their marriage conditions would be met to the sender); 3) When the sender receive a
response, it also check its conditions. if there are many candidates, it selects one to marry; 4)
Then, the two individuals are married, and their marital states are also changed.
513

Combining MSM and ABM for Micro-Level Population Dynamics Bae, Paik, Kim, Singh, and Sajjad

Rules applied to the matrimony of KPDM are important to decide a marriage partner, so
how to develop the rules would aﬀect the population estimation. Also, these rules are important
to structure the associated interactions. In KPDM, we incorporate social norms and trends
into the matrimony rules. For example, in Korea, there is a tendency that the average age at
ﬁrst marriage is rising because of complicated problems. We can develop interaction rules for
marriage by reﬂecting such situations (e.g., marriage requires certain amount of money). The
hybrid model structure enables application of those rules, so it help us to see the future changes
with various respects.

Figure 4: Marriage Interactions between two individuals; they communicate with their personal
information and decide to marry or not based on both the received information and their own
conditions

4.2

Experiments and Result Analysis

We performed experiments using the developed KPDM. As simulation results, KPDM can
provide the future population structure. In the experiment, we varied model parameters about
individual behavior and interaction factors and see how the future population structure would
changed with respect to the varied parameters.
Korean population statistics were utilized as parameters of stochastic processes for deciding
individual behaviors. Among those parameters, we varied fertility rate from no changes (NC ) to
10% up (10% ). As the interaction variable, we changed the rule for ﬁnding a marriage partner:
we designed a random selection rule (Random) and ”Man should be elder than woman” rule
(ElderMan) as the parameter variance. For the model initialization, we utilized population
statistics and 2% micro-population data (about 890,000 individuals) in 2010 provided by KOSIS.
Figure 5 illustrates the future population changes in 2049 as the two parameters are varied (cf.,
Random rule and no change to the fertility rate case is used as the baseline for the comparisons)
Before the result analysis, we note that In Korea, a childbirth generally is provided by
married couples and the fertility rate is highly correlated with the mother age. Therefore,
Figure 5 illustrates that population changes occur from 0 to 40 ages. For quantitative analysis,
we present the number of births through the simulation executions from 2010 to 2050 (see Table
2). Even if the experiments requires statistical procedures, this table oﬀers interesting results:
1) ElderMan rule has a negative eﬀect to increasing the fertility, 2) but the combination of
ElderMan 10% case encourages more fertility than Random 10% in some cases.
514

Combining MSM and ABM for Micro-Level Population Dynamics Bae, Paik, Kim, Singh, and Sajjad

Figure 5: Population pyramids generated from the simulation results: (a) population structure
in 2010 (i.e., starting year of the simulation) and comparison population structures in 2049
from the simulation results – (b) Random selection rule for marriage partners (Random) with
no changes in the fertility rate (NC ) vs. ”Man should be elder than woman” rule (ElderMan)
with NC; (c) Random with NC vs. Random with 10% fertility rate up (10% ); (d) Random
with NC vs. ElderMan with 10%
Years
2010
2015
2020
2025
2030
2035
2040
2045
2050

Random NC
23,557
23,630
20,832
19,159
18,797
13,608
12,344
11,048
10,604

ElderMan NC
23,557 (-)
23,454 (−1%)
20,653 (−1%)
18,936 (−2%)
18,989 (+1%)
13,375 (−2%)
12,051 (−3%)
11,394 (+3%)
10,542 (−1%)

Random 10%
23,557 (-)
25,272 (+6%)
22,022 (+5%)
20,402 (+6%)
20,035 (+6%)
14,052 (+3%)
13,229 (+7%)
12,352 (+11%)
11,643 (+9%)

ElderMan 10%
23,557 (-)
25,389 (+7%)
22,273 (+6%)
20,556 (+7%)
20,104 (+6%)
14,656 (+7%)
13,118 (+6%)
12,097 (+9%)
11,578 (+6%)

Table 2: Number of births per 5 years generated from the experiments with varying the fertility
rate (i.e., no change (NC ) and 10% up (10% )) and the rule for marriage partner (i.e., Randomly
selection (Random) and Man should be elder than woman (ElderMan) rules):% values in the
parenthesis indicate the increasing or decreasing rate compared to Random and NC case.

5

Conclusion and Further Works

Population dynamics has been modeled using microsimulation (MSM) and agent-based model
(ABM) techniques. These two methods hold both strong and weak points in modeling the
population dynamics, so we proposed a hybrid model structure that can demonstrate the advantages of both. By discovering their common and diﬀerent features, we conﬁrmed that they
515

Combining MSM and ABM for Micro-Level Population Dynamics Bae, Paik, Kim, Singh, and Sajjad

can be integrated into a hybrid model and the hybrid model could deliver insights that are
not seen in each sole method. Korean population dynamics model illustrates how the proposed
method is applied, and the experiment results represent a clue of its contribution.
This paper stands in the middle of our research. To complete this research, we consider
1) formulating modeling components in the hybrid model structure for general usages and 2)
executing more simulations and analyzing the simulation results with statistical methods as our
further works.

5.1

Acknowledgements

This work is supported by the Korea ICT R&D program of MSIP/IITP (10047117, Development of Distributed/Parallel Multi-Dimensional Demographic Micro Simulation Technologies
for Population Dynamics and Socio-Economic Experimentation).

References
[1] Korean statistical information service. http://kosis.kr/eng/. Accessed: 2016-01-30.
[2] The world factbook, country comparison :: Total fertility rate. https://www.cia.gov/library/
publications/the-world-factbook/rankorder/2127rank.html#download. Accessed: 2016-0130.
[3] Gary An, Qi Mi, Joyeeta Dutta-Moscato, and Yoram Vodovotz. Agent-based models in translational systems biology. Wiley Interdisciplinary Reviews: Systems Biology and Medicine, 1(2):159–
171, 2009.
[4] Jang Won Bae, SeHoon Lee, Jeong Hee Hong, and Il-Chul Moon. Simulation-based analyses of an
evacuation from a metropolis during a bombardment. Simulation, 90(11):1244–1267, 2014.
[5] Jang Won Bae and Il-Chul Moon. Ldef formalism for agent-based model development. IEEE
Transactions on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics: Systems, PP(99):1–1, 2015.
[6] Itzhak Benenson, Itzhak Orner, and Erez Hatna. Agent-based modeling of householders migration
behavior and its consequences. Agent-Based Computational Demography, pages 97–115, 2003.
[7] Francesco C. Billari, Fausta Ongaro, and Alexia Prskawetz. Agent-Based Computational Demography: Using Simulation to Improve Our Understanding of Demographic Behaviour, chapter Introduction: Agent-Based Computational Demography, pages 1–17. Physica-Verlag HD, Heidelberg,
2003.
[8] John Conway. The game of life. Scientiﬁc American, 223(4):4, 1970.
[9] Joshua M Epstein. Generative social science: Studies in agent-based computational modeling.
Princeton University Press, 2006.
[10] Nicholas Geard, James M McCaw, Alan Dorin, Kevin B Korb, and Jodie McVernon. Synthetic
population dynamics: A model of household demography. Journal of Artiﬁcial Societies and Social
Simulation, 16(1):8, 2013.
[11] Nigel Gilbert and Klaus Troitzsch. Simulation for the social scientist. McGraw-Hill Education
(UK), 2005.
[12] Frank Heiland. Agent-Based Computational Demography: Using Simulation to Improve Our Understanding of Demographic Behaviour, chapter The Collapse of the Berlin Wall: Simulating StateLevel East to West German Migration Patterns, pages 73–96. Physica-Verlag HD, Heidelberg,
2003.
[13] SeHoon Lee, Jeong Hee Hong, Jang Won Bae, and Il-Chul Moon. Impact of population relocation
to city commerce: Micro-level estimation with validated agent-based model. Journal of Artiﬁcial
Societies and Social Simulation, 18(2):5, 2015.

516

Combining MSM and ABM for Micro-Level Population Dynamics Bae, Paik, Kim, Singh, and Sajjad
[14] S Philip Morgan. Is low fertility a twenty-ﬁrst-century demographic crisis?
Demography,
40(4):589–603, 2003.
[15] Cathal O’Donoghue. Microsimulation and public policy. Ann Harding (Ed.), Journal of Artiﬁcial
Societies and Social Simulation, 1, 1998.
[16] Guy H Orcutt. A new type of socio-economic system. The review of economics and statistics,
pages 116–123, 1957.
[17] Donald T Rowland. Demographic methods and concepts. Oxford University Press, 2003.
[18] Thomas C Schelling. Dynamic models of segregation. Journal of mathematical sociology, 1(2):143–
186, 1971.
[19] Karandeep Singh, Mazhar Sajjad, and Chang-Won Ahn. Towards full scale population dynamics
modelling with an agent based and micro-simulation based framework. In Advanced Communication Technology (ICACT), 2015 17th International Conference on, pages 495–501. IEEE, 2015.
[20] Evert Van Imhoﬀ and Wendy Post. Microsimulation methods for population projection. Population, 10(1):97–136, 1998.
[21] John Von Neumann, Arthur W Burks, et al. Theory of self-reproducing automata. IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks, 5(1):3–14, 1966.
[22] Sidney B Westley, Minja Kim Choe, and Robert D Retherford. Very low fertility in asia: Is there
a problem? can it be solved? 2010.

517

