Procedia Computer Science
Volume 80, 2016, Pages 824–833
ICCS 2016. The International Conference on Computational
Science

Multi-agent system supporting automated GIS-based
photometric computations
Adam S¸edziwy, Leszek Kotulski
Department of Applied Computer Science,
AGH University of Science and Technology
Al. Mickiewicza 30, 30 059 Krakow, Poland
{sedziwy,kotulski}@agh.edu.pl

Abstract
The growing share of LED light sources in outdoor lighting enables developing street lighting
solutions characterized by high energy eﬃciency. It is accomplished by replacing high intensity
discharging lamps with LEDs and implementing various control strategies. It was also shown
that a well tailored lighting design may signiﬁcantly decrease the power usage. To apply this
method in large projects, however, the computationally eﬃcient approach is necessary. In this
article we propose the method of energy eﬃciency optimization relying on a multi-agent system
framework which enables scalable computations capable of handling large-scale projects. The
case of a real-life optimization is also presented in the paper.
Keywords:

1

Introduction

One of the most signiﬁcant challenges in all domains of technological development is the energy
demand growing continuously. There are several major technological approaches to that issue
such as looking for renewable energy sources (including energy storage) or improving energy
eﬃciency of main power consumers. Roadway lighting eﬃciency in urban spaces is an important
case of the problem. As stated in Northeast Group report [4] the number streetlights installed in
the world is estimated to increase by 60 millions and reach nearly 340 million by 2025. In terms
of the money spent for electric energy it gives the expected annual energy costs $23.9 billion
to $42.5 billion by 2025, dependently on the assumed operational power. Those numbers show
that optimization of street lighting installations has to be taken into account in the context of
power management in the cities.
Among the various methods aiming at decreasing energy usage of street lighting installations
two have to be pointed. The ﬁrst one is based on using LED light sources instead of high
intensity discharging (HID) or metal halide lamps. The second one, relying the LED technology,
is based on optimization which aims at adjusting consumed power to the lowest level complying
824

Selection and peer-review under responsibility of the Scientiﬁc Programme Committee of ICCS 2016
c The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V.

doi:10.1016/j.procs.2016.05.372

Multi-agent system supporting automated GIS-based photometric computations

S¸edziwy, Kotulski

with the lighting standards requirements. The result of an optimization are, dependently of the
retroﬁt scope, optimal settings for such parameters as ﬁxture model, arm length, pole height,
ﬁxture’s tilt and dimming. Since the consumed power decreases with increasing dimming level,
the last property is crucial for a quality of ﬁnal result.
The most common approach to creating a lighting design is a kind of trial-and-error procedure. A human designer prepares “manually” a project and next veriﬁes it against some
criteria. In the considered context such a criterion is energy eﬃciency of an installation. The
above veriﬁcation is supported by software [3, 14]. If a project check fails then a new (modiﬁed)
conﬁguration has to be examined.
In the above process some simpliﬁcations related to the road and installation layouts are
made. In particular, it is assumed that the both are uniform.
In the international project Products and Services of a Living Smart Energy City Lab [7, 6]
we showed that replacing “manual” trial-and-error process with regular computer-performed
search enables obtaining statistically 8% reduction of the energy usage for sodium-vapor lamps.
It is possible thanks to iterating over all available conﬁgurations.
Introducing simpliﬁcations related to the road and lighting installation layouts leads, however, to decreased energy eﬃciency of projects being created. It was shown in [13] that taking
into account actual deviations from uniformity, i.e., a photometric design optimization made
on the basis of precise, geodetic data (in the sequel referred to as GIS data - Geographical
Information System) instead of uniform ones (e.g., averaged lamp spacing or road width) yields
the power usage decreased by 15%. GIS data can be provided by mobile mappers or taken from
already existing sources like CAD ﬁles. This approach will be referred to as a customized design.
Although the customized design produces high quality solutions it operates on raw data (GIS-based) rather than on
the calculation-ready, uniform scenes.
Those raw data includes both area and luminaire coordinates which require appropriate preprocessing: identifying
particular areas (walkways, roads, bike lanes, squares), establishing suitable calculation ﬁelds ascribed to them (Figure 1) and determining relevant luminaires (e.g., excluding
park luminaires in a case of roadway lighting calculations).
It is a critical problem for a computing system: it can be
unable to recognize correctly relevant areas and determine
calculation ﬁelds.
The above issue get critical especially for large projects
covering thousands of luminaires. None of market-available
Figure 1: The sample road lay- programs can perform such automated computations, espeout: bike lane, single carriageway cially for large-scale projects. On the other side, a manual
and walkway. Circles mark street check of all possible conﬁgurations even using any software
luminaires and hexagons denote is utterly unfeasible in a reasonable time.
In this article we propose the approach which supports
park ones
such operations. It combines a graph formalism with agent
system methods. Such a combination allows for automated, scalable and time-eﬃcient photometric calculations required in large street lighting optimizations made prior to retroﬁt works,
for example when old sodium lamps are to be replaced with new, LED ones. This approach
can be applied to a customized design and make this method applicable in the practical use.
The paper’s objective is presenting eﬀective calculation method applied for such an actual
data-based optimization made by agents. Thanks to this the time eﬃciency is improved by
825

Multi-agent system supporting automated GIS-based photometric computations

S¸edziwy, Kotulski

Table 1: ME lighting classes according to EN 13201-2
class

Lavg [cd/m2 ]
[min.]

Uo
[min.]

Ul
[min.]

T I [%]
[max.]

SR
[min.]

ME1
ME2
ME3a
ME3b
ME3c
ME4a
ME4b
ME5
ME6

2.0
1.5
1.0
1.0
1.0
0.75
0.75
0.5
0.3

0.4
0.4
0.4
0.4
0.4
0.4
0.4
0.35
0.35

0.7
0.7
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.4

10
10
15
15
15
15
15
15
15

0.5
0.5
0.5
0.5
0.5
0.5
0.5
0.5
n/a

excluding a human designer from a conﬁguration search process and energy consumption is
reduced by preparing the well tailored and standard compliant, photometric projects rather
than on a deep hardware upgrade. The method being presented in the article breaks the rule of
a lighting installation design where some solution for a single lighting situation is proposed by a
human designer and next, veriﬁed (using trial-and error method) against the standard-derived
constraints.

2

Preliminaries and the state of art

2.1

Photometric computations

The roadway lighting is subject to regulations concerning various aspects of the street illumination. In European countries they are described by EN 13201 standards which deﬁne lighting
classes for particular public spaces, performance requirements for them, introduce the methodology
of
computing
and
measuring
photometric
parameters,
and
so
on.
Two standards are particularly important in
this article; EN 13201-2 (performance requirements) and EN 13201-3 (calculation of
performance) [1, 2]. The EN 13201-2 standard speciﬁes what are the obligatory performance values of certain photometric parameters. For example, Table 1 presents requirements of so called ME classes for roads (with
motorized traﬃc). It introduces the constraints for the light reﬂected on the road surface (i.e.,luminance), luminance uniformity
and others.
EN 13201-3 in turn gives the detailed algo- Figure 2: Actual road layout with physical lurithm of computing all parameters. This al- minaires L1 , L2 . . .(a) and its simpliﬁed form
gorithm is used by all industry-standard tools (b). L1 , L2 , . . . denote “averaged” luminaire powhich support photometric computations like sitions. In both cases the sample calculation
DIALux, Ulysse, Relux, Agi32 and others ﬁelds are marked with oblique hatching
826

Multi-agent system supporting automated GIS-based photometric computations

S¸edziwy, Kotulski

(see [3, 14]). All those programs verify if a
project complies with constraints given in Table 1 assuming uniformity of a lighting situation:
evenly spaced and identical luminaires, uniformly distant from a carriageway and constant
width carriageway. Calculations are made for a road section (also known as a calculation ﬁeld)
delimited by two subsequent luminaires (Figure 2b) which is representative for the entire road
due to its assumed symmetry. Further calculating details which can be found in [2] will not be
discussed here.
When performing computations for real life cases one assumes the most pessimistic conditions: the road width and lamp spacing are set to maxima or averages of actual widths and
spacings respectively (see Figure 2). Thus the obtained results can be expected to be standard
compliant1 . The side eﬀect of this approach is energy wasting and light pollution caused by
over-illumination.
The proposed approach to improving energy eﬃciency applies the
method discussed in depth in [13].
It uses the customized design based
on actual GIS data, applied in
the place of standard methods described above. For each point of a
calculation ﬁeld (Figure 2b) the relevant luminaires have to be identiﬁed (Figure 3) prior to photometric computations. According to
the standard [2] it is accomplished Figure 3: The real-life case of the sample calculation
by selecting all luminaires falling point. The dashed line delimits the region containing
into the region of the size 17H × luminaires which have to be taken to compute luminance
10H, containing a calculation point, and illuminance in the point.
where H is a pole height. Note that
such an identiﬁcation requires processing raw GIS data and presumably some additional information concerning, for example, a luminaire type (park luminaires may be ignored when
computing roadway lighting). Moreover, some luminaire fallen into such a region may be already processed. Then an actual calculation must not corrupt results obtained previously. The
problems mentioned above inﬂuence complexity of a design task. In the further sections we
present how a customized design can handle large scale computations, covering thousands of
calculation ﬁelds.

2.2

Graphs

To overcome the computing complexity issue described above the design problem has to be
formulated using some formal model enabling computer processing. Such a model should be
scalable and, on the other side, capable of hosting multi-agent system. The graph representations satisfy those demands. They are expressive enough to represent a broad range of systems
[9, 5, 8]. Moreover, they were shown to be a suitable environment for multi-agent systems
deployment [10, 11].
In the most intuitive, “naive” approach, streets, walkways, bike lanes etc. are represented
by graph edges and road junctions by graph nodes. Node and edge labels can store either
names or any identiﬁers of streets and junction ”points” (in fact, they are areas given by
1 In

fact, aggregating with average may lead to violate the standard as shown in [13]

827

Multi-agent system supporting automated GIS-based photometric computations

S¸edziwy, Kotulski

some bounding boxes rather than dimensionless points). All other data are held in attributes:
some of node/edge ones are shown in Table 2. They group both street and luminaire related
information. In the another approach, more suitable for practical use, graph nodes represent
both calculating ﬁelds and luminaires (see Figure 4).
F17

F1

F13
..
.
F8

(a) A, B, C, D, E, F denote calculating ﬁelds;
F1 , F2 , . . . F21 represent luminaires

F18

F19

F20

C

E

A

D

F

B

F14

...

F7

F15

F21

F16

(b) The graph representing the scene shown in
Fig. 4a. Square nodes correspond to calculation ﬁelds, circled ones – to luminaires

Figure 4: The sample map and the corresponding simpliﬁed graph
A graph hosts multiple agents (see Section 4) which optimize particular installations street
by street or, in terms of graph formalism, edge by edge (See Figure 8).
Table 2: The sample attributes ascribed to graph edges and vertices
Attribute name
bounding box
lighting class
surface
luminaires

3

Description
Array of 2D GIS coordinates
Lighting class (as in EN 13201:2)
Reﬂective properties of the road surface
Array of relevant luminaires (incl. full applicable data)

Calculation process

The considered problem may be described as follows. Given a city map consisting of two
layers: a background layer including street layout data and an upper one containing positions
of luminaires and the other related information. As noted in the previous section, a map is
represented by some graph hence all important streets and luminaires data are stored either in
edge/node attributes or directly in a graph structure.
Each luminaire is described, among others, by high precision GIS coordinates of a pole, in
some geodetic coordinate system, e.g., UTM or WGS84. Street layout is also deﬁned using
geodetic coordinates. A task to be accomplished is twofold: extracting calculation ﬁelds from
those raw data and making photometric computations on them. The former task is based on
both map layers: it requires a street geometry to be known but also locations of particular
luminaires which inﬂuence calculation ﬁeld placement. The latter step is an optimization which
can be described as searching for such values of luminaire adjustments which yield the most
energy-eﬃcient installation complying a mandatory (for an underlying street) lighting standard.
Both steps are made interleavely in the course of processing.
The key step in photometric computations is determining a calculation ﬁeld F with respect
to considered luminaires. For roadway lighting situations it is accomplished by selecting two
828

Multi-agent system supporting automated GIS-based photometric computations

S¸edziwy, Kotulski

subsequent luminaires, say L1 , L2 . Figure 2 shows the ﬁelds for the customized (a) and standard
(b) computational approaches. The next step is selecting all luminaires which have to be taken
into account when computing photometric parameters on F and optimal adjustments for L2
(L1 is assumed to be already adjusted). After that a subsequent luminaire is taken (L3 ), the
new calculation ﬁeld is set and the procedure is iterated. The detailed description of the process
may be found in [13].
Note that the above schema may complicate when there are two luminaires, L2 , L2 located
close each other (see Figure 1). Then it is necessary to reject one of them on the basis of some
additional information like pole GIS coordinates, ﬁxture type, pole height, arm orientation with
respect to the road axis etc. Such analysis is made by a computing agent described in Section
4.
When considering a large set of crossing streets two situations can occur: accessing a luminaire already processed (Figure 6a) and detecting two luminaires belonging to diﬀerent series
(Figure 6b).
A principal computing process
begins with a sequence of the ﬁve
subsequent luminaires grouped in
a row R0 , for which photometric
computations are made (Figure 5).
The calculating area (not to be confused with a calculation ﬁeld), A0 ,
being a section of a roadway and
Figure 5: The initial phase of a computing process. R0
neighboring walkways (or any other
is an initial row of luminaires and A0 is an area grouping
communication routes) correspondall neighboring communication routes
ing to R0 is determined on the basis
of underlying GIS-based street layout. The result of computations are adjustments for luminaires in R0 such that lighting
standards requirements for A0 are met and the power usage is minimized. After completing this stage calculations proceed iteratively: the next luminaire, l (L6 in Figure 5), is taken,
R1 = R0 ∪{l}, and photometric parameters are calculated for the extended area, A1 = A0 ∪A(l),
where A(l) denotes an area inﬂuenced by the light emitted by l. Note that adjustments are
calculated for l only and those obtained for R0 are not changed anymore. All luminaires being
already adjusted are tagged appropriately.
When following the scenario described above two situations can occur (see Figure 6):
1. A subsequent luminaire, say lt , is already tagged which means that it was proceeded and
adjusted accordingly (Figure 6a).
2. A subsequent luminaire, lf , is located in a forking point where a new segment begins and
lf aﬀects it (Figure 6b).
In the former case lt is recalculated with respect to the area being currently processed.
Having two sets of settings obtained (previous and actual ones, both are assumed to comply
with the relevant lighting standard requirements) one selects the more restrictive ones.
Example. Let us assume, for example, that the carriageway of ME5 class was processed ﬁrst
(in Figure 6a the road along dark grayed symbols). In the result the power of lt was adjusted to
100 W. Next, the photometric calculations for the neighboring route of ME3a class were made
(the road along white symbols) and lt as the last luminaire in the series was adjusted to 120 W.
To ensure the standard compliance one selects from both wattage settings the latter one.
829

Multi-agent system supporting automated GIS-based photometric computations

(a) Calculation process meets a processed and
tagged luminaire (T )

S¸edziwy, Kotulski

(b) Calculation process meets a forking point.
N symbol denotes the ﬁrst luminaire in the
new segment, C is a luminaire in the current
segment

Figure 6: Two special cases in a calculation process. For both ﬁgures the bold arrows indicate
processing order. White bulbs denote adjusted luminaires and dark grayed ones being currently
adjusted. Non-ﬁlled bulbs stand for luminaires waiting for processing

Figure 7: Multi-agent system activity schema. CA life cycle (left) and MA life cycle

In the second situation a new, separate process for the new segment has to be initiated. If
applicable, the last processed luminaire gets shared as the ﬁrst one in the new segment.
A process described in this section, applied to the large size problem requires involving
a calculation paradigm allowing the parallel and scalable autonomous analysis and decision
making. A multi-agent system is a suitable framework enabling that. In the next section a
MAS structure will be discussed.

4

Agent system perspective

The multi-agent system architecture for the considered computations consists of two agent types
only: master agent (abbrev.: MA) and computing agent (CA).
830

Multi-agent system supporting automated GIS-based photometric computations

S¸edziwy, Kotulski

The role of a master agent, which exists in a single instance only, is decomposing a problem
speciﬁc graph into a slashed form representing all sub-tasks to be processed (for a decomposition
details see [10]). Moreover, an MA collects asynchronously sub-results incoming from computing
agents (Figure 7-left). Those results may be supplied as messages containing JSON-formatted
matchings of the form: Calculation ﬁeld ID, Photometric parameters . Optionally, an MA can
redeploy a CA to restart some computations when a failure (timeout) is detected. An MA has
to ensure that all luminaires are covered by photometric computations.
Computing agent which may exist in multiple instances is responsible in turn for executing
a calculation processes as described in Section 3. In particular, a CA can create other CAs
in ”forking points” mentioned previously. The CA life cycle terminates (”Completed?” testing
block in Figure 7-right) in one of the following circumstances:
1. All non-tagged luminaires have been already processed. It happens when either a CA met
a tagged luminaire or no other lamp to be processed is left (the last luminaire has been
just adjusted).
2. No solution can be found. Such a situation occurs when a problem of ﬁnding an optimal
adjustments complying with a given lighting class cannot be found in the assumed search
space. In this case a CA reports a problem to a MA. Then a master agent may restart
calculations in a changed search space (e.g., with another ﬁxture models or pole heights).
It should be noted that computing agents have to communicate each other during a calculation process. It is necessary because some luminaires which have to be taken into account by a
given CA can be located in the area maintained by another CA. Then a request has to be sent
to obtain required data. Yet another case is adjusting a luminaire located on a border of two (or
more) areas maintained by two (or more) agents. In this case, in turn, all parties have to negotiate the adjustments satisfying lighting standards for each segment and minimizing the power
usage. Note that it can be not a straightforward task due to the complex dependencies among
luminaire locations, presence of shading objects and a resultant photometric performance.

Figure 8: The sample map with segments processed by agents
Figure 8 shows the map with multiple segments being processed by computing agents.
831

Multi-agent system supporting automated GIS-based photometric computations

S¸edziwy, Kotulski

Table 3: Resultant installation power obtained in diﬀerent computation approaches
Computing method
No optimization, standard calculations
Optimized in standard calculations
Optimized in customized calculations

Power required [kW]
275
253
234

Power savings3
0.0%
8%
15%

(a) Global view on a computing task as an MA sees (b) Lighting installation layout from the
it. The numbers in circles denote numbers of lu- perspective of a CA. Note that several
minaires in particular subdomains. Black rectangle CAs can operate in such a region
delimits area enlarged in Figure 9b

Figure 9: Computing task from the global and local perspective

5

Results

The proposed approach was applied to support the retroﬁt made in the city of Cracow, Poland.
The goal of the project was replacing 3,700 HID ﬁxtures with LED sources. Prior to that the
optimization of adjustments was performed for all those luminaires. During that 2,000 ﬁxture
models2 provided by several vendors were tested. Selected ﬁxtures had to be matched appropriately to the area type (walkway, main road, park, parking zone and so forth). Besides a ﬁxture
model the inclination angle, dimming and other parameters were also varied while searching
optimal conﬁgurations. The most common road layout contained the single carriageway with
walkways at both sides (see Figure 1). Note that each of them had a separate lighting class ascribed. In terms of typical photometric computations the project covered approximately 1,800
calculation ﬁelds. Figure 9a presents a high-level view on several streets being processed (the
OpenStreetMap underlay is used). Its zoomed section is shown in Figure 9b: single luminaires
are marked as bulbs. The computing time required for optimizing luminaire adjustments for
the case of sequential processing was Tseq = 50 h 24 min and the computing time for the case of
an agent system using the reuse method [12] was Tag = 2 h 5 min. The speedup of a calculation
process s = Tseq /Tag obtained thanks to using agents was s = 24.2.
Table 3 presents the results obtained for three methods of a lighting design. The ﬁrst one
is based on typical calculations as made by market-available software. The second one relies
on standard computations too, but involves optimization of adjustments as well. In the third
method the customized approach is applied. Namely, optimization performed on GIS-based
street layout and luminaires locations data according to the algorithm presented in [13].

2 Precisely,

this number refers to the photometric solids.
to non-optimized, standard calculations.

3 Compared

832

Multi-agent system supporting automated GIS-based photometric computations

6

S¸edziwy, Kotulski

Conclusions

The presented calculating method combines preparation of well suited photometric designs
yielding signiﬁcant energy savings and scalable agent-based computations which allows for a
time-eﬃcient search over the entire solution space. It deﬁnes a multi-agent system framework
which was successfully applied in real-life retroﬁt projects covering thousands of luminaires.
Computing agents involved in the above operations are responsible for optimal solution
ﬁnding and local optimizations in “contact zones” where two or more lamp series meet.
The introduced methodology allows not only for optimizing roadway lighting installations
but also enables application of adaptive control methods which ﬁt roadway lighting performance
to the actual requirements. These control methods rely on dynamic schemas where lamp dimming is set on the basis of an actual environment state reported by sensor layer (induction
loops, ambient light meters, rain sensors and so forth). The role of the presented method is
pre-optimization of all possible states of an installation. It reduces the power usage up to 15%
when relying on the automated optimization and customized computation approach.
Acknowledgement The paper is supported from the resources of KIC InnoEnergy grant no.
7.7.120.7050.

References
[1] European Committee For Standardization CEN 13201-2. Road lighting - part 2: Performance
requirements. 2003. Ref. No. EN 13201-2:2003 E.
[2] European Committee For Standardization CEN 13201-3. Road lighting - part 3: Calculation of
performance. 2003. Ref. No. EN 13201-3:2003 E.
[3] DIAL. DIALux. http://goo.gl/21XOBx, 2015. [Online; accessed 2-March-2015].
[4] Echelon. Outdoor Street Lighting. http://goo.gl/mfpGYT, 2015. [Online; accessed 28-Mar-2015].
[5] Hartmut Ehrig, Gregor Engels, Hans-J¨
org Kreowski, and Grzegorz Rozenberg, editors. Handbook
of Graph Grammars and Computing by Graph Transformation, Vol. 2: Applications, Languages
and Tools. World Scientiﬁc, Singapore, 1999.
[6] KIC InnoEnergy.
Alive & KICing. Products and services of living smart energy
city lab.
http://www.kic-innoenergy.com/innovationproject/our-innovation-projects/
alive-and-kicing, 2012. [Online; accessed 27-November-2015].
[7] Leszek Kotulski, Jeroen De Landtsheer, Sven Penninck, Adam S¸edziwy, and Igor Wojnicki. Supporting energy eﬃciency optimization in lighting design process. Proc. of 12th European Lighting
Conference Lux Europa, Krakow, 17-19 September 2013, 2013. [Online; accessed 2-March-2015].
[8] Leszek Kotulski and Barbara Strug. Using graph transformations in distributed adaptive design
system. volume 5337 of LNCS, pages 477–486. Springer, 2008.
[9] Grzegorz Rozenberg. Handbook of Graph Grammars and Computing by Graph Transformations,
Volume 1: Foundations. World Scientiﬁc, 1997.
[10] Adam S¸edziwy. Eﬀective graph representation for agent-based distributed computing. volume
7327 of LNCS, pages 638–647. Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2012.
[11] Adam S¸edziwy. Representation of Objects in Agent-Based Lighting Design Problem. volume 170
of Advances in Intelligent and Soft Computing, pages 209–223. Springer, 2012.
[12] Adam S¸edziwy. On acceleration of multi-agent system performance in large scale photometric
computations. In Advanced Methods and Technologies for Agent and Multi-Agent Systems, volume
252 of Frontiers in Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Applications, pages 58–67. IOS Press, 2013.
[13] Adam S¸edziwy. A new approach to street lighting design. LEUKOS, 12(3), 2016.
[14] Urbis Lighting. TURBO Light. http://goo.gl/FY8yUX, 2015. [Online; accessed 2-March-2015].

833

