Procedia Computer Science
Volume 80, 2016, Pages 418–427
ICCS 2016. The International Conference on Computational
Science

Error Function Impact in Dynamic Data-Driven
Framework Applied to Forest Fire Spread Prediction
Carlos Carrillo, Tomàs Artés, Ana Cortés, and Tomàs Margalef
Computer Architecture and Operating Systems Department
Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, Spain.
{carles.carrillo, tomas.artes}@e-campus.uab.cat
{ana.cortes, tomas.margalef}@uab.cat

Abstract
In order to use environmental models eﬀectively for management and decision-making, it is
vital to establish an appropriate measure of conﬁdence in their performance. There are diﬀerent
ways and diﬀerent methodologies to establish and measure the conﬁdence of the models. In this
paper, we focus on the forest ﬁre spread prediction. Simulators implementing forest ﬁre spread
models require diverse input parameters to deliver predictions about ﬁre propagation. However,
the data describing the actual scenario where the ﬁre is taking place are usually subject to high
levels of uncertainty. In order to minimize the impact of the input-data uncertainty a Two-Stage
methodology was developed to calibrate the input parameters in (1) an adjustment stage so
that the calibrated parameters are used, and (2) the prediction stage to improve the quality of
the predictions. Is in the adjustment stage where the error formula plays a crucial role, because
diﬀerent formulas implies diﬀerent adjustments and, in consequence, diﬀerent wild ﬁre spread
predictions. In this paper, diﬀerent error functions are compared to show the impact in terms
of prediction quality in DDDAS for forest ﬁre spread prediction. These formulas have been
tested using a real forest ﬁre that took place in Arkadia (Greece) in 2011.
Keywords: error function, forest ﬁre, simulation, FARSITE

1

Introduction

Natural hazards represent a challenge for society since each year they cause important losses
worldwide. In the last decades, physical and mathematical models have been developed and
implemented in simulators to predict the behaviour of certain natural hazards [14] [12] [13] [16].
Such models require inputs parameters to describe the environment where the disaster takes
place but, unfortunately, it is impossible to obtain the data that populates these models without
error. This data uncertainty is due to the diﬃculty in gathering precise values at the right places
where the catastrophe is taking place, or because the hazard itself distorts the measurements.
So, in many cases the unique alternative consists of working with interpolated, outdated, or
418

Selection and peer-review under responsibility of the Scientiﬁc Programme Committee of ICCS 2016
c The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V.

doi:10.1016/j.procs.2016.05.342

Error Impact in DDDAS-Fire Spread Prediction

C. Carrillo, T. Artes, A. Cortes and T. Margalef

even absolutely unknown values. Obviously, this fact results in a lack of accuracy and quality
on the provided predictions. In this work, we focus on forest ﬁre spread prediction as a natural
hazard study case. Forest ﬁre propagation simulators require both static and dynamic input
data. One deﬁnes static data as those parameters that keep quite stable during the propagation
simulation process. Topography and vegetation maps are examples of this data typology. On
the other hand, dynamic input data are those parameters that are aﬀected by the meteorology
as, for example, humidity and wind. Obviously, both sets of parameters have a direct impact
in the forecast quality, however, the dynamic ones are the most sensitive parameters [1] [15].
In order to minimize the uncertainty in all this input data and improve the accuracy of the
delivered predictions, a Two-Stage Dynamic Data Driven Forest Fire Prediction System was
developed [7]. The dynamic data driven approaches for forest ﬁre spread prediction seek to
drive the model forecast using control variables. That is, to enhance basic forest ﬁre spread
simulations with the knowledge obtained from a calibration/adjustment stage [4] [5]. In this
Calibration stage, the obtained simulations are evaluated in order to weight them according
to some ﬁtness/error function, which determines the similitude of a given simulation to the
observed real ﬁre propagation. Once the best scored simulation is selected, the conﬁguration of
the control variables associated to that winner, is applied for prediction purposes in the near
future [2]. The problem arises when trying to establish an appropriate level of conﬁdence in
the way that the error, in the Calibration stage, is computed. Currently, there exist a large set
of techniques to determine the quality of the simulations depending on the underlying problem
[3] so, this work aims to analyze how the ﬁtness/error function used in the Calibration stage
aﬀects the prediction of the burned area.
This paper is organized as follows. In section 2 the Dynamic Data Driven Two-Stage methodology is brieﬂy explained. Section 3 describes the diﬀerent functions proposed to compute the
simulation error. Section 4 presents the experimental results and, ﬁnally, section 5 summarizes
the main conclusions and the future work.

2

DDDAS for Forest Fire Spread Prediction

As we have mentioned, to overcome the input uncertainty problem in the case of forest ﬁre
spread prediction, a DDDAS Two-stage methodology has been used [8]. This strategy is based
on extracting relevant information about real observed ﬁre spread to dynamically adjust certain
parameters of the simulation process. Then, those calibrated parameters will be introduced in
the simulation system to drive the forecast of the evolution of the forest ﬁre (see ﬁgure 1).
As a search technique, in the Calibration stage, a Genetic Algorithm (GA) has been applied,
where a random initial population of individuals (input parameters setting) is generated. Each
individual is simulated and the resulting forest ﬁre spread is compared to the real observed ﬁre
evolution to compute the ﬁtness of each individual (called error in this case). Then, according
to the quality of the simulations evaluated in the Calibration stage, the individuals are ranked
and the genetic operators (elitism, selection, crossover, mutation) are then applied to generate a
new population. The process is repeated a certain number of iterations and the best individual
at the end of the process is selected to drive the prediction of the near future forest ﬁre spread.
This dynamic data-driven forest ﬁre spread prediction system has been designed to be simulator
independent, so any forest ﬁre simulator could easily be included in a plug&play fashion. In
particular, the forest ﬁre spread simulator used is this work has been the so called FARSITE
([10]).
Evaluating the simulations quality is a key point in this scheme, because diﬀerent error
formulas imply diﬀerent rankings of the individuals. Since the obtained ranking is used to
419

Error Impact in DDDAS-Fire Spread Prediction

C. Carrillo, T. Artes, A. Cortes and T. Margalef

Figure 1: DDDAS Two-Stage forest ﬁre spread prediction method.
select the individuals to be applied the genetic operators, the error function should be carefully
chosen because it has a direct impact in the prediction results. In the next section, diﬀerent
error functions are described and analyzed to determine the potential inﬂuence in the described
DDDAS forest ﬁre prediction system.

3

Quality prediction evaluation

When dealing with prediction quality, it is mandatory to determine what is considered the
"truth state" and how the prediction delivered by the prediction system is compared to this
"truth state" [9] [11]. In the case of forest ﬁre, this "truth state" is the real ﬁre propagation, more
precisely, the perimeter of the burn area at a given time. Therefore, any simulation delivered
by the DDDAS prediction system must be compared somehow to the observed perimeter.
To perform such a comparison, the scope of the forest ﬁre is deﬁned by a cell map. Therefore,
the method used to determine either hits or misses will be categorical or dichotomous method,
which is possible only by the occurrence or not of a speciﬁc event, such as: burned cell / no
burned cell, in the case of forest ﬁre. The even notation to deﬁne those errors is depicted in
Figure 2.
The cells around the map that have not been burnt by neither the real ﬁre nor the simulated
ﬁre are considered Correct Negatives (CN). Those cells that have been burnt in both real ﬁre
and simulated ﬁre are called Hits. The cells that are only burnt in the real ﬁre and are not
burnt in the simulated ﬁre are called Misses. Finally, in the opposite case, the cells that are

Figure 2: Events involved in metrics related to forecast veriﬁcation.
420

Error Impact in DDDAS-Fire Spread Prediction

C. Carrillo, T. Artes, A. Cortes and T. Margalef

burnt in the simulated ﬁre but the real ﬁre does not actually reach them, are called False Alarm
(FA). In the forest ﬁre case, the correct negatives are ignored since the area of the map to be
simulated may vary independently of the ﬁre perimeter, so they may distort the measurement
of the error. In order to express the formulas in the context of diﬀerence between sets, we use
the following terms: RealCell (cells burnt in the real ﬁre), SimCell (cells burnt in the simulated
ﬁre), UCell (all cells belonging to both real ﬁre and simulated ﬁre), ICell (cells burnt in the
real ﬁre and in the simulated ﬁre) and IniCell (cells burnt at the starting time or cells of the
ignition perimeter). In fact, these variables can also be transformed as a combination of Hits,
Misses and False alarms as is shown in Eq. 1.
RealCell = Hits + M isses

(1)

SimCell = Hits + F A
U Cell = Hits + M isses + F A
ICell = Hits
Taking into account this notation, in the subsequent sections, we shall describe diﬀerent
error functions that could be deployed in the above described Dynamic Data Driven Prediction
system, in particular in the Calibration stage, and the advantages and drawbacks of each one
are reported.

3.1

Bias score or frequency Bias (BIAS)

This error metric measures the frequency of modelled events to that observed ones (see Eq. 2).
Hits + F A
(2)
Hits + M isses
In the evolutionary process we focus on minimizing the ratio of the frequency of the erroneous
simulated events, so we rely on a slight variant of the BIAS score. The same error function can
be expressed in terms of diﬀerence between sets where the initial ﬁre is considered a point and,
therefore, it can be removed from the equation. The obtained formula is also shown in Eq. 3.
BIAS =

∈=

M isses + F A
U Cell − ICell
=
Hits + M isses
RealCell

(3)

The main problem of this metric when applied to the Two-Stage methodology is concentrated
into the Calibration stage. As we said, in this part of the methodology, several scenarios are
evaluated, then they are ranked using the error function, and ﬁnally, the best parameter set
is selected to perform the prediction. It was detected that the individuals with less spread,
tend to provide the best error values [4]. Analysing the shape of the other individual, it was
observed that potential good predictions were discarded from the calibration process due to
the high penalty generated by the False Alarms. In order to solve this undesired eﬀect, the
following errors functions are proposed.

3.2

Proposed equation 1 (∈1 )

This function is a combination of the previous formula(Eq. 3) and the False Alarm Rate (FAR).
The FAR measures the proportion of the wrong events forecast (see Eq. 4).
F AR = F A/(Hits + F A)

(4)
421

Error Impact in DDDAS-Fire Spread Prediction

C. Carrillo, T. Artes, A. Cortes and T. Margalef

Since we are interested in penalizing those cases that underestimate the forecast, ∈1 combines BIAS and FAR. Eq. 5 shows this new error function in terms of events and diﬀerence
between cell sets.
∈1 =

3.3

1
·
2

M isses + F A
FA
+
Hits + M isses Hits + F A

=

1
·
2

U Cell − ICell SimCell − ICell
+
RealCell
SimCell

(5)

Proposed equation 2 (∈2 )

The next error function is very close to the previous one, but in this case the FAR subtract the
BIAS, as it can be seen in the Eq. 6.
∈2 =

3.4

1
·
2

M isses + F A
FA
−
Hits + M isses Hits + F A

=

1
·
2

U Cell − ICell SimCell − ICell
−
RealCell
SimCell

(6)

Proposed equation 3 (∈3 )

Another error function used is a combination of Eq. 4 and the PrObability of Detection of hits
rate (POD). This formula relates the observed events an estimated positively with all ones, Eq.
7. It represents the probability of a phenomenon being detected.
P OD =

Hits
Hits + M isses

(7)

However, as it was mentioned, we focus on minimizing the ratio of the frequency of the erroneous
simulated events, so we rely on a slight variant of the POD, as expressed in formula 8.
∈=

M isses
Hits + M isses

(8)

The result of combining Eq. 8 with Eq. 4 is expressed in Eq. 9.
∈3 =

3.5

M isses
FA
+
Hits + M isses Hits + F A

1
·
2

=

1
·
2

RealCell − Icell SimCell − ICell
+
RealCell
SimCell

(9)

Proposed equation 4 (∈4 )

This error function was proposed in [4]. Using this function, the individuals that provide
overestimated prediction have a better error than those individuals that underestimate the ﬁre
evolution. This function is shown in Eq. 10.
∈4 =

3.6

1
·
2

M isses + F A
M isses + F A
+
Hits + M isses
Hits + F A

=

1
·
2

U Cell − Icell U Cell − ICell
+
RealCell
SimCell

(10)

Proposed equation 5 (∈5 )

In order to penalize more the misses than the False Alarms, Eq. 11 was proposed.
∈5 = α · F A + β · M isses = α · (SimCell − ICell) + β · (RealCell − ICell)

(11)

with α = 1 and β = 2. This error function provides very high errors, but, in our case, this is
not a problem, because we only want to compare the errors among the individuals but not the
absolute value of the error.
422

Error Impact in DDDAS-Fire Spread Prediction

3.7

C. Carrillo, T. Artes, A. Cortes and T. Margalef

Proposed equation 6 (∈6 )

This equation is close to Eq. 11, but in this case the Hits are removed (see Eq. 12). This
implies that using this error function, negatives values can be obtained but, as it was stated,
we do not care about the value but on the ﬁnal ranking. In this case, the best individual will
be the individual with a high negative value.
∈6 = α · F A + β · M isses − γ · Hits =
= α · (SimCell − ICell) + β · (RealCell − ICell) − γ · ICell

(12)

The problem of Eq. 11 and Eq. 12 is that the values of α, β, and γ are ﬁxed and they are not
the best choice for all the forest ﬁres.

3.8

Proposed equation 7 (∈7 )

In order to overcome the restrictions of the Eq. 11, Eq. 13 has been proposed.
∈7 = α · F A + β · M isses
with
α=

(13)

Hits
ICell
=
Hits + F A
SimCell

(14)

and

ICell
ICell
Hits
=
+
(15)
Hits + M isses
SimCell RealCell
Then, the error function expressed in context of diﬀerence between sets corresponds to Eq.
β =α+

16.
∈7 =

4

ICell
· (SimCell − ICell) +
SimCell

ICell
ICell
+
SimCell RealCell

· (RealCell − ICell)

(16)

Experimental Study

In order to analyze how the use of diﬀerent error functions aﬀects the prediction of the forest ﬁre
spread, we have selected as study case one event belonging to the database of EFFIS (European
Forest Fire Information System) [6]. In particular, we have retrieved the information of a past
ﬁre that took place in Greece during the summer season of 2011 in the region of Arkadia. The
forest ﬁre began on the 26th of August and the total burnt area was 1.761 ha. In Figure 3, it
can be seen the ﬁre perimeters at three diﬀerent time instants: t0 (August 26th at 09:43am),
t1 (August 26th at 11:27am) and t2 (August 27th at 08:49am).
Since the objective of this experimental study is to demonstrate the impact of the error
function in the conﬁdence level of the Two-Stage dynamic data driven prediction system, the
best individuals obtained in the Calibration stage for each proposed error function are shown
in Figure 4. The corresponding prediction stage perimeters for each error function are shown
in Figure 5. As it can be observed, the best individual at the end of the Calibration stage is
directly related to the error function used in it. In Figure 5(a) we can observe that the error
function BIAS (eq. 3) tends to provide the best error values to individuals with less spread.
The corresponding prediction can be seen in Figure 5(a) where it can be observed that the
423

Error Impact in DDDAS-Fire Spread Prediction

C. Carrillo, T. Artes, A. Cortes and T. Margalef

direction of the simulated ﬁre is diﬀerent from the direction of the real ﬁre. For this reason,
the burned area of the simulation is overestimated in some places and in other the burned area
is underestimated. The best individual in the calibration stage, when the ﬁrst error function
proposed (Eq. 5) is used, is quite underestimated too, see Figure 4(b). The prediction of the
forest ﬁre ﬁts better than the previous error function, but in some places the burned area is
underestimated, see Figure 5(b). In Figure 4(c) it can be seen that the second error function
proposed (Eq. 6) assigns less errors to the underestimated simulations. The best individual is
selected in the Calibration stage when this error function is the most overestimated. But the
corresponding prediction, ﬁgure 5(c) is not so bad. When the third error function proposed
(Eq. 9) is used, the burned area of the best individual of the Calibration stage is overestimated
respect to the real ﬁre (see Figure 4(d)). Figure 5(d) shows the corresponding prediction. It
can be observed that the burned area of the simulation ﬁre is much bigger that the burned area
of the real ﬁre. Figure 4(f) shows the best individual when the ﬁfth metric proposed (Eq. 11)
is used. As we can see, in this case the individual with less error in the Calibration stage has
an underestimated burnt area. The corresponding prediction is shown in ﬁgure 5(f). As it can
be observed, the prediction of the forest ﬁre has a very underestimated perimeter. Using the
sixth proposed equation (Eq. 12) the best individual of the Calibration stage ﬁts the real ﬁre
perimeter pretty good (see Figure 4(g)). However, the obtained predicted ﬁre perimeter is very
overestimated (see ﬁgure 5(g)). The seventh equation proposed (Eq. 16) is a rare case. While in
the Calibration stage, the best individual generates an underestimated burned area, see ﬁgure
4(h), the prediction of the wild ﬁre behaviour is overestimated (8ﬁgure 5(h)). The reason for
this incoherence is because this error function is very sensitive to the hits or intersection cells.
This equation provides better errors when the number of intersection cells is smaller, therefore,
this can distort the results.

5

Conclusions

Natural hazards evolution prediction is a key issue to minimize the damage they cause, so
complex models are developed to predict their evolution. These models require certain input
parameters that, in some cases, are diﬃcult to know in a real emergency. In this work, we focus
on the speciﬁc case of forest ﬁre as one of the most worrisome natural disaster. It has been
demonstrated that DDDAS Two-Stage methodology is a good strategy in order to minimize
the input parameter uncertainty. The key issue in this strategy resides in the Calibration stage,

Figure 3: Fire perimeters corresponding to Arkadia ﬁre. The Perimeter 1 was used as initial
perimeter (ignition Perimeter), Perimeter 2 was used in the Calibration stage and the perimeter
to be predicted is Perimeter 3.
424

Error Impact in DDDAS-Fire Spread Prediction

C. Carrillo, T. Artes, A. Cortes and T. Margalef

(a) Best individual using equation
BIAS, ∈= 1.010.

(b) Best individual using proposed
equation 1 , ∈1 = 0.802.

(c) Best individual using proposed
equation 2, ∈2 = 0.254.

(d) Best individual using proposed
equation 3, ∈3 = 0.196.

(e) Best individual using proposed
equation 4, ∈4 = 1.139.

(f) Best individual using proposed
equation 5, ∈5 = 481.

(g) Best individual using proposed
equation 6, ∈6 = 189.

(h) Best individual using proposed
equation 7, ∈7 = 86.254.

Figure 4: Calibration stage perimeters for each error function and its corresponding error.
where the input parameters are calibrated according to real observations of the behaviour of the
ﬁre. The results show that diﬀerent error functions imply diﬀerent calibration of the parameters
and, therefore, diﬀerent forest ﬁre spread predictions are obtained. For this reason to select
an adequate error function is a crucial aspect to establish an appropriate level of conﬁdence in
the forest ﬁre prediction system for management and decision-making. The ﬁre simulator does
not take into account the human intervention against the forest ﬁre, for this reason, the best
error function is the error function which penalizes less the overestimated predictions than the
underestimated. Future work includes to test the proposed error functions described in section
3 in other real cases in order to ﬁnd which is the optimal one to improve the prediction of the
425

Error Impact in DDDAS-Fire Spread Prediction

C. Carrillo, T. Artes, A. Cortes and T. Margalef

(a) Prediction stage perimeters for
BIAS, ∈= 1.178

(b) Prediction stage perimeters for
proposed equation 1, ∈1 = 0.584

(c) Prediction stage perimeters for
proposed equation 2, ∈2 = 0.267

(d) Prediction stage perimeters for
proposed equation 3, ∈3 = 0.182

(e) Prediction stage perimeters for
proposed equation 4, ∈4 = 0.826

(f) Prediction stage perimeters for proposed equation 5, ∈5 = 1536

(g) Prediction stage perimeters for
proposed equation 6, ∈6 = 2218

(h) Prediction stage perimeters for
proposed equation 7, ∈7 = 786.835

Figure 5: Prediction stage perimeters for each error function and its error.

behaviour of the wild ﬁres.

Acknowledgments
This research has been supported by MINECO-Spain under contract TIN2014-53234-C2-1-R
and by the Catalan government under grant 2014-SGR-576.
426

Error Impact in DDDAS-Fire Spread Prediction

C. Carrillo, T. Artes, A. Cortes and T. Margalef

References
[1] Tomàs Artés, Adrián Cardil, Ana Cortés, Tomàs Margalef, Domingo Molina, Lucas Pelegrín, and Joaquín Ramírez. Forest ﬁre propagation prediction based on overlapping
DDDAS forecasts. Procedia Computer Science, 51:1623–1632, 2015.
[2] Tomàs Artés, Andrés Cencerrado, Ana Cortés, and Tomàs Margalef. Enhancing computational eﬃciency on forest ﬁre forecasting by time-aware genetic algorithms. The Journal
of Supercomputing, 71(5):1869–1881, 2015.
[3] Neil D. Bennett and Barry et alter. Characterising performance of environmental models.
Environmental Modelling & Software, 40:1–20, 2013.
[4] Carlos Brun, Ana Cortés, and Tomàs Margalef. Coupled dynamic data-driven framework
for forest ﬁre spread prediction. Lecture Notes Computer Science, 8964:54–67, 2015.
[5] Andrés Cencerrado, Ana Cortés, and Tomàs Margalef. Genetic algorithm characterization
for the quality assessment of forest ﬁre spread prediction. Procedia Computer Science,
9:312–320, 2012.
[6] Joint
Research
Centre.
European
forest
ﬁre
information
system.
http://forest.jrc.ec.europa.eu/eﬃs/, August 2011.
[7] Mónica Denham, Ana Cortés, and Tomàs Margalef. Computational steering strategy to
calibrate input variables in a dynamic data driven genetic algorithm for forest ﬁre spread
prediction. Lecture Notes Computer Science, 5545:479–488, 2009.
[8] Mónica Denham, Kerstin Wendt, Germán Bianchini, Ana Cortés, and Tomàs Margalef.
Dynamic data-driven genetic algorithm for forest ﬁre spread prediction. J. Comput. Science, 3(5):398–404, 2012.
[9] B
Ebert.
Forecast
veriﬁcation:issues,
methods
and
faq.
http://www.cawcr.gov.au/projects/veriﬁcation, June 2012.
[10] M. A. Finney. Farsite: Fire area simulator—model development and evaluation. FResearch
Paper RMRS-RP-4 Revised, 236:Research Paper RMRS–RP–4 Revised, 1998.
[11] Odegaard V. Gjertsen U. The water phase of precipitation: a comparison between observed, estimated and predicted values. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.atmosres.2004.10.030
., October 2005.
[12] A. D. Roo P. D. Bates. A simple raster-based model for ?ood inundation simulation.
236((1-2)):54–77, 2000.
[13] P. F. Skerlj J. Lawrence A. Twisdale K. Huang P. J. Vickery, J. Lin. Hazus-mh hurricane
model methodology. i: Hurricane hazard, terrain, and wind load modeling, 2006.
[14] R. Rothermel. R. rothermel. US Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Inter- mountain
Forest and Range Experiment Station Ogden, UT, USA 1983.
[15] Gemma Sanjuan, Carlos Brun, Tomàs Margalef, and Ana Cortés. Wind ﬁeld uncertainty
in forest ﬁre propagation prediction. Procedia Computer Science, 29:1535–1545, 2014.
[16] F. I. Gonzalez V. V. Titov. Implementation and testing of the method of splitting tsunami
(most) model, 1997.

427

