Available online at www.sciencedirect.com

Procedia Computer Science 9 (2012) 1999

International Conference on Computational Science, ICCS 2012

Improved Motif Detection in Large Sequence Sets with random
sampling in a Kepler workﬂow
Sven K¨ohlera,∗, Phillip Seitzera , Marc T. Facciottia , Bertram Lud¨aschera
a University

of California, Davis

Abstract
The discovery of functionally signiﬁcant short, statistically overrepresented subsequence patterns (motifs) in a set
of biological sequences is a challenging and important problem. Oftentimes, not all sequences in the set contain a
motif. When using traditional methods these non-motif-containing sequences complicate the algorithmic discovery of
motifs. MotifCatcher [1] is a framework developed by Seitzer et al. [2] that extends the sensitivity of existing motifﬁnding tools by applying random sampling to input sequences. First, multiple subsets of sequences are randomly
constructed. Some of these subsets have a large number of motif-containing sequences. Traditional motif-ﬁnding
tools are applied to all subsets in parallel, and signiﬁcant motifs are recovered from appropriate subsets. Finally,
this framework returns candidate functionally signiﬁcant motifs and organizes them into a tree. which allows further
analysis. However, the current implementation of MotifCatcher does not scale to large sets of sequences. This is
due to the fact that the current implementation is not suited for distributed computing, and the whole sequence set
is kept in memory. In order to achieve better scalability we present a redesigned implementation using the Kepler
scientiﬁc workﬂow system that addresses those shortcomings. Kepler functions as a convenient front end to encode
the computation into a Map Reduce pattern [3] to archive high parallelism for computationally intensive steps. Furthermore, Kepler greatly simpliﬁes the substitution of the motif ﬁnding algorithm used on each subset. Using Kepler
we ware able to increase the maximum size of the sequence sets in which motifs can be discovered and we were able
to increase the number of subsets processed in parallel.
Keywords: Scientiﬁc workﬂow, motif detection, Map-Reduce

References
[1] http://www.bme.ucdavis.edu/facciotti/resources data/software/.
[2] P. Seitzer, D. Larsen, E. Wilbanks, M. Facciotti, A monte carlo-based framework to enhance the discovery and interpretation of regulatory
sequence motifs.
[3] J. Wang, D. Crawl, I. Altintas, Kepler + Hadoop: a general architecture facilitating data-intensive applications in scientiﬁc workﬂow systems,
in: Proceedings of the 4th Workshop on Workﬂows in Support of Large-Scale Science, WORKS ’09, ACM, New York, NY, USA, 2009, pp.
12:1–12:8.

∗ Corresponding

author
Email address: svkoehler@ucdavis.edu (Sven K¨ohler)

1877-0509 © 2012 Published by Elsevier Ltd. Open access under CC BY-NC-ND license.
doi:10.1016/j.procs.2012.04.219

