Procedia Computer Science
Volume 29, 2014, Pages 1846–1858
ICCS 2014. 14th International Conference on Computational Science

Measuring Business Value of Learning Technology
Implementation in Higher Education Setting
Nia Alexandrov1*
1

Barcelona Supercomputing Center, Spain.
nia.alexandrov@bsc.es

Abstract
This paper introduces the concept of Business Value of Learn ing Technology and presents an
approach how to measure the Business Value of Learning Technology in Higher Education setting
based on a case study in Co mputational Science and cognate areas. Compu tational Science subject
area is used as a pilot for the studies described in this paper since it is a mult idisciplinary area,
attracting students from diverse backgrounds and Computational Science is both the natural
environment to promote collaborative teaching methods and collaborative provision of courses and as
such requires more streamlined management processes. The paper, based on the above case study,
presents the motivators and hygiene factors for Learn ing Technology Implementation in Higher
Education setting. Finally, the Intersecting Influences Model presents the influences of pedagogy,
technology and management over the mot ivation and hygiene factors, together with the corresponding
generalization for PG level HE setting.
Keywords: Business Value in HE setting, M otivation Factors in HE, M easuring Business Value in HE Setting,
Computational Science.

1 Introduction
This paper introduces the concept of Business Value of Learning Technology in HE, d iscusses
how to measure the Business Value of Learning Technology in Higher Education setting based on
case study in Co mputational Science. The case study was built upon the ACET (Advanced Co mputing
and Emerg ing Technologies center) managed postgraduate courses: the MSc in Net work Centred
Co mputing, the Eras mus Mundus MSc in Network and e-Business Centred Co mputing and the MSc in
Co mputational Science by Research. The efforts were init ially concentrated on the Computational

*

BSC, C/Jordi Girona 29, 08034 Barcelona, Spain

1846

Selection and peer-review under responsibility of the Scientiﬁc Programme Committee of ICCS 2014
c The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V.
doi:10.1016/j.procs.2014.05.169

Measuring Business Value of Learning Technology

N. Alexandrov

Science subjects included in these MSc courses as these are core subject modules taught to all
registered students before they choose a specialization.
The subject modules in question were Transferable Skills coupled with Network Co mputing (at the
University of Reading (Uo R), UK) in order to deliver a set of team based projects, where the results of
the former were utilised by the later as well as both modules using the Collaborative Creative Cross Pollination (CCCP) learning activit ies [1]; Algorith ms for Databases and Knowledge Mining (as part
of Erasmus Mundus MSc in NeBCC, A ristotle University of Thessaloniki (AUTh), Greece), where
development team pro ject was based on the individual research projects that the team members did,
Co mputational Intelligence and e-business (also as part of EM MSc in NeBCC at AUTh) also
applying team assessment; Postgraduate Research Skills (UoR, UK) assessed by team report
proposing algorith mic solution to g iven mathematical prob lem, and the Mathemat ical Modelling
(Uo R, UK) module requiring the students to take set of industry relate d seminars fro m the
Mathematics department and work with their peers fro m the Mathematics MSc. M ore detailed
presentation of the implementation of the CCCP act ivities and other team exercises was given in the
ICCS’12, Sixth Workshop on Teaching Computational Science (WTCS 2012) [2] and also in [1].
The reasoning behind using Computational Science subject area as a pilot for the des cribed in this
paper approach was that as mult idisciplinary area, attracting students fro m diverse backgrounds,
Co mputational Science is both the natural environ ment to promote collaborative teaching methods and
collaborative provision of courses and as such requires more streamlined management processes.
Business Value fo r IT is an emerging area driven main ly by industry. Resent books on the
subject are written by M. Curley [3] and D. Sward [4], Intel Corporation. There is also an Innovation
Value Institute (IVI) [5] located in the National Un iversity of Ireland, Maynooth, on the subject
matter. The proposed approach advocates to introduce certain metrics for estimat ing the Business
Value of IT. The metrics is linked with defining the baseline, defining the IT innovations to be
introduced, defining the expected productivity gain and measuring ROI (Return On Investment) within
the given timeline [4]. David Sward, for examp le, g ives the following defin ition of the business value,
accepted in Intel Corporation [4]:
“Business Value is the benefit for business groups, represented in dollar terms, that is a result of
Information Technology (IT) solutions or services, as evidenced by one or more of the following:
x

Direct contribution to the corporation’s market position or revenue

x

Deliverables and results that support solving customer business needs and challenges

x

Financial improvements derived from customer cost savings or benefits

x

Examples of technology investment that advance the industry.”

The author collaborated with the IVI in the area of apply ing the Business Value for IT approach
and ideas to the public sector, e.g. in a university environ ment. So the approach is fro m the point of
view of defining the Business Value and the metrics for a university enviro nment.
Herzberg in his studies (Herzberg 2003) has investigated the major factors to motivation to work
(or “job attitude factors”). The author believes that comparable set of factors exists in an educational
setting and they can be inferred using Herzberg ´s methodology. In his studies, Herzberg identified a
triad of factors -“first-level factors, second level factors and effects” (Herzberg 2003).
According to Herzberg [6] the first-level factors appearing in “Long-Range and Short-Range high
attitude sequences”, ordered by percentage of appearance the highest first are [6]: 1.Achievement,
2.Recognition, 3.Work itself, 4.Responsibility, 5.Advancement, 6. Salary, 7.Possibility of Growth,
8.Interpersonal relations-subordinate, 9.Status, 10.Interpersonal relations-superior, 11.Interpersonal
relations-peers, 12. Supervision-technical, 13. Co mpany policy and ad min istration, 14. Working
Conditions, 15 Personal life, 16 Job security.
Herzberg also considered interlinked factors [6]: 1.Recognition and achievement b eing closely
lin ked, 2.Achievement is lin ked with recognition, responsibility and the work itself, (and wh ichever is

1847

Measuring Business Value of Learning Technology

N. Alexandrov

considered as a primary factor of the previous four, the remaining three are secondary) 3.Advancement
being linked with salary and work its elf.
Herzberg also introduced the hygiene factors[6]: 1.Co mpany policy and administration,
2.Supervision-technical, 3.Salary, 4.Interpersonal Relations, 5.Working Conditions.
The motivation in educational context is considered in Sect ion 2, the motivation factors in HE
context are presented in Section 3, an examp le of a possible approach how to assess the Business
Value of LTI (Learning Technology Imp lementation) in HE context together with the ACET case
study example is presented in Sections 4 and 5 respectively. The Analysis, generalization and
conclusions are presented in Section 6.

2 Motivation in Educational Context
What motivates students to perform better and how to enhance this has been discussed time and
time again. In their work Chickering and Gamson [7] deduced the seven principles for good practice
in undergraduate education:
1.
Student faculty interaction – affordance of contacts in and out of class
2.
Student collaboration – collaborative learning activities
3.
Encouragement of active learning – emphasis on all parts of the learning cycle:
conceptualization, reflection, abstraction and practice
4.
Prompt feedback – adaptation through dialogue with teacher and peers
5.
Emphasize on time-on-task – sufficient time and it effective use
6.
Communication of high expectations – expecting high results and supporting extra efforts
7.
Respect of diverse learn ing styles – student centered model accounting for background
knowledge and allowing individualization of the experience
The seven principles are grounded in pedagogical theory and lay out a blue print for managing the
teaching process. There are obvious parallels between the Herzberg motivators and the seven
principles (Table 1).
Principles of good practice in HE
Student faculty interaction
Student collaboration
Encouragement of active learning
Prompt feedback
Emphasize on time-on-task
Communication of high expectations
Respect of diverse learning styles

Herzberg´s Motivators in work
environment
Recognition, Interpersonal relations superior
Recognition, Interpersonal relations - peers
Work itself
Recognition, Company policy and
administration
Company policy and administration
Achievement, Possibility of growth
Recognition, Work itself

Table 1: Relation between the principles of good practice in HE and Herzberg´s motivators
If we look at Higher Education and Learning Technologies Implementation (LTI), the question is
to identify these hygiene factors and motivators in respect to learning and th e learning process, e.g.:

1848

Measuring Business Value of Learning Technology

N. Alexandrov

x

Which are the hygiene factors and motivators in respect to the learning and the learning
process?

x

How the appropriate technology can enhance the motivators and facilitate the hygiene
factors?

3 Motivation Factors in Higher Education Context
3.1 Major Drivers and Rationale
The major d rivers were research and teaching leadership, producing the right profile of graduates
for the academia and industry, meeting the students expectations [8].
One of the triggers also is the constantly increasing demand on limited teaching staff comb ined
with frozen budgets or budget reductions. This inevitably calls for higher efficiency.
One of the opportunities to achieve that is to imp lement efficient IT solutions in order to enhance
first the Teaching and Learning process through imp lementing novel pedagogical approaches and
second to reduce the admin istration and administrative costs through streamlin ing the administrative
processes and de-centralizing the dissemination of teaching materials and assessment submissions
through a Learning Management System (LMS) or Virtual Learning Environ ment (VLE). Both can
lead to direct communication between lecturers and students and faster feedback to students.
In our case, at the Advanced Computing and Emergent Technologies Centre (A CET), at the
University of Reading, UK, it was required to optimize the budget and fro m point of v iew of staffing it
was decided to rep lace the t wo secretaries with several postgraduate (MSc/PhD) students who were
doing the secretarial jobs part-time and in the same time introducing new IT solutions and optimizing
the workflows in the office, and also introducing new electronic application systems for the MSc
applications, thus optimizing and reducing the ad ministration time and the time to deal with student
applications. At the same time these PhD students were proceeding with their PhD part -time.
The next ad ministrator emp loyed at the successful end of the above changes was a single person on
a higher grade dealing with overall administrative support of the Centre.
The study has been focused to the MSC degrees delivered by A CET Centre, among which there
are two collaborative provision degrees: Eras mus Mundus Joint MSc in Net work and e -Business
Co mputing, MSc by research in Co mputational Science and the local MSC in Network Centred
Co mputing. Various foru ms and groups were established in the integrated on -line course management
system in order to catch the students at application phase before enrolling on the programme and
continuing functioning after they actually enrolled on the programme throughout their studies. Based
on new pedagogic approaches and the CCCP learn ing activities [1] new teaching methods were
implemented on several subject modules in order to engage students in Collaborative Learning. Th is
enabled us to increase the business value for ACET in line with the business plan in terms of higher
student results, more interesting and in depth student projects, increased number of publications of the
students with professors teaching on the programme.
The author believes that the approach helped to achieve the goal of LTI business value not only in
financial terms of the imp lementation of an LTI solution by measuring the impact it had on selected
parameters crit ical for the strategic goals of the A CET Centre but also in academic and research terms
increasing the quality of the academic output as well as the international research collaboration.
Following Herzberg’s approach the author has defined two sets of questionnaires , one focusing on
the students and extended one for the professors and lecturers teaching on the courses. The
questionnaire is divided in three parts: questions on identifying the satisfying factors using IT,
questions on identifying dissatisfying factors using IT and questions on general technology use.

1849

Measuring Business Value of Learning Technology

N. Alexandrov

3.2 Identifying the major motivation factors in HE context
The satisfaction and motivation levels of students in two consecutive years on the intakes of three
MSc programs: the MSc in Network Centred Co mputing, the Eras mus Mundus MSc in Netwo rk and
e-Business Centred Computing and the MSc in Co mputational Science by Research have been
studied. All the students taking modules on the above programs were asked to reply to the set of
questionnaires mentioned above. Analyzing the replies in my opinion the follo wing motivation and
hygiene factors can be discovered in the case of HE setting, which correlate with Herzberg’s theory.
Consider first the analysis of the student replies. The motivation factors which came out fro m the
surveys are presented below:
x

Achievements (these are mainly conditions to facilitate further achievements, for examp le
participation in A lu mni association, writing papers for Eras mus Mundus MScs Annual
Conference etc.)

x

Recognition in HE (Higher Education) setting is through assessed works, marks and final
degree.

x

Student Involvement and Participation (active student participation
Representative, Forums, Interviews and feedback on the course. etc.)

x

Teaching Methods – “modules very well structured and balanced”, “good”, ”good opportunity
to stay in touch with lecturers”, “block system lectures and labs very beneficial”

x

Feedback – “good”, ”more feedback mechanisms at the end of each module needed”,
“feedback collected for the whole program regularly.”, “more feedback is needed, some marks
published too late”

x

Technology Features Facilitating the learn ing. The students have outlined some key features
such as: “24/7 availab ility”, “remote access to data and content”, ”access to articles, foru ms,
wikis”, “ability to submit wo rk electronically 24/7”, “online collaboration tools to exchange
info and collaborate on projects”. All the students rated positively and non -negatively (5 only)
that the technology used was satisfactory and that was easy to use the collaborative and
communication tools.

x

Interaction with Conveners and Professors, “good interaction student -teacher”, “active
participation in the learning process”, “Professors open for help and discussion”, ”teachers and
tutors always welcoming and ready to assist”, “lecturers always available”, “some external
lecturers difficult to contact”

x

Visib ility ( integration with the local student body, opportunities for socializing and
networking, added value elements, international exper ience, good teamwork, integration with
student organizations, strictly student forums, etc).

through

Class

Consider now the hygiene factors identified:
x

1850

IT Support (features and reliability of the Technology used). Was rated positively and non negatively outlining that “the training given was adequate”, “navigation was intuitive”,
”interfaces were usually user friendly”, ”online help was easy assessable”, “minimized
downtime of the system”. All the students interviewed rated positively the reliability of the
environments used. All the students rated positively and non-negatively (three only) that the
environments used were easy to navigate.

Measuring Business Value of Learning Technology

N. Alexandrov

x

Content and Assessment of the study program – “good lecture material, good quality”,
“mu ltiple methods used”, ”lectures on-line, easy to access”, “greater correspondence of module
name to content sometimes needed”, “objectives mostly clear”, ”amount of assessment
somewhat high”

x

Quality of Teaching , “the comb ination between the lectures and seminars is very good”, ”some
lectures are too deep”, ”sometimes the pace of teaching is too fast”, ”modules were well
structured”, ”lectures well co mp lemented by seminars”, “pushing students to the limit, properly
understanding to reach goals through proper research”

x

Teaching and Learning Resources , “handouts not always provided”, “good, well balanced”,
”always enough materials”, “some need clearer explanation”

x

Admin istrative Support, all were positive or non-negative, with only 5 negative responses. The
students knew who to contact in administration, learning support was available, informat ion
was given on time. So me student comments “good”, “very good”, “admin well organized”,
“admin very cooperative in resolving issues”.

x

Organization and Student Support, all students rated the available student support positively
and non-negatively, with only one being negative. So me students’ comment on “good
support”, “high collaboration lecturers -students”.

The motivators and hygiene factors in HE setting can be summarized in the following table:
Motivators
Achievements
Recognition
Student Involvement and Participation
Teaching Methods
Feedback
Technology Features Facilitating the
learning
Interaction with Convenors and Professors
Visibility

Hygiene factors
IT Support
Content and Assessment
Quality of Teaching
Teaching and Learning Resources
Administrative Support
Organization and Student Support

Table 2: Motivators and hygiene factors for students
Achievements and recognition were the two most important motivators for students, further
student involvement and participation was also very important for them and their early involvement
through online foru ms was very valued, interaction with professors during the studies was also
strongly pointed out. Technology features facilitating learning were key motivator. The feedback and
teaching methods were seen as very important for their advancement and higher achievements.
On the hygiene side, the IT support as enabler was clearly stated, stud ents were not happy if the
connection was slow, bad connectivity, software platform not delivering the functionality required
etc.. Students outlined the importance of the quality of the teaching materials and the quality of
teaching also as well as the importance of Teaching and Learning resources and their availab ility 24/ 7
are key enabler. The administrative support as well as organization and student support were
important for students to enable them to do the admin efficiently and up to date.
Consider now how knowing the motivators and hygienes we can enhance the learn ing process and
in turn facilitate hygienes and enhance the motivators. One possibility is to introduce novel
pedagogical approach based on collaborative learning and coupled and supported by advanced

1851

Measuring Business Value of Learning Technology

N. Alexandrov

collaborative ICT. These are expected to impact if p roperly introduced on the teaching and learning as
well as on the admin and overall on the business processes. We would expect to be able to increase the
student throughput, student performance, allo w fu rther flexibility in the subject portfolio and be able
to develop new areas and free some funding for PG grants, all these in turn will help enhance the
International Recognition and Employability of the students.

4 Measuring Business Value in HE
ACET was a founder and an associated member of the IVI (Innovation Value Institute) until 2011.
The author’s involvement with the IVI was in the area of studying and development of the IT -CM F
for the Public Sector.
The translation of these levels for Higher Educational setting as an examp le of non -for-profit
organization and more specifically the investment in Virtual Learn ing Environ ments and other IT tools
can be managed with respect to business value. This can be achieved by analyzing success or failure of
investment in tools as well as staff training and student skills acquirement based on improved student
results and increased satisfaction but not as direct cost benefit.(see Table 3).

ITCMF
Level
1

Description

IT-CMF in the Higher Education Context

No defined processes

2

Cost control and
services focus

3

Investment
governance based on
business cases

4

Portfolio
management

5

Alignment with
organisational business
objectives

Ad Hoc decision resolving particular current needs –
isolated cases of use of VLE, conferencing or web tools by
some courses or departments
Cost effective investments in providing services – centrally
supported VLE , conferencing tools, mail service for all
students, central Database
Management or educational reasons for investment –
centralised administrative systems for submission and
management of work and marks; availab ility of collaborative
tools and digital learning materials; simu lation and
visualisation tools
Sustained investment in advanced technologies and tools
facilitating research and collaboration and staff training for
implementing the technology in the teaching and learning
process coupled with creation of cross disciplinary bodies for
managing the developments
Strategies accounting for the benefits with great revenue
distance – students taught in technology rich environment with
state-of-the-art tools gain advantage in terms of future proof
skills and knowledge acquired, which in turn would reflect
into better employability.
Research publications increase based on achieving results
impossible without IT investment and so on

Table 3: Defining IT-CMF in HE Context

1852

Measuring Business Value of Learning Technology

N. Alexandrov

5 Business Value Assessment at PG Level
In the case of ACET the analysis of level of capability maturity of IT management for business
value was conducted through evaluation of course admin istration and identification of management
processes.
Time consuming processes:
x Processing coursework
x Collecting marks
x Processing Student Applications
x Preparing paper handouts for students
Repetitive processes:
x Information to teaching staff
x Preliminary information about student performance.
Expenses incurred due to specific way of work:
x Dissemination of paper handouts
x Storing of paper copies of coursework, etc.
The decision was taken to integrate LMS and make 100% use of various University systems into
the course management and ad ministration as well as imp lement our own electronic application
system.
So, on first instance an MSc/PhD student was employed instead of a secretary in order to transfer
the admin to a paperless one using the Blackboard VLE, secondly two MScs have developed, under
our supervision with the support of one PhD student, our own electronic application
system
producing applications in a format required by the Faculty of Science at Reading. Additionally a PhD
student has developed student forums, chat room and other tools enabling incoming students to
communicate with current ones before they enrol on the program. Therefo re we can summarize the
Course Management & Learning Technology Implementation as follows:
Stage 1: Cost effective investments in providing services (CMF level 2)
x Enforced use of a VLE (Virtual Learning Environ ment) in our case Blackboard. This was
also the VLE used by the three degree awarding institutions in the Eras mus Mundus MSc. All
the lecturers from the three universities as well as visiting ones used the same VLE.
x Paperless courses, store all the lectures, assignments etc. using the VLE, the students are
given CD, have access to the VLE and are ab le to download the lecture notes, assignments,
communicate with lecturers and view their marks.
x One IT account across all institutions involved in collaborative provision, All the lecturers
from the three universities as well as visiting ones used the same VLE and e-mail accounts.
Stage 2: Management or Educational reasons for IT investment (CMF level 3)
x On-line Fo ru ms, chat rooms, enabling inco ming students to communicate with the current
students on the program. This enables exchange of views on routine informat ion about
accommodation, student societies etc.
x Visib ility Events, such as the welcome week, and the Annual Workshop with the lecturers
from all the institutions involved via teleconferencing or in person.
x “Document bank” of all course documents including the case of collaborative provision.

1853

Measuring Business Value of Learning Technology

x
x

N. Alexandrov

Shared Content System across all institutions, enabling to keep lecture materials, marks etc .
in one place.
On-line applicat ion system, introducing online application system, one for all MSc programs
in the Centre, this minimized the time spent dealing with applications.

Stage 3: Investment in advanced technolog y and tools facilitating collaboration and
research (CMF levels 3 and 4)
x Measuring Business Value of LT Imp lementation, after imp lementing the above we have
reduced the time spent on routine jobs, have min imized the use of paper and have automated
the operations we could using IT. We have been able to reduce the permanent staffing being
without need of higher nu mber lower grade secretaries and instead having one office manager
mainly supporting the research work of the Centre and reducing also the cost for paper thus
releasing funds for PG grants.
x Managing LT Imp lementation for Business Value, here we are looking into managing IT in
terms of increasing the outlined above parameters and enhancing the motivators and
facilitating hygienes for students and staff.
The Business Value for the Centre and the University can be evaluated as follows:
x Clear alignment with the business objectives of the University such as Research and Teaching
strategies and the University of Reading Corporate plan at the time of conducting the study.
Aligning and advancing Postgraduate Education through portfolio management of LT to the
strategic objectives of the Centre and the University of Reading.
x To attract increased number of high quality postgraduate research students and provide them
with a stimulating and supportive research environment and training.
x Increased number of offered courses and a flexible postgraduate courses portfolio. The
change of the course structure, of the curricu la and possibility to offer more flexible program,
enabling the students to choose their own program increased the attractiveness of the cou rses
offered.
x This was a LTI investment that advances the use of novel technology and pedagogy for
Teaching and Learning. Our Collaborative Learning approach based on Collaborative
Creat ive Cross-Pollination (CCCP) activity model imp lemented on the MSc programs
increased the achievements and marks of the students in co mparison with the previous
intakes. One student statement summarizes it all: The program ”is pushing students to the
limit properly understanding how to reach goals through proper research”
x Putting all the lecture notes, assignments, marks etc on VLE as well as introducing the
software system for online application process, optimized the routine and time consuming
tasks. The investment here was one MSc and one PhD student part -time with Co mputer
Science background to digitize and set up the systems as well as one off investment in a
sponsored MSc project to create the online student application system. In a long run saved all
secretarial salaries and one part time PhD student is needed to maintain and reset the systems.
Plus all the lectures and Teaching Assistants were now ab le in a distributed fashion to update
their lectures, and assignments on the system. In addition, one system, handles the internal as
well as the International Joint Degree Programs. The result is increased throughput and
reduced costs.

1854

Measuring Business Value of Learning Technology

N. Alexandrov

Use of IT

The gains of this IT facilitated implementation are summarised in the table below:
Teaching Methods and
Curricula Design
Support of team work and
individual accountability

Subject Specific

Co mmon timetable and
progression path
Access to teaching and
resources
administrative
irrespective of location
Streamlined administration
Decentralised control over
material update and student
feedback

Remote
access
to
relevant
teaching
resources including HPC
resources

Gain

Develop ment of prob lem
solving,
research
and
collaboration skills through
implementation of CCCP
activities

Management Processes

HPC
and
domain
specific applications;
Visualisation
and
simulation environments;
Mathematical Modelling
capabilities
Over mult idisciplinary
subject area

Table 4: IT Impact

6 Analysis, Generalization and Conclusions
As previously stated, the author supposed that a set of necessary elements need to exist in the
education context in order to prevent disappointment or failure (hygiene factors). However their
presence is not sufficient to motivate students to learn or be satisfied with the experience, for which
another set of factors is necessary to be present (motivators). Also these fact ors can indicate the
existence, or lack of, synergies between technological facilitators, collaborative learning pedagogy and
management processes in the educational context. In such a complex system as HE, these are key for
creating successful programs. The eight motivators and six hygiene factors in HE context were
identified and presented in Section 3 above. Although there is a context specific d ifferentiation
between the meaning of these factors in education and in work environ ment (Herzberg), there are
obvious parallels between them.
According to Herzberg [6] the first-level mot ivating factors appearing in Long-Range and ShortRange high attitude sequences, ordered by percentage of appearance the highest first are: Achievement
understood to be successful complet ion of a job, finding a solution to a problem, seeing the results of
one’s work etc.; and Recognition- the act of recognition fro m a peer, supervisor, colleague,
professional colleague, general public, professional body, etc. He also co nsidered interlinked factors,
e.g. a frequency in which factors appear together in the sequences and Achievement is linked with
recognition, responsibility and the work itself, (and wh ichever is considered as a primary factor of the
previous four, the remaining three are secondary)
According to the study conducted by the author, Achievement is seen by the students as conditions
to facilitate further achievements, for examp le participation in Alu mn i association, writ ing papers for
Erasmus Mundus MScs Annual Conference etc. and Recognition is through assessed works, marks
and final degree. In conclusion, in HE context Achievement and Recognition are interlinked factors
too.
Herzberg´s highest frequency hygiene factors are Co mpany policy and ad ministration (ade quacy or
inadequacy of company organization and management) and Supervision -technical (relationship in
which the co mpetence or incompetence, fairness or unfairness of the supervisor, supervisors

1855

Measuring Business Value of Learning Technology

N. Alexandrov

willingness or unwillingness to teach, willingness or unwill ingness to delegate are critical
characteristics).
In the context of technology enhanced learning, they are comparab le to the students´ understanding
of IT support (features and reliability of the technology affording instant and constant access to
supervisors, materials and peers); Administrative Support (clarity who to contact in ad ministration,
admin cooperation in resolving issues, informat ion availability on time. learning support availability);
Organization support (linked by students to visibility, affo rdance of student involvement and lecturer student collaboration)
Reviewing the mot ivator and hygiene factors derived fro m the study it is possible to organize them
into sets with predo minant influence of one or several of the above mentioned areas – pedagogy,
technology and management (see Figure 1).
Analyzing the influences of the three areas and their intersections, the following conclusions can
be deduced:
1. The ways in which the areas influence the factors are:
x
x
x

As facilitator, the technolog y is in the position to resolve or aggravate the issues with means to
do, achieve, or communicate something
Pedagog y sets the principles on which the teaching is based (course, activities, and materials
design; level and type of communication between peers and with lecturers, and type of
student´s feedback)
The management creates organizational framework defin ing the capacity of this complex
system to resolve potential proble ms expedit iously and create visibility and involvement for the
students through rules, regulations and institutional bodies.

2. While some of the factors have clear affiliation to one of the areas, the majority of the factors
need complex solutions involving more than one type of intervention.
x

Single area of influence:
IT support (HF) and Technological features supporting learning (M) success or failu re can be
resolved/ facilitated with purely technological means.
Quality of Teaching (HF), Content and Assessment (HF), Interaction with Convenors and
Professors (M), and Teaching Methods (M) are factors resulting fro m the specific way of
teaching (pedagogy) and its quality.

x

Dual areas of influences
The dissatisfaction with administrative support may result fro m the existing admin istrative
regulations, the staff co mpetence or the poor level o f technological support preventing students
to interact with admin istration. Thus it falls under the influences of both management and
technology areas.
Teaching and learning resources can be poorly designed and in this case there is a pedagogical
issue or the tools used do not allow adequate access or collaborative work which makes the
problem on of technological type.

x

Triple (complex) areas of influences
Inevitably Achievements (M ) and Recognition (M) as interlinked factors in Long-Range
sequences are in the triple intersection and to be successfully facilitated require adequately
functioning technology, appropriate pedagogical environ ment and supportive management
processes.

1856

Measuring Business Value of Learning Technology

N. Alexandrov

technology
management

pedagogy
Legend:
M – motivator
H – hygiene factor
Factors standing
in overlapping
areas are under
intersecting
influences

Figure 1: Intersecting Influences Model
In this paper the concept of Business Value of Learning Technology in presented, together with an
example how to measure it in HE setting at PG level based on a case study in Co mputational Science.
Co mputational Science subject area is used as a pilot for the studies described in this paper since it is a
mu ltid isciplinary area, attracting students fro m d iverse backgrounds and Co mputational Science is
both the natural environ ment to pro mote collaborative teaching methods and collaborative provision
of courses and as such requires more streamlined management processes. Based on this study the
motivators and hygiene factors for Learning Technology Imp lementation in H igher Education setting
have been presented. Finally based on the study results it was possible to lin k together the intersecting
influences of the pedagogy, technology and management through the Intersecting Influences Model
which is one of the key findings of this paper.

1857

Measuring Business Value of Learning Technology

N. Alexandrov

References
[1] N.Alexandrov, R. Ramirez-Velarde, and V. Alexandrov, ed., “Technological Advances in Interactive Collaborative
Learning”, Taylor and Francis, 250 pages,Dec, 2012, ISBN-9781466502086.
[2] N. Alexandrova, V. Alexandrov and Raul Ramirez “The Role of Computational Science and Emerging T echnologies in the
Natural Sciences Education at University Level”, Procedia Computer Science, Elsevier, Volume 9, pp. 1789-1798, 2012.
[3] Martin Curley, “Managing IT for Business Value”, Intel Press, 2005.
[4] David Sward, “ Measuring Business Value of IT ”, Intel Press, 2006.
[5] IVI, Innovation Value Institute, http://ivi.nuim.ie/, Maynooth, Ireland.
[6] F. Herzberg, B. Mausner, B.B. Snyderman, “The Motivation to Work”, Transaction Publishers, Sixth Edition, 2003.
[7] Chickering, A.W., and Gamson, ZF 1991, Applying the Seven Principles for Good P ractice in Undergraduate Education,
New Directions for T eaching and Learning. Number 47, Fall 1991. San Francisco: Jossey -Bass Inc.
[8]Walker R, J. Voce and J. Ahmed, 2012, UCISA Report: 2012 Survey of Technology Enhanced Learning for Higher
Education in UK, http://www.ucisa.ac.uk/tel

1858

