Available online at www.sciencedirect.com

Procedia Computer Science 18 (2013) 2444 – 2453

International Conference on Computational Science, ICCS 2013

A 1D Lattice Boltzmann model for ocean acidiﬁcation
P. Geria , S. El Yacoubia , C. Goyeta , O. Marcoua,∗
a Institut

de Mod´elisation et Analyse en G´eo-Environnement et Sant´e, 52 Av. Paul-Alduy, PERPIGNAN 66860 CEDEX, France

Abstract
The impact of rejected anthropogenic CO2 is the object of numerous studies and concerns. If global warming is its most widely
known consequence, ocean acidiﬁcation is another important one. In this study, we will present a ﬁrst version of a simulator
dedicated to modeling the physico-chemical properties of ocean, and notably carbon concentrations. This model intends
to describe a one-dimensional water column, and will be validated through comparison with data from the Northwestern
Mediterranean Sea. The state variables in the ﬁnal model will be Temperature, Salinity, Total CO2 , Total Alkalinity and
Oxygen (O2 ). In the present version of the model, only Temperature and Salinity are being present. The chosen modeling
method is a Lattice Boltzmann scheme adapted and modiﬁed for this speciﬁc application. The model shows reasonable
agreement between simulation and experimental measurements for the considered time scale, but results also show evidence
that important improvements are needed.
Keywords: Lattice Boltzmann ; Ocean Acidiﬁcation ; Diﬀusion

1. Introduction
The anthropogenic CO2 rejected in the atmosphere is one the main identiﬁed reasons for global warming, but
also for the ocean acidiﬁcation phenomenon. It has been estimated that the average pH in oceans has evolved
from 8.25 in years 1750 to a value of 8.14 in 2004. The amplitude of this evolution depends on the geographical
points of the globe. Various phenomena are involved in this decrease, but the most important identiﬁed factor is
the increase of the anthropogenic CO2 in sea-water.
The aim of this study is to propose a model for the description of important physico-chemical properties in
oceans (focused at ﬁrst in the Mediterranean sea). Most models that can be found in oceanography actually focus
on describing water ﬂows and water physico-chemical properties as a part of a wider, ecological model. The studies present some interest in the dynamics of physical oceanography (see [1, 2]) or focus on the various biological
and ecological processes that take place in ocean waters (see [3, 4, 5]). The latter present some hydrodynamics
models for the physical and chemical properties used to feed a biological evolution model. The main concerned
properties are basically : Temperature (T), Salinity (S) and water ﬂows variations.
However, our work focuses on producing a model that mainly describes physico-chemical properties, while
keeping the complexity level of biology-related phenomena as low as possible. The present study intends to show
a simulator based on the Lattice Boltzmann method which gives the evolution of physico-chemical properties in
the ocean. A ﬁrst, a preliminary version is dedicated to the study of two independant parameters : temperature
∗ O.

Marcou Tel.: +0-000-000-0000 ; fax: +0-000-000-0000 .
E-mail address: marcou@univ-perp.fr.

1877-0509 © 2013 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. Open access under CC BY-NC-ND license.
Selection and peer review under responsibility of the organizers of the 2013 International Conference on Computational Science
doi:10.1016/j.procs.2013.05.420

P. Geri et al. / Procedia Computer Science 18 (2013) 2444 – 2453

2445

and salinity. This model intends to be a ﬁrst step for a future model capable of predicting the future evolution
of physico-chemical properties (like pH, Total Carbon, Total Alcalinity...) in the whole water column at the
DYFAMED site.
For this study on the modeling of a one-dimensional water column, we will exploit data from the oceanological
observatory of Villefranche-sur-Mer and of the DYFAMED (Dynamics of Atmospheric Fluxes in the MEDiterranean sea) site, in the waters of the ligurian sea. For this ﬁrst study, the model utilizes as state variables two ocean
properties available in DYFAMED data : Temperature and Salinity.
2. System description
The considered system is a column of water, where the following variables are considered : Temperature T,
Salinity S.
The ﬂow characteristics are those observed on the DYFAMED site, and the simulations realized with the model
will be compared with available data. Indeed, using a 1-D model means we implicitly assume that the horizontal
mass movement will be neglected. That hypothesis which is not really physically exact is usually considered
acceptable on the DYFAMED site, according to its location. Indeed, it is located in open sea in a zone generally
assumed to be isolated from currents. The system has only two boundaries : the bottom boundary, assumed to be
the ﬂoor of the sea, and the top boundary, where the air/water exchanges will be considered.
All the aforementioned variables are highly interacting through various physical, chemical and biological
processes. These processes are described in detail in various works which generally focus on ecological and
biological processes [3, 4, 5].
3. Experimental data
In this section we will give some insight concerning the experimental data that will serve to calibrate and
validate the system. As it was already mentioned, the data come from the long-term time-series investigation DYFAMED, which takes place at a site located at 43◦ 25’N, 7◦ 52’E in the north western sector of the Mediterranean
Sea (Ligurian Sea) approximately 45 km south of Cape Ferrat, France, in 2,350m of water. The main objective
is to contribute to the comprehensive understanding of the global carbon cycle. Various types of data are measured : hydrological (salinity, temperature, oxygen...), biogeochemical (alcalinity, total carbon, chlorophyllia...),
sediments, etc.
In this study, we use in particular measurements of Salinity and Temperature coming from monthly (at best)
cruises conducted from year 1998 until 2009. These measurements serve the purposes of providing initial and
boundary conditions to our model, and validating it by comparing the state of the simulated system at a chosen
time to the corresponding experimental data.
For both temperature (T) and salinity (S) studied in the model, the system will be initialized using experimental
proﬁles in terms of depth. Similar experimental proﬁles will also be utilized for validating the model. Also, surface
data is used to determine the values to apply as boundary conditions as the top end of the system.
In some cases where experimental data is needed but missing, linear interpolations are employed for their
estimation.
4. Water column model
In this section, we will present a water column model based on the Lattice Boltzmann method. LB models,
as described in several textbooks or review papers (for instance [6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12]), are an acknowledged alternative to standard CFD techniques to solve the Navier-Stokes equations and other partial diﬀerential equations.
The LB method for hydrodynamics is a mesoscopic approach in which a ﬂuid is described in terms of density
distributions fi (r, t) of idealized ﬂuid particles moving and colliding on a regular lattice. These ﬂuid particles can
only take a ﬁnite number of possible velocities vi such that, in one time step of the dynamics, particles move from
one lattice site to another.

2446

P. Geri et al. / Procedia Computer Science 18 (2013) 2444 – 2453

We present in this paper a ﬁrst model, which we plan to extend in the future. The aim of this ﬁrst model is to
describe the evolution of Temperature T and Salinity S according to time and depth in a one-dimensional water
column. As previously stated, we consider the two following hypothesys:
1. The system is a vertical one-dimensional water column.
2. Horizontal movements of water masses are thus neglected.
An important source of modiﬁcation for water properties in general are the movements of water masses (in
more general terms, transport phenomena). Most of these movements are horizontal and carry water masses with
speciﬁc salinity, acidity and temperature. Density diﬀerences between water masses lead their respective movements. In this study, the speciﬁc location of the DYFAMED site is usually considered to allow neglecting these
horizontal movements, as we already mentioned. This simpliﬁcation excludes external transport on the ”sides” of
the system. Another important simpliﬁcation of the model lies in the way that surface boundary conditions are
handled. A realistic modeling of air-sea surface exchanges (heat and temperature exchanges, evaporation, precipitation) is a whole topic in itself, and our model currently deals with it in a very simpliﬁed way, using traditional
LBM boundary conditions.
In addition to the aforementioned hypothesys, the water column is usually considered to be divided into three
layers : a mixed layer (near the surface), a deep layer (far from the surface), and an intermediary layer called
the thermocline. The mixed layer is basically a zone of approximately homogeneous salinity and temperature,
that appears because of the strong mixing induced by air-surface forcing (wind, etc). On the contrary, deep waters
remain relatively more stable. The thermocline is simply the transitional layer that spontaneously appears between
the two others.
In usual oceanographic models that were developed for studying the DYFAMED site (as in [3, 4, 5]), equations
of Temperature and Salinity read (see for example [5]):
∂T
∂t
∂S
∂t

=
=

∂ T ∂T
1 ∂I
λ
+
∂z
∂z
ρc p ∂z
∂ S ∂S
λ
∂z
∂z

(1)

They are basically diﬀusion equations including (for Temperature) an additional term corresponding to the
radiative energy received by the system from sunlight.
The Lattice Boltzmann model that was adapted to simulate the evolution of the two retained properties has the
following characteristics :
• The lattice is a one-dimensional lattice. For each cell of the lattice, there are two sets of distribution functions
that will be called resp. T i (r, t) and S i (r, t). Each set corresponds to one of the chosen variables, either
Temperature or Salinity. For each set, three distribution functions are considered : one for the upward
direction, one for the downward direction, and one for the rest direction. In Lattice Boltzmann terms, it is
thus a D1Q3 topology.
• Each distribution function has a typical value comprised between 0 and 1. Their sum on a given site corresponds to the ”density” in the Lattice Boltzmann terminology, called resp. T (r, t) and S (r, t) for Temperature
and Salinity. The LB density for a given property is converted to a physical value through a multiplicative
factor. The value of this multiplicative factor is 300 for Temperature and 40 for Salinity, which will put
them in a physically realistic range.
• The two usual steps of propagation and collision are implemented. The collision step uses the classical
BGK relaxation equation, which we will write using the following notation :
1
T eq − T i
τT i
1
S i (r + δt vi , t + δt ) = S i (r, t) + S S ieq − S i
τ

T i (r + δt vi , t + δt ) = T i (r, t) +

(2)
(3)

In usual oceanographic models [3, 4, 5], the evolution of temperature and salinity is usually described by a
diﬀusion equation as seen in equ. 1. Therefore, the collision operator of our LB model will be simpliﬁed

P. Geri et al. / Procedia Computer Science 18 (2013) 2444 – 2453

2447

and take into account mass conservation only, and not momentum conservation as usual. For each of
the two variables, the equilibrium distribution function is calculated by taking into account only the mass
conservation constraint. In our case, it leads to dividing the mass equally between the distribution functions
(as found for example in [13]) :
1
T (r, t)
3
1
S ieq (r, t) = S (r, t)
3

T ieq (r, t) =

(4)
(5)

• The diﬀusion
ﬀ
coeﬃcient of the model is deduced from the relaxation time τ, space and time steps Δr and Δt ,
and the number of elementary movement directions z (equal to 2 or 3, depending on whether we consider
a rest direction or not). Its expression is derived from the traditional formula for calculating the viscosity
in LB models, or the diﬀusion
ﬀ
coeﬃcient in the case of a diﬀusion
ﬀ
model (as in [13]). In our case, the
expression reads :
D=2·

(Δr )2
1
∗ τ−
Δt · z
2

(6)

A derivation of this relationship between the relaxation time and the diﬀusion
ﬀ
coeﬃcient can be found
in [14]. In the speciﬁc case of diﬀusion,
ﬀ
LB models are unconditionally stable regargless of the value of
τ, meaning that τ can also be chosen freely in order to obtain the desired diﬀusivity,
ﬀ
as long as its value is
superior to 0.5. However, the error increases for values of τ close to 0.5 or inﬁnity [14].
• System dimensions : the system is considered to be a 2000 meters deep water column. Therefore, the
actual size of the system (in terms of number of lattice sites) as well as the values of the space and time
steps depends on the desired value for the coeﬃcient of diﬀusion.
ﬀ
In Fig. 3, we present various simulations
corresponding to several diﬀerent
ﬀ
sets of values for the time and space steps and the diﬀ
ﬀusion coeﬃcient.
• Boundary conditions : they ﬁx the density value for each property at the limits of the lattice (in our case,
the two cells corresponding to the top and bottom extremities). The boundary values are deﬁned by using
measures realized at the DYFAMED site (see Fig. 1). Data is only available at times were measurements
were done during the DYFAMED program : therefore, when a value is required for a given time when there
is no data, a linear interpolation is made.

Fig. 1. Evolution of surface temperature between 1998 and 2000 (data from the site DYFAMED in Northwestern Mediterranean Sea ) - Used
as a surface boundary condition in simulations.

• The initial condition of the model corresponds to a density proﬁle of the considered property at time t0 for
all the height of the lattice. Interpolations are also used in order to have a value at each point of the lattice.

2448

P. Geri et al. / Procedia Computer Science 18 (2013) 2444 – 2453

Fig. 2. Measured Temperature proﬁle in the water column on the DYFAMED site (6th February 1998) - Served as an initial condition during
simulations.

5. Simulations results
This ﬁrst version for the model provides good results at deep depth, where mass exchanges are low. However,
it is not the case in the shallow layers. In these areas, the properties exhibit strong variations, some of them most
likely due to currents and air-sea exchanges.
Before presenting the results, a few words are required regarding numerical problems related to potential
instabilities or calculation time. Since it is a one-dimensional system, simulations are not calculation intensive.
Even in a worst-case scenario where a long-term (like 400 years of simulated time) simulation was run with a
resolution for time and space steps similar to other simulations, calculation times were typically smaller than two
hours on a single processor system. In LB models, the value of the parameter τ (relaxation coeﬃcient in equ. 2
and 3) must usually be kept signiﬁcantly higher than 0.5 to avoid numerical instabilities. Purely diﬀusive
ﬀ
LBM,
however and as previously stated, are unconditionally stable regardless of τ value. τ is still better kept signiﬁcantly
above 0.5, in order to diminish error [14]. Since we do not have strong constraints concerning the values of time
and space steps, it was also possible to choose the value of the diﬀusion
ﬀ
coeﬃcient (in agreement with equ. 6) so
that the value of τ was within an acceptable range. Unphysical oscillations in the obtained solution were observed
in the following cases :
• When the diﬀusion
ﬀ
coeﬃcient is suﬃciently small : much lower than for the simulations presented in this
paper, and much lower than the values that allow to observe good agreement between data and simulation.
• When no rest particle exists (when there are two directions of propagation instead of three) : oscillations
are then observed at deep depths, where the Temperature proﬁle is more or less ﬂat.
More model-related problems were also encountered. Those problems were :
• Taking into account the eﬀect
ﬀ of gravity : the water density (as a physical property, not the LB density of
one variable) may change according to temperature and salinity. In some cases, waters of high densities
may appear on top of waters of lower densities. This is unphysical, and since it is not implicitly taken
into account by the simple LB evolution rules for temperature and salinity, an additional step had to be
introduced into the algorithm to correct the problem.
• Correctly considering the mixed layer, where the diﬀusion
ﬀ
coeﬃcients of properties are expected to be much
stronger.

P. Geri et al. / Procedia Computer Science 18 (2013) 2444 – 2453

2449

• Correctly modeling air-sea exchanges. In our results, there is an accumulation of heat during summer
periods, which are not evacuated as quickly as it should when temperatures lower. In 100-300 meters
layers, we observe a clear delay in the heat diﬀusion.
Density: As was previously stated, it may happen in some occasions in simulations that waters of higher
density exist above waters of lower densities. Such a problem can appear in case of sudden modiﬁcations of the
physical properties of water (Temperature and Salinity).
This is obviously not physical, since waters of higher densities will tend to naturally move downward. However, no such process was initially implemented in the model. The calculation of density in function of temperature
and salinity revealed that in simulations, such density inconsistancies could sometimes be observed temporarily.
This calculation is done according to the results of [15]. In order to avoid the problem, a correcting term oriented
according to the density gradient was added in the BGK equation. In cases where the density is greater on one site
than it on the site immediately below, the BGK relaxation equation is modiﬁed as follow :
fi (r + δt vi , t + δt ) = fi (r, t) +

Δt −
1 eq
v i · F · fi (r, t) · Δ f
f − fi + 2 →
τ i
v

(7)

Where fi is either T i or S i , F is a parameter quantifying the desired importance of the term and Δ f is the diﬀerence
in densities between the two sites.
Mixed layer: In surface layers, inﬂuence of wind and air/water exchanges are strong, and result in the formation of a turbulent mixed layer where typical diﬀusion coeﬃcient for the considered variables are more important
than in deeper layers. Therefore, keeping an homogeneous diﬀusion coeﬃcient in every lattice site will result
in the model failing to reproduce the mixed layer phenomenon. Several strategies have been tested to take into
account the presence of the mixed layer.
Heterogeneous diﬀusion coeﬃcient in the mixed layer
The ﬁrst idea that was studied is simply to change the diﬀusion coeﬃcient according to the depth. To achieve
this result, the relaxation time τ is modiﬁed in the lattice sites belonging to the mixed layer. In the simulations
we will present here, the mixed layer depth is ﬁxed according to observations made on the DYFAMED data, and
vary according to the period of year. This method allows to obtain a zone where diﬀusion is faster, which means
the slope of the temperature proﬁle in function of depth will be stronger in surface than in deep layers. However,
results in that case are still insuﬃcient.
Fixed diﬀusion coeﬃcient in the mixed layer
The mixed layer depth is ﬁxed in the same way as in the preceding case, that is, according to observations of
measurements from the DYFAMED data. However, instead of simply changing the diﬀusion coeﬃcient in that
zone, instead we consider the values of properties in the mixed layer to be constant. This is consistant with the fact
that in data, temperature is eﬀectively found to be more or less constant in the surface layers which are considered
to be the mixed layer.
In Fig. 4, one can observe how the data/simulation correspondance may vary depending on the time considered
: the model actually tends to correspond correctly to experimental DYFAMED data in some moments in the year
(typically in summer) and exhibits diﬀerences at other times (typically in winter). For example, the graphic for
t = 1118 days shows in the simulation curve a heat pike near the surface which is clearly not present in data.
The Fig. 5 shows that the diﬀerences in simulation results depending on the method chosen for taking into
account the mixed layer. According to what can be observed, the best method seems to be the one with a ﬁxed
value for properties in all sites belonging to the mixed layer. With the other method, there are actually small
but signiﬁcant variations of temperature in the mixed layer, as well as an important diﬀerence between data and
simulation just after the end of the thermocline.
Deep waters temperature proﬁle: In previous results, a good agreement was observed between simulations
and data concerning the temperature proﬁles in deep waters. However, it is possible that this apparent convergence
is due to insuﬃcient simulation time. Indeed, the diﬀusion coeﬃcient value in these simulations is most likely
not high enough to allow the simulated system to reach its natural equilibrium in deep waters during the usual
simulation time, in the case where this equilibrium state is far from the initial state : the diﬀusion coeﬃcient is
actually adjusted so that the system responds correctly to seasonal variations on the surface, but the long term
eﬀects of these variations on the temperature of deep waters are unknown.

2450

P. Geri et al. / Procedia Computer Science 18 (2013) 2444 – 2453

Fig. 3. Temperature proﬁles (at 17th October 2000 - 1021 days) : comparisons of data and simulations with variations of time and space steps.

To conﬁrm that the model correctly predicts the temperature proﬁle in deep waters, a much longer simulation
time is needed. The result of such an extended simulation is given in Fig.6. A simulation with a diﬀusion
ﬀ
coeﬃcient of 4.0 was run for a simulation time equivalent to 400 years. In this case, unfortunately the system’s
temperature proﬁle in deep waters stabilizes but into a form which is relatively far away from the observed data :
a linear gradient between the temperature at 2000m (12.8◦ C) and a temperature of approximately 17◦ C at 100m
instead of a more ﬂat proﬁle as in the data proﬁle shown in the same ﬁgure.
The system still exhibits the expected stratiﬁcation between the mixed layer, the thermocline, and the deep
layer.
It is likely that the observed consistancy between data and simulation previously observed in deep layers is
largely caused by the limited time-scale of simulations, since when we let the simulation run for a very long
period, the typical proﬁle for Temperature in deep waters is lost. Therefore, it is safe to assume that a simple
one-dimensional diﬀusion
ﬀ
model is not suﬃcient to take into account all the phenomena involved in producing a
correct Temperature proﬁle.
6. Conclusion
In this paper, we proposed a ﬁrst version of a model dedicated to modeling and simulating the physicochemical properties in ocean. This model simulates in its current state the evolution of temperature and salinity
in a one-dimensional water column, with boundary and initial conditions from DYFAMED data. It is based on a
modiﬁed Lattice Boltzmann model, and treats the evolution of T and S as a solution to a diﬀusion
ﬀ
equation.
The results show reasonable consistancy between data and simulation. A simple method for taking into account
the mixed layer has been tested and shows acceptable results. However, it necessitates to obtain the depth of the
mixed layer at regular times by observation of the experimental data from the DYFAMED program. In its current
state, the model is suited for reasonable time-scale simulations (about 10 or 20 years) but not suited for giving
insight on long-term phenomenon, as it was shown by the 400-year simulations. Nevertheless, this ﬁrst approach
of using LB to model the physical properties is encouraging.
Perspectives of this work include at ﬁrst some fundamental changes in order to make the model capable of
reproducing spontaneously a correct Temperature proﬁle for deep layers after long-term simulations. Notably,

P. Geri et al. / Procedia Computer Science 18 (2013) 2444 – 2453

Fig. 4. Data and simulation agreement at various times of simulation, for a diﬀusion
ﬀ
coeﬃcient of 0.1.

2451

2452

P. Geri et al. / Procedia Computer Science 18 (2013) 2444 – 2453

Fig. 5. Temperature proﬁles (at 17th October 2000 - 1021 days) : comparisons between the two strategies tested for taking into account the
mixed layer.

the possibility of introducing transport into the model, as well as at least bi-dimensional calculation, will be
considered. Further perspectives include the addition of other properties in the model (Total CO2 , Total Alkalinity,
Oxygen, pH) as well as a better modeling of the mixed layer, and a satisfying calculation of its depth. Taking into
account the variability of the consistancy between data and simulation depending on time, the calculation of a
proper diﬀusion
ﬀ
coeﬃcient with potential seasonal variations may also be considered.
Acknowledgements
The research presented in this paper was funded by the European Mediterranean Sea Acidiﬁcation in a changing climate (MedSeA) initiative.
References
[1] P. Gaspar, Modeling the seasonal cycle of the upper ocean 18 (1988) 161–180.
[2] Y. G. Philippe Gaspar, J.-M. Lefevre, A simple eddy kinetic energy model for simulations of the oceanic vertical mixing: test at station
papa and long-term upper ocean study site 95 (1990) 16,179–16,193.
[3] D. ANTOINE, A. MOREL, Modelling the seasonal course of the upper ocean pco2 (i). development of a one-dimensional model. 47B
(1995) 103–121.
[4] D. ANTOINE, A. MOREL, Modelling the seasonal course of the upper ocean pco2 (ii). validation of the model and sensitivity studies.
47B (1995) 122–144.
[5] C. R. BLUM, Mathematical modelling of the lingurian sea ecosystem using models of diﬀerent
ﬀ
complexities. application of a kalman
` (2006).
ﬁlter to improve models reliability., Ph.D. thesis, Univers´e´ de Liege
[6] R. Benzi, S. Succi, M. Vergassola, The lattice boltzmann equation: theory and applications, Physics Reports 222 (1992) 145–197.
[7] S. Chen, G. Doolen, Lattice Boltzmann methods for ﬂuid ﬂows, Annu. Rev. Fluid Mech. 30 (1998) 3729.
[8] S. Succi, The Lattice Boltzmann Equation, For Fluid Dynamics and Beyond, Oxford University Press, 2001.
[9] B. Chopard, M. Droz, Lattice-Gas Cellular Automata and Lattice Boltzmann Models: an Introduction, Cambridge University Press,
1998.
[10] D. A. Wolf-Gladrow, Lattice-Gas Cellular Automata and Lattice Boltzmann Models: An Introduction, Lecture Notes in Mathematics,
Springer, 2000.

P. Geri et al. / Procedia Computer Science 18 (2013) 2444 – 2453

2453

Fig. 6. Temperature proﬁle : extended simulation of around 400 years. It demonstrates that a simple diﬀusion
ﬀ
model is not suﬃcient to
generate the observed deep waters temperature proﬁle, even though it yields the correct subdivision between mixed layer, thermocline and
deep layer.

[11] M. Sukop, D. Thorne, Lattice Boltzmann Modeling: an Introduction for Geoscientists and Engineers, Springer, 2005.
[12] C. K. Aidun, J. R. Clausen, Lattice-boltzmann method for complex ﬂows, Annu. Rev. Fluid Mech. 42 (2010) 439–472.
[13] D. Alemani, A lattice boltzmann numerical approach for modelling reaction-diﬀusion
ﬀ
processes in chemically and physically heterogeneous environments, Ph.D. thesis, University of Geneva, Switzerland (2007).
URL http://archive-ouverte.unige.ch/unige:469
[14] Q. Li, C. Zheng, N. Wang, B. Shi, Lbgk simulations of turing patterns in cima model, Journal of Scientiﬁc Computing 16(2) (2001)
121–134.
[15] I. O. Commission, The international thermodynamic equation of seawater 2010: Calculation and use of thermodynamic properties,
Intergovernmental Oceanographic Commission (2010).

