Procedia Computer Science
Volume 51, 2015, Pages 2483–2492
ICCS 2015 International Conference On Computational Science

Security and Privacy Dimensions in Next Generation
DDDAS/Infosymbiotic Systems: A Position Paper
Li Xiong1 and Vaidy Sunderam1
Emory University, Atlanta, Georgia, USA
lxiong,vss@emory.edu

Abstract
The omnipresent pervasiveness of personal devices will expand the applicability of the Dynamic
Data Driven Application Systems (DDDAS) paradigm in innumerable ways. While every single smartphone or wearable device is potentially a sensor with powerful computing and data
capabilities, privacy and security in the context of human participants must be addressed to
leverage the inﬁnite possibilities of dynamic data driven application systems. We propose a
security and privacy preserving framework for next generation systems that harness the full
power of the DDDAS paradigm while (1) ensuring provable privacy guarantees for sensitive
data; (2) enabling ﬁeld-level, intermediate, and central hierarchical feedback-driven analysis for
both data volume mitigation and security; and (3) intrinsically addressing uncertainty caused
either by measurement error or security-driven data perturbation. These thrusts will form the
foundation for secure and private deployments of large scale hybrid participant-sensor DDDAS
systems of the future.
Keywords: security, privacy, dddas, infosymbiotics

1

Introduction

The DDDAS paradigm provides a powerful framework for applications in which simulations are
dynamically integrated in a feedback loop with real-time data-acquisition and control components. Increasingly, these systems critically depend on security (protecting data integrity) and
privacy (safeguarding sensitive information) in their measurement, feedback, control, and imperative phases. In particular, hybrid systems comprising both sensors and human participants
fundamentally alter privacy and security requirements. At the same time, increased heterogeneity, complexity, and scale lead to technical challenges to ensure data integrity in the presence
of uncertainty and faults. New mechanisms are urgently needed to integrally support large
scale DDDAS systems manifesting such combinations of privacy, security, heterogeneity and
uncertainty attributes. Including security and privacy functionality integrally within DDDAS
frameworks will enhance adoption and facilitate their use in numerous emerging settings.
Selection and peer-review under responsibility of the Scientiﬁc Programme Committee of ICCS 2015
c The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V.

doi:10.1016/j.procs.2015.05.357

2483

Security and Privacy in DDDAS . . .

Xiong and Sunderam

Figure 1: Crowdsensing participation in DDDAS systems
The major extension we envision to next generation DDDAS systems as shown in Figure1
is the engagement of human or crowdsensing participants – both in the measurement domain
and the simulation domain. Participants possessing one or more smart devices and wearable
computers oﬀer a tremendous expansion in opportunities for DDDAS-based applications, as
observation and measurement entities and as local-regional simulation platforms to enable hierarchical feedback driven adaptive systems. In the general case, such entities are not dedicated
or owned by an application (e.g. UAVs/UGVs) nor do they necessarily have secure communication channels to central servers. However, their privacy and security must be guaranteed to
achieve high levels of voluntary participation and use.
We envision a hierarchical DDDAS architecture that consist of multiple loosely organized
local cohorts of participants and sensors at the “ﬁeld” level, one or more intermediate levels of
“regional” computational or simulation engines (or data repositories), and possibly a centralized high-end system where appropriate to an application. Interactions and feedback-driven
measurement, analytics, and decision-making can and do occur at each level, as well as across
levels in the hierarchy. Canonically, end-devices (participants and sensors) make measurements
or observations upon which individual or local cooperative analysis may be performed, raw or
aggregated data is fed into regional or central simulations, that in turn provide steering feedback to the end-devices. In this position paper, we propose privacy and security overlays on
this DDDAS model, identify some of the critical issues to be addressed in such an enhanced
feedback driven adaptive system and propose several key approaches to security, privacy and
uncertainty handling.

1

1 Original DDDAS paradigm depicted in Figure 1 due to Dr. Frederica Darema (http://1dddas.org), reproduced with permission. Dr. Darema reserves all rights to use graphic in Figure 1 or portions thereof in future
presentations or publications without express consent

2484

Security and Privacy in DDDAS . . .

2

Xiong and Sunderam

Central Concepts

The key tenet of our approach is that privacy preserving techniques can work in tandem with
uncertainty handling, multi-source data assimilation and adaptive decision support to provide
an integrated framework for dynamic data driven sensor-participant application systems. In
DDDAS systems, uncertainty can result from multiple sources e.g. measurement noise, unpredictable trajectories, and perturbation or cloaking for obfuscation; techniques to handle
privacy-induced uncertainty can address other causes as well. Similarly, aggregation or consolidation are methods employed to manage large data volumes; privacy preserving techniques
can be superimposed on such schemes without degrading utility. When data from multiple
sources are combined – either to reduce volume or to increase ﬁdelity – algorithms to weight
the credibility of individual inputs can simultaneously protect private source data. Secure multiparty computation schemes can enable localized-distributed DDDAS decision-making, thereby
reducing delays and expensive communications, without disclosing sensitive data.
Our framework seeks to fundamentally advance the state-of-the-art in privacy preserving and
secure DDDAS. We initially focus on hybrid participant-sensor systems and investigate techniques for: dynamic sensor-participant task management and alerts, aggregation of multiple
data streams/observations with conﬁdence metrics, and localized distributed computations for
multi-level decision making. Our ongoing PREDICT 2 project that has established preliminary
foundations for privacy-enabled DDDAS will be enhanced as a hierarchical, nested-feedback
architecture that is scalable and resilient to uncertainty and failures. It is intended to support dynamic task assignment, multi-source data acquisition and fusion, decision support and
control. Speciﬁcally, we are developing an adaptive privacy-preserving hybrid framework for
DDDAS that addresses:
1. Secure feedback-driven task assignment and alerts in the context of cloaked or encrypted
sensor-participant location data, including dynamic trajectory prediction to optimize sensing cost and target coverage.
2. Privacy-preserving data assimilation for modeling data streams from sensors, devices and
participants, correlating and combining them with high ﬁdelity and low disclosure.
3. Distributed-localized secure computing that is resilient to uncertainty and faults, and enables semi-autonomous decision making at multiple levels in the simulation and feedback
loops of the DDDAS paradigm.

3

Background and Context

In addition to greatly increased complexity and scale, the next generation of DDDAS/Infosymbiotics frameworks will depend critically on security and privacy in the data acquisition,
transmission, feedback and control phases of an application. DDDAS systems are becoming
much more comprehensive and now include human participants at all levels including data
acquisition, policy, steering and computation. As demonstrated by numerous crowdsensing
applications, literally every human can engage in, and contribute to, various subsets of applications in DDDAS arenas. While there is tremendous and limitless potential for leveraging the
capabilities of participants to complement sensors, devices, networks and algorithms, engagement by participants is predicated on security and privacy protection, in terms of identity and
location disclosure as well as other factors such as trajectory and temporal activity characteristics. Next generation DDDAS frameworks must centrally address participant management
with security and privacy preservation [15, 1, 11, 4].
2 PREDICT

is an acronym for PRivacy Enhancing Dynamic Information Collection and moniToring

2485

Security and Privacy in DDDAS . . .

Xiong and Sunderam

Figure 2: PREDICT Architecture
In current and emerging DDDAS systems, exponentially increasing data are acquired by
participants, heterogeneous sensors and controllers, each with greatly improved computational
capabilities. Applications involving complex streaming data are sensitive to privacy concerns
as well as to volume issues, especially when participant data and sensor data are fused in
complementary ways. These situations will beneﬁt greatly from privacy protection coupled
with reduced data modeling. Data uncertainty brings additional challenges, with sensors subject
to measurement error, power, environmental and component failure issues while reliability of
participant-provided data is susceptible to human factors. Thus there is a need to perform
aggregation and condensed data representation, while maintaining suﬃcient integrity to enable
decision making at all levels, including locally.
Privacy mechanisms are coincidentally well-aligned with techniques that deal with uncertainty, complexity, and volume challenges. For example, target tracking can be accomplished
cooperatively by participants whose exact locations are unknown (e.g. either deliberately obscured for privacy or due to measurement inaccuracy) by using privacy-preserving probabilistic
task assignment schemes [13]. In many DDDAS settings, high volume data can be aggregated
in ways that retain key statistical properties; equivalent algorithms can be developed that add
privacy-protection while simultaneously reducing volume, and maintaining high information
ﬁdelity [6, 5]. Advances in privacy and security can also enable localized distributed processing
through mechanisms such as secure multi-party computation that does not divulge private data
to untrusted peers but can compute decision-support functions without the need for a (trusted,
but distant and therefore expensive) central server [8].
Foundational Work We have established the viability of such approaches in the foundational phase of the PREDICT project, and have developed several new techniques for privacy
preserving task assignment, stream data sampling and aggregation, and multiparty computation. Our feedback driven framework focusing on privacy preserving data collection, data
aggregation, and data modeling is illustrated in Figure 2.
Detailed descriptions and results in each of the privacy-preserving collection, aggregation,
and modeling stages in PREDICT are described elsewhere, but to brieﬂy summarize:
1. Privacy preserving data collection with feedback control – we consider the problem of
assigning data-targets to participants with privacy protection (using cloaked participant
2486

Security and Privacy in DDDAS . . .

Xiong and Sunderam

locations), while maximizing coverage and minimizing (travel) costs. Using a two-stage
process where a central server makes initial assignments using cloaked locations that are
reﬁned locally by individual participants, we show that high levels of coverage can be
achieved with reasonable cost when participants and targets are ﬁxed. In many DDDAS
settings, mobile targets and participants are the norm and we are developing extensions
to handle the much more challenging and fundamentally diﬀerent situation involving
multiple moving targets and uncertain/unreliable, mobile, participants.
2. Privacy preserving data aggregation and modeling with feedback control – in many situations, aggregating and sampling can reduce data volume while providing functionally
adequate information content. We have developed techniques to deliver high data utility/integrity, with rigorous privacy guarantees such that source data is not disclosed. Data
are assumed to be single stream, and “true”. In emerging DDDAS systems, multiple uncertain streams (from sensors and participants) need to be fused, and characterized with
a conﬁdence metric that quantiﬁes the trust level of the function output, a focus of our
ongoing work.
3. In many DDDAS settings, (parts of) simulations may be performed locally or regionally, to minimize expensive or vulnerable communication with central servers. When
local participants are mutually untrusted, and for increased responsiveness in the ﬁeld,
such computations must be performed without disclosing individual input values, true
participant locations, or other sensitive information. Our preliminary work on secure
computations without a trusted aggregator has demonstrated the viability of such mechanisms, and will form the basis for speciﬁc types of distributed-localized, secure versions
of ﬁltering, trajectory prediction, and decision-support algorithms.
In the ongoing and future phase outlined in this paper, we articulate several research challenges that still remain to be addressed in privacy and security, both in the context of the
DDDAS model but also leveraging its capabilities and strengths.
Applications and Impact The proposed research will help overcome data privacy and security barriers and have signiﬁcant impact in enabling DDDAS applications for an even wider
range of domains. For example, real-time traﬃc activity, vehicle movements, and their environmental impacts can be measured and aggregated (through road-embedded sensors, traﬃc cameras and crowdsensing participants) for coordinated and environmental-friendly transportation
planning. Since spatio-temporal vehicle information can disclose sensitive data about individuals, privacy preservation is imperative. Similarly, user downloads of voice, data and streaming
video (again a privacy sensitive activity) can be aggregated in content and pattern analysis
for real time load balancing in content delivery networks. Systems such as WIPER [14] have
been proposed to use real-time aggregate cell phone data for dynamic population movement
prediction and emergency response – viable only if user privacy is guaranteed. UAV/UGV
systems for monitoring, e.g. crowd monitoring for border control, can be greatly enhanced
through augmentation with crowdsensing participants (with assured privacy protection) who
can respond and adapt in intelligent ways to the needs of the DDDAS application. Inevitably, in
all these scenarios, user privacy issues arise in task assignment and acceptance, data collection,
and usage modes. Data acquisition, aggregation and localized computation must be enabled
in dynamic and adaptive ways that are compatible with DDDAS while maintaining provable
privacy guarantees and quantiﬁable uncertainty bounds to make these systems a true reality.
2487

Security and Privacy in DDDAS . . .

Xiong and Sunderam

Figure 3: Next Generation DDDAS with Privacy and Security

4

Next Generation DDDAS with Privacy and Security

We are developing an adaptive privacy preserving framework for hybrid DDDAS systems focusing on dynamic participant management, data synthesis and localized-distributed computations, as illustrated in Figure 3. Our framework is intended to be realized as a hierarchical,
nested-feedback architecture where local processing feeds consolidated data into higher level
simulations that in turn provide steering, feedback, alerts and control signals.
The major thrusts of the PREDICT project include:
• Privacy preserving dynamic crowd sensing task assignment methods for adaptively assigning mobile targets to varying numbers of moving participants whose locations are
cloaked. Given uncertain trajectories of participants, we are investigating schemes based
on building mobility models and estimating (current and predicted) locations guided by
ﬁlters and feedback loops for dynamically (re)assigning sensing tasks.
• Data synthesis and validation techniques for assessing data content and integrity in the
presence of uncertainty. Sensor data and participant input are each subject to uncertainty;
we are developing techniques to combine data sources based on trust estimates to deliver
assimilated data with high conﬁdence levels in DDDAS systems.
• Secure localized distributed computation to enable hierarchical processing and decision
making, both for responsiveness and to leverage high end computational capabilities at
end-computing devices, while reducing high volume data communication loads and security compromise risks.
Our preliminary approaches to each of these thrusts is outlined below.
Privacy preserving dynamic crowd sensing task assignment. We consider a group of loosely
coupled participants who are mutually addressable but whose exact locations are not disclosed
to the cohort. This set of participants, either autonomously or augmented by a central server is
to be collectively tasked with a cooperative eﬀort e.g. target tracking. One current application
scenario concerns tracking a speciﬁc vehicle moving through an urban area [7] for destination
prediction and other uses. Another is surveillance and crowd control by a heterogeneous team
of participants, UAVs and UGVs [10]. In these and similar scenarios, subsets of participants are
dynamically assigned to make observations about their assigned targets, including trajectory
estimation and rates of movement.
2488

Security and Privacy in DDDAS . . .

Xiong and Sunderam

We are developing models for spatial task assignment in mobile crowd sensing that uses a
dynamic and adaptive data driven scheme to assign moving participants with uncertain trajectories to sensing tasks, in a near-optimal manner. Our scheme explores building a mobility model
from available trajectory history and estimating posterior location values using noisy/uncertain
measurements upon which initial tasking assignments are made. These assignments can then
be reﬁned locally (using exact location information) and used by participants to steer their
future data collection, completing the feedback loop.
In this project thrust, several research challenges are encountered:
1. Given partial trajectory history of a moving target and cloaked locations of n participants,
how to assign subsets of participants such that at a series of future times, the target is
covered by at least k participants. This challenge may be extended to map a set of
participants to multiple moving targets, maximizing coverage while minimizing cost.
2. Given mobile participants whose trajectories are cloaked, each of whom may only accept
assignments with a certain probability, assign subsets of participants to targets, maximizing coverage and minimizing cost.
Our preliminary approach to these research challenges is outlined below. To formulate the
location transition process, Bayesian inference and Markov model are two popular methods
which are being examined. For example, a grid-based road network with mapped trajectories
can be used to build a Bayesian inference framework for next location prediction [16]. Similarly,
a Markov model can be constructed which assumes a state for each node of a network, and for
each pair of adjacent nodes, both transition directions are considered and the probability of
each directed edge can be calculated based on location transition probabilities.
We are exploring a ﬁltering component in our framework that provides estimates of noisy
locations in order to improve the accuracy of location information. Using one of the mobility
models above, a linear state space can be created and coupled with an observation model and a
ﬁltering algorithm can be used for posterior estimation of the true state to minimize error. This
output, i.e. a set of ﬁltered uncertain locations, can then be used in task assignment based upon
new algorithms that optimize the assignment process using techniques from spatio-temporal
approaches, including k closest pairs of objects (K-CPQ) [3] and bounding area methods. Initial
assignments are then reﬁned locally where true location information is used to further optimize
assignments while maximizing application goals.
Data synthesis and validation techniques. In DDDAS application scenarios with possibly moving targets or data sources, sensing and data measurement/observation tasks are conducted by
ﬁxed and varying groups of mobile sensors and mobile participants. Observations especially
from the latter two are subject to uncertainty and unreliability for reasons ranging from measurement inaccuracies to power issues to communication error to, in the case of participants,
human ability, willingness, and security constraints.
The major challenges to be addressed to account for such uncertainties include:
1. Given multiple time series observations referring to the same event or phenomenon, each
with some measurement error or privacy perturbation, how can we combine them to derive
an estimation of the phenomenon that is as close as possible to the ground truth?
2. Further, if a subset of these observation streams are time-lagged, missing, or of diﬀerent
modalities, can they be fused to form an accurate estimate, especially if each source can
be associated with a trust level?
2489

Security and Privacy in DDDAS . . .

Xiong and Sunderam

The technical approaches we are adopting to address this challenge are as follows. We are
attempting to develop methods that enhance knowledge and data accuracy about particular
targets by combining sensor/participant data in ways that increase conﬁdence levels in the
fused information about a target or event. One issue concerns co-identiﬁcation, i.e. recognizing
an event or target as equal when reported upon by independent sensors, for which we are
exploring spatio-temporal registration as well as repeated image identiﬁcation techniques and
named events such as those used by certain crowdsourcing applications. To compensate for
unreliable inputs however, we need to develop trust-based mechanisms that combine historical
information with modeling to improve conﬁdence.
Methods based on probabilistic modeling oﬀer the greatest promise. Recent works [12] have
used graphical probabilistic models for truth discovery in crowdsourced detection of spatial
events. However, they only consider the static case where the input is the user report at a given
time stamp. We plan to extend the graphical models to consider dynamic users and temporal
spatial events. We are analyzing a probabilistic framework that integrates the modeling of
time-variant location popularity, participant reliability (trustworthiness), the trajectories and
the temporal and spatial distributions of participants, peer behavior, as well as the spatial and
temporal information of events/targets. We envision such a framework will allow dynamic and
automatic data synthesis and validation while eﬃciently handling various types of uncertainty
and unreliability.
In this regard, we expect to adopt from information fusion work that is closely related to our
eﬀorts. For example, consensus-based ﬁlters have been used eﬀectively for cooperative space
object tracking [9]. Another closely related project is the URREF framework[2] that permits
the speciﬁcation of uncertainty levels and information credibility in fusion systems. In our
approach we plan to generate parameterized estimations of spatio-temporal events from real
and simulated data, and derived trust levels among crowd sensing participants. The theory of
trust in multimodal fusion settings from URREF and similar projects will provide a platform
for evaluating the eﬀectiveness of our approaches to trust quantiﬁcation.
Secure localized distributed computation. We adopt the most generalized interpretation of the
DDDAS model wherein feedback loops are nested and hierarchical; data is adaptively collected
and fused at lower levels providing input to simulations at higher levels, which in turn drive the
collection process. In addition, there is also substantial potential and value in data transformations and simulations among peer entities at each level, i.e. localized distributed computations
enabling feedback-driven decision making. In addition to greater responsiveness and reacting to
local conditions, such an enhancement to DDDAS has several advantages including minimizing
communication costs in low power devices, avoiding costly encryption and key management,
and adapting to uncertainties and failures.
To facilitate both a model and practical scaﬀolding to enable multi-level nested feedback
loops in DDDAS, several technological challenges must be overcome:
1. Analyzing and developing secure multiparty computation versions of key DDDAS algorithms such as multi-observation ﬁltering and distributed consensus, e.g. trajectory prediction based on multi-perspective observations, collaborative assignment of participants
to targets without mutual disclosure of exact participant locations.
2. Estimating performance tradeoﬀs between localized-distributed computation vs. encryption followed by transmission of observations to centralized trusted aggregator; quantifying
temporal responsiveness in localized vs. centralized decision-support computations.
Secure multiparty computation is a key requirement for such localized distributed actions.
We are building upon our recent work in developing eﬃcient and distributed algorithms that can
2490

Security and Privacy in DDDAS . . .

Xiong and Sunderam

perform certain types of computations while preserving data conﬁdentiality [8]. For example,
a group of participants tracking a moving target might perform secure multiparty ﬁltering
and trajectory estimation based on their own (private) locations to locally reassign monitoring
responsibilities. For all the algorithms we develop in participant task management and data
synthesis areas, we will develop the counterpart secure multiparty computation protocols to
allow localized task assignment for data acquisition as well as ﬁeld processing of combined
participant and sensor data data.
For example, assigning static targets to participants that only disclose cloaked locations in
a cost-optimal manner was previously accomplished by ﬁrst transmitting cloaked locations to a
central server whose preliminary assignments were then reﬁned locally. A distributed version of
the same is straightforward to implement via all-to-all sharing of cloaked locations and replicated
local computations. Indeed, better results are likely due to the additional information available
in the ﬁrst stage of the process. A substantially bigger challenge is to make such assignments in
the case of a moving target with only instantaneous trajectory vector information. In addition
to distributed algorithms to compute such functions, a programming model and autonomous
computing infrastructure will be required; we are investigating middleware for a distributed
ﬁeld setting that incorporates entity naming and addressing, communication protocols, and
data alignment, correlation and analysis.

5

Summary

In this paper we posit that next generation DDDAS systems will critically depend on privacy
and security, and conversely, that the provision of such functionality will greatly expand the
applicability domain of the DDDAS paradigm. Our key insight is that mechanisms and data
transformations for privacy preservation have a three-way beneﬁt in protecting disclosure of
sensitive data, aggregation to reduce data volumes and oﬀset uncertainty, and enable local distributed computing that facilitates multi-level hierarchical feedback driven adaptive systems.
We describe foundational work in these areas and outline new challenges as well as possible
approaches to address them. Methodologies and techniques resulting from these eﬀorts will
provide signiﬁcantly enhanced functionalities for emerging future generation DDDAS/Infosymbiotics systems.

6

Acknowledgments

This research is supported by the Air Force Oﬃce of Scientiﬁc Research (AFOSR) DDDAS
program under grant FA9550-12-1-0240.

References
[1] Report of the August 2010 Multi-Agency Workshop on InfoSymbiotics/DDDAS, The Power of
Dynamic Data Driven Applications Systems. Workshop sponsored by: Air Force Oﬃce of Scientiﬁc
Research and National Science Foundation.
[2] Erik Blasch, Audun Jøsang, Jean Dezert, Paulo C. G. Costa, and Anne-Laure Jousselme. URREF self-conﬁdence in information fusion trust. In 17th International Conference on Information
Fusion, FUSION 2014, Salamanca, Spain, July 7-10, 2014, pages 1–8, 2014.

2491

Security and Privacy in DDDAS . . .

Xiong and Sunderam

[3] Muhammad Aamir Cheema, Xuemin Lin, Haixun Wang, Jianmin Wang, and Wenjie Zhang. A
uniﬁed framework for answering k closest pairs queries and variants. IEEE Transactions on Knowledge & Data Engineering, 26(11), 2014.
[4] Delphine Christin, Andreas Reinhardt, Salil S. Kanhere, and Matthias Hollick. A survey on privacy
in mobile participatory sensing applications. Journal of Systems and Software, 84(11):1928 – 1946,
2011. Mobile Applications: Status and Trends.
[5] Liyue Fan and Li Xiong. An adaptive approach to real-time aggregate monitoring with diﬀerential
privacy. IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., 26(9):2094–2106, 2014.
[6] Liyue Fan, Li Xiong, and Vaidy S. Sunderam. Diﬀerentially private multi-dimensional time series
release for traﬃc monitoring. In Data and Applications Security and Privacy XXVII - 27th Annual
IFIP WG 11.3 Conference, DBSec 2013, Newark, NJ, USA, July 15-17, 2013. Proceedings, pages
33–48, 2013.
[7] Richard Fujimoto, Angshuman Guin, Michael Hunter, Haesun Park, Gaurav Kanitkar, Ramakrishnan Kannan, Michael Milholen, Sabra Neal, and Philip Pecher. A dynamic data driven application
system for vehicle tracking. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Computational Science, ICCS 2014, Cairns, Queensland, Australia, 10-12 June, 2014, pages 1203–1215, 2014.
[8] Slawomir Goryczka, Li Xiong, and Vaidy S. Sunderam. Secure multiparty aggregation with diﬀerential privacy: a comparative study. In Joint 2013 EDBT/ICDT Conferences, EDBT/ICDT ’13,
Genoa, Italy, March 22, 2013, Workshop Proceedings, pages 155–163, 2013.
[9] Bin Jia, Khanh D. Pham, Erik Blasch, Dan Shen, Zhonghai Wang, and Genshe Chen. Cooperative space object tracking using consensus-based ﬁlters. In 17th International Conference on
Information Fusion, FUSION 2014, Salamanca, Spain, July 7-10, 2014, pages 1–8, 2014.
[10] Amirreza M. Khaleghi, Dong Xu, Zhenrui Wang, Mingyang Li, Alfonso Lobos, Jian Liu, and
Young-Jun Son. A dddams-based planning and control framework for surveillance and crowd
control via uavs and ugvs. Expert Syst. Appl., 40(18):7168–7183, 2013.
[11] N.D. Lane, E. Miluzzo, Hong Lu, D. Peebles, T. Choudhury, and A.T. Campbell. A survey of
mobile phone sensing. Communications Magazine, IEEE, 48(9):140–150, Sept 2010.
[12] R. W. Ouyang, M. Srivastava, A. Toniolo, and T. J. Norman. Truth discovery in crowdsourced
detection of spatial events. In ACM International Conference on Information and Knowledge
Management (CIKM), 2014.
[13] Layla Pournajaf, Li Xiong, Vaidy S. Sunderam, and Slawomir Goryczka. Spatial task assignment
for crowd sensing with cloaked locations. In IEEE 15th International Conference on Mobile Data
Management, MDM 2014, Brisbane, Australia, July 14-18, 2014 - Volume 1, pages 73–82, 2014.
[14] Timothy Schoenharl, Student Member, Ryan Bravo, and Greg Madey. Wiper: Leveraging the cell
phone network for emergency response. International Journal of Intelligent Control and Systems,
11:2006, 2007.
[15] Katie Shilton. Four billion little brothers?: privacy, mobile phones, and ubiquitous data collection.
Commun. ACM, 52:48–53, November 2009.
[16] Andy Yuan Xue, Rui Zhang, Yu Zheng, Xing Xie, Jin Huang, and Zhenghua Xu. Destination prediction by sub-trajectory synthesis and privacy protection against such prediction. In Proceedings
of the 2013 IEEE International Conference on Data Engineering (ICDE 2013), ICDE ’13, pages
254–265, Washington, DC, USA, 2013. IEEE Computer Society.

2492

