Procedia Computer Science
Volume 80, 2016, Pages 2387–2391
ICCS 2016. The International Conference on Computational
Science

Non-invasive procedure to probe the route choices of
commuters in rail transit systems
Christopher Monterola1∗, Erika Fille Legara1 , Di Pan2 , Kee Khoon Lee1 , and Gih
Guang Hung1
1

Complex Systems group, Institute of High Performance Computing, Agency for Science,
Technology, and Research, Singapore
2
Complexity Institute, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
3
Research and Publications, Land Transportation Authority Academy, Singapore

Abstract
Accurately determining the probability of various route choices is critical in understanding the
actual spatiotemporal ﬂow of commuters and the instantaneous capacity of trains and stations.
Here, we report a novel procedure, based solely on the recorded tap-in tap-out ticketing data,
that dictates the route choice of commuters in a rail transit system (RTS). We show that there
exists a signature travel time distribution, in the form of Gumbel type 1 function, from a given
origin O to a destination D. Any particular route can then be considered as a superposition
of this mapping function and one can compute the probability that a speciﬁc path, over other
possible paths, is taken by a commuter from O to D. The procedure is demonstrated by
considering diﬀerent scenarios using travel data from smart fare cards from Singapore’s RTS;
results show that the forecasted characteristic proﬁle deviates by less than 10−5 from the actual
distribution. We note that our method utilizes only two parameters that can be experimentally
accounted for.
Keywords: Route choices, Rail transit systems, Travel time distribution, Gumbel distribution, Arrival
times

1

Introduction

The rail network of Singapore is among the busiest railways in the world carrying about
2.5 million journeys per day on its 133 stations spanning 178 km of lines in operation
(http://www.lta.gov.sg/). Assuming an average of two rides per day (home to work/school
and back) per person, this translates to a daily usage estimate of about 20% of Singapore’s
∼5.3 million population. Aside from infrastructure development, providing a speedy, aﬀordable,
safe and convenient way of moving people in highly dense localities necessitates understanding
∗ corresponding

author: monterolac@ihpc.a-star.edu.sg

Selection and peer-review under responsibility of the Scientiﬁc Programme Committee of ICCS 2016
c The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V.

doi:10.1016/j.procs.2016.05.459

2387

Non-invasive procedure to probe the route choices in RTS

Monterola, et al

the travel patterns and natural tendencies of commuters. Here, we probe the routes of RTS
commuters in Singapore and demonstrate that comfort and travel time go hand in hand in
the considerations of commuters when choosing a particular route over another. Incorporating accurate route choice model is critical to meaningfully capture RTS dynamics for scenario
planning [1].
An early model attempt of Sumi et al [2] proposes that penalty for late arrival is the main
driving mechanism that inﬂuences departure time and shapes the route choices of commuters.
Recent works on route choices are geared toward constructing cost or utility function that will
ﬁnd the right balance on the above factors using surveys or synthetic data [3, 4, 5]. Such
artiﬁcial or laboratory-like experiments, however, can contain inherent contaminations because
the process of generating and collecting them tends to disturb the commuters’ ambient behavior
[6, 7, 8]. In this work, we demonstrate a ‘non-invasive’ procedure that allows straightforward
forecast on the probability that a commuter takes one route over the others in a naturally
evolved RTS dynamics. Using tap-in/tap-out information that commuters instinctively perform
in every journey taken, we demonstrate that a signature travel time distribution can be derived
for every route that can then be utilized in diﬀerentiating distinct paths.

2

Signature travel time distribution in RTS system

Our data indicate that the probability P that two successive commuters are separated by time
interval Δt at some station O is exponentially distributed (R2 = 0.96) given by P (Δt ) ∼
exp(−Δt /β ), where β is a characteristic time constant. For a ﬁnite group of commuters C, the
probability that Δt is less than some randomly taken Δtm , where m = 1, 2, . . . C, and both
(−Δt /β

)
. With an
Δt and Δtm are ∈ {Δt1 , Δt2 , . . . , Δtm } is then P (Δt < Δtm ) ∼ exp C
ansatz that the essential statistics is the one deﬁned by the ﬁrst passenger who failed to ride
the train just before it left for another station, the corresponding probability density function
is derivable as Gumbel Distribution of type 1:

p(Δt) =

1
exp(−Δt/β) exp(− exp(−Δt/β))
β

(1)

where Δt = t−μ; t is the travel time of commuters from O to√D; β , μ are model parameters.
The mean and standard deviation of p(Δt) are μ + γβ and βπ 6, respectively. Note that the
peak of the above equation is not the mean but the mode μ; the median of the distribution is
given by μ − β ln(ln(2)).
By renormalising Eq. 1, the results can be generalised for journeys that have N possible
routes as:
N

pG (t; μi , βi ) =

N

pi (Δt) =
i=1

i=1

ai
exp(−t − μi /βi ) exp(− exp(−t−μi /βi ))
βi

(2)

where the coeﬃcients am gives the relative weight of the a characteristic proﬁle for route
N
m. The fraction of the commuters who use route m (pm ) is then pm = am / i=1 ai .

2.1

Single route: Empirical veriﬁcation of characteristic route

We ﬁrst implement a nonlinear ﬁt of Eq. 1 to the actual ticketing data (time resolution = 0.1
s) using the Levenberg-Marquardt algorithm (LMA) [9]. The numerical solution using LMA
has been shown to be more robust than the usual Gauss-Newton algorithm (GNA) allowing
2388

Non-invasive procedure to probe the route choices in RTS

Monterola, et al

convergence to the correct solution even if the starting search space is far oﬀ from the desired
equilibrium. This advantage outweighs its weakness of being a bit slower compared to GNA if
well-behaved functions and reasonable starting points are considered.

Figure 1: Comparison of derived expression (Eq.1) with actual data for diﬀerent
O-D pairs. Shown are the actual travel time distribution (open circles) taken from ticketing
data of Singapore’s RTS as compared with ﬁt of Eq. 1. Considered are commuters boarding at
station A and alighting at stations B to E, from March 19-23, 2012.
For purpose of illustration, we consider a speciﬁc origin station A going to four known
successive destinations (stations B to E). A good visual (see Fig. 1) and statistical (mean
square error in the order of ∼ 10−5 ) agreement between the actual data and the analytic
expression is observed validating the accuracy of the derived characteristic proﬁle. Moreover,
by merely looking at the extracted ﬁtting coeﬃcients, one can draw the actual time the train
travels from station B to C; station C to D; then station D to E, as 1.93, 2.21 and 3.03 minutes
respectively, corresponding to the mean diﬀerence of the successive curves. In the LTA website,
the values for these lines are 2 mins, 2 mins, and 3 mins (rounded-oﬀ), respectively, which are
all in good agreement. Table 1 summarizes this result with the predicted mean and standard
deviation from the derived Gumbel distribution. We note the statistical agreement of the results
with the actual travel time distribution observed for considered O-D pairs.
O-D pairs
A to B
A to C
A to D
A to E

derived μ
4.44
6.40
8.51
11.45

derived β
1.35
1.29
1.46
1.63

derived travel time
5.2±1.7
7.1±2.6
9.4±2.9
12.4±2.1

actual travel time
5.8±3.2
7.7±2.4
9.8±3.5
12.7±2.9

Table 1: Comparison of derived expression (Eq. 1) with actual data for diﬀerent
O-D pairs. Provided are the statistics of the actual travel time (in minutes) distribution as
compared with the analytic ﬁt of Eq. 1. Considered are commuters boarding at station A and
alighting to stations B to E.

2.2

Application to multiple routes: three cases

We now discuss below how the derived distribution function can be used to characterise multiple
routes (N > 1). We ﬁrst look at the results when there are more than one path that a commuter
2389

Non-invasive procedure to probe the route choices in RTS

Monterola, et al

can practically choose from — for example, stations F, G, H going to station I (Figure 2). The
richness of the dynamics of these chosen O-D pairs as a representative of the RTS will be
described in the succeeding cases.
Case 1: Preference for shorter time. Figure 2 and 3a shows that there are two dominant
routes in moving from station G to I. The faster route that involves passing over the interchange
q (use the thin rail line in the ﬁgure then continue with dashed rail line) has a mean travel
time of about 35 minutes (from tap in to tap out, inclusive of train transfers), while the second
dominant route that does not involve any transfer and using only the thick rail line takes about
49 minutes (14 minutes longer or added 40% travel time). Application of our method indicates
that ∼ 70% prefers the faster route while the remaining 30% chose convenience over time. It is
worthwhile noting that for N =2, further addition of other routes will not statistically change
the observed journey distribution and that the statistical normalized mean square error of the
derived distribution as compared to the actual distribution is quite small at ∼ 2.1 × 10−5 . The
procedure is able to capture the relevant routes that are intuitively veriﬁable since these routes
are, for practical reasons, the only sensible paths for commuters.

Figure 2: Route choice of commuters. Shown in the plots are the actual travel time proﬁle
of commuters going from Station G to I and the resulting ﬁt using the characteristic function
given by Eq. 2 (left). Also presented are the corresponding percentages of commuters utilizing
diﬀerent route realizations (scan from N =1 to 6). Notice that the system is stable after N=2
indicative that two routes are suﬃcient to model the resulting travel time distribution.

Figure 3: Three cases of route choices variations. Shown are the diﬀerent routes and
the corresponding probabilities that they will be chosen by commuters. Also indicated are the
travel times for each of this route. For all cases, N is scanned from 1 to 6 with case 1 getting a
stable ﬁt at N=2, case 2 and case 3 at N=3.
Case 2: Preference for convenience.The fact that about 30% of the commuters in the above
case still utilize a route that takes more than 40% of their travel time indicates that route choice
2390

Non-invasive procedure to probe the route choices in RTS

Monterola, et al

is indeed an interplay between the convenience of not changing train lines and minimizing the
time of travel. Note that by simply moving one station away, starting from station F to I
(instead of station G to I), such that the shorter time now requires two transfers and with
the time diﬀerence reduced to 7 minutes from 13 minutes, 90% of the population would now
choose the longer route that takes about 45 minutes over the shorter route that only requires
38 minutes (20% lesser time; see Fig. 3b).
Case 3: Interplay of convenience and comfort. We now consider the case of journeys from
station H to station I. In this case, commuters choose with statistically equal probability the
following three options: i). Longest travel time route with nearly 50 minutes travel time but
no transfer; ii). Medium time route, with 48 minutes travel time but require one train transfer;
and iii). Shortest travel time route that takes only 38 minutes but requires two transfers. While
it is not straightforward to probe whether the continued preference for longer routes is a result
of poor estimates of travel time or just due to comfort considerations, this case provides an
interesting insight on the balance of travel time and convenience, which are both instinctively
instilled in a commuter’s decision process.

3

Conclusion

We have demonstrated in this article a non-invasive procedure that probes the characteristic
route choices of commuters in a RTS system using real-world ticketing data. The scenarios presented indicate how the method can be utilized in probing commuter behavior. As commuters
may alter their travel behaviors when network is expanded, the method here can be potentially
useful in identifying these changes. The algorithm we have employed is straightforward and
was shown to provide results consistent with available data.
Acknowledgment: We would like to acknowledge Vicknesh Selvam for useful discussion
and LTA Singapore for the ticketing data. This research was supported by Singapore A* SERC
“Complex Systems Programme” research grant (1224504056).

References
[1] E.F. Legara, C. Monterola, K.K. Lee, G.G. Hung, Physica A: 406, 100-106 (2014).
[2] T. Sumi, Y. Matsumoto, Y. Miyaki, Transportation Research Part B: Methodological 24, 247-262
(1992).
[3] H. Xu, J. Zhou, W.Xu, Transportation Research Part C: Emerging Technologies 19, 218-228
(2011).
[4] M. Razo, S. Gao, Transportation Research Part C: Emerging Technologies, 21 (2012).
[5] S.P. Hoogendoorn, P.H.L. Bovy, Transportation Research Part B: Methodological 38, 169-190
(2004).
[6] J. Bailenson, M. Shum, and D. Uttal, J. of Environmental Psychology 18, 251-264 (1998).
[7] Y. Iida, T. Akiyama, T. Uchida, Transportation Research Part B: Methodological 26, 17-32 (1992).
[8] S. Gao, E. Frejinger, M. Ben-Akivac, Transportation Research Part C: Emerging Technologies 18,
727-740 (2010).
[9] Seber, G. A. F., and C. J. Wild, Nonlinear Regression (Hoboken, NJ: Wiley-Interscience, 2003).

2391

