Procedia Computer Science
Volume 29, 2014, Pages 1656–1666
ICCS 2014. 14th International Conference on Computational Science

Evaluation of in-vehicle decision support system for
emergency evacuation
Sergei V. Ivanov1* and Konstantin V. Knyazkov1
1

ITMO University, Saint-Petersburg, Russia.
svivanov@mail.ifmo.ru, constantinvk@gmail.com

Abstract
One of the most important issues in Decision Support Systems (DSS) technology is in ensuring their
effectiveness and efficiency for future implementations and use. DSS is prominent tool in disaster
information system, which allows the authority to provide life safety information directly to the mobile
devices of anyone physically located in the evacuation area. After that a personal DSS guides users to
a safe point. Due to the large uncertainty in initial conditions and assumptions on underlying process
the implementation and evaluation of such DSS are extremely hard, particularly in real environment.
We propose a simulation methodology for the evaluation of in-vehicle DSS for emergency evacuation
based on transport system and human decision-making modeling.
Keywords: Decision support systems, emergency evacuation, evaluation, transport simulation

1 Introduction
The design and implementation of a DSS comprises computer technologies, information
processing, organizational structure and human behavior. Conjointly, it prevent the creation of unified
rigorous and precise scientific methods for the evaluation of DSS which aim to assess whether the user
needs are properly met, the system is suitable for tasks, and users perform better with the new system
(Kirakowski & Corbett, 1990). Now DSS have became a very important aspect in all types of jobs and
everybody’s lives there is a need to have more rigorous methods to the evaluation of DSS based on
objective (quantifiable) criteria. In accordance with (Rhee & Rao, 2008) the sequential approach to
DSS evaluation categorizes evaluation process into three components: identification of evaluation
criteria, formative evaluation, and summative evaluation. Evaluation criteria (or metrics) are a basis
for evaluation. It refers to an objective list that defines the usefulness of a system. A formative
evaluation is an iterative process of weak points elimination until the desired objectives are reached. A
summative evaluation is a final stage in this process that attempts to determine the system efficacy. It
should be noted that in this paper the evaluation of DSS is viewed from a standpoint of both the
*

Corresponding author. Tel.: +7-812-337-6492

1656

Selection and peer-review under responsibility of the Scientiﬁc Programme Committee of ICCS 2014
c The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V.
doi:10.1016/j.procs.2014.05.151

Evaluation of in-vehicle decision support system ...

Sergei Ivanov and Konstantin Knyazkov

efficiency and the effectiveness. Efficiency for a DSS is measured as the speed of decisions or the cost
of the decision-making process and considered as system oriented assessment. In contrast,
effectiveness is concerned with beneficial to the end user. Taking into account this distinction, it is
clear that evaluation should be done in different manner, as the relevant criteria are usually quite
different. Consequently, a comprehensive DSS evaluation methodology must address both
effectiveness and efficiency (Evans & Riha, 1989).
The most natural way for the evaluation of DSS is to measure its effectiveness and efficiency using
experimental methods (empirical evaluation). But Kuwata (Kuwata, Noda, Ohta, Ito, Shinhoda, &
Matsuno, 2002, August) noted that disaster DSS (like emergency evacuation) is a specific type of
DSSs. They differ from usual DSSs because they require real-time responses and performance, moreefficient user interfaces and are difficult to evaluate in a realistic environment. Furthermore,
emergency response DSS require considerable efficient evaluation because of their importance (Evans
& Riha, 1989). This can be done through simulation approach when both environment and decisionmaking process are implemented with the mutual influence. An evaluation framework for this purpose
is proposed. А case study will be used which demonstrates the evaluation of the effectiveness and
efficiency of an in-vehicle DSS for emergency evacuation.

2 Related works
A growing threat of natural and technical disasters is compounded by the concentration of
populations into big cities, placing more people at risk. Main problem with large scale emergency
evacuations is that the population is growing faster than the development of infrastructure (road
capacity). As a result, potential evacuation is getting more difficult and mitigation strategies should be
studied. Normally emergency management planning is performed by special agencies but the role of
road services (including information) is getting higher. Usually transportation research on emergency
situations is focused on better coordination between different agencies in relation to large scale
evacuations (Alsnih & Stopher, 2004). The main issue is avoiding of congestion collapse on the routes
with limited capacity by centralized management. The common feature of modern emergency DSS is
a microscopic model with dynamic traffic assignment (routing). The history of micro traffic
simulation has started in 1990s. The rapid development of this class of models supported by the
growth of computing power led to a large number of software packages with similar functionality. But
as mentioned in (Alsnih & Stopher, 2004) for some reasons they are not useful for emergency
evacuation modeling. In last two decades several DSS for transport planning based on micro traffic
simulation in ordinary conditions have been implemented. Some of them have been adapted to
simulate transportation systems in emergency conditions in order to support evacuation planning
and/or operative stages (Vitetta, Musolino, & Marciano, 2009). The key problem in evacuation
management is a routing for reducing evacuation time. In ordinary conditions the problem of vehicle
routing is well studied. For example in (Tarantilis & Kiranoudis, 2002) the solution based on spatial
DSS and efficient vehicle routing algorithm is proposed. Many commercial solutions (TomTom,
Garmin, Google Maps and others) have the efficient routing algorithms hat help the customer to
minimize travel time. Information delivery is usually organized through mobile applications with
specific tips on choosing the path. In contrast to centralized management, the possible solution is
facilitating the self-organized evacuation by in-vehicle DSS, which allows the authority to provide life
safety information directly to the mobile devices of anyone physically located in the evacuation area.
The major drawback of this approach on existing infrastructure is that it is focused on beneficial to the
particular user and the system effect of mass use is not taken into account. Theoretically that means
that popular solutions for vehicle routing are not very useful for evacuation problem. For evacuation
routing in congested urban networks a number of solutions have been proposed. For example, in (Ren,
Huang, Cheng, Zhao, & Zhang, 2013) an evacuation routing algorithm is combined with signal

1657

Evaluation of in-vehicle decision support system ...

Sergei Ivanov and Konstantin Knyazkov

optimization model. A lane-based evacuation routing algorithm with case study in Salt Lake City is
proposed in (Cova & Johnson, 2003). An optimal routing strategy based on Nash equilibrium
approach and implementation in popular simulation framework MATSim have been describes in
(Lammel & Flotterod, 2009). A more general evacuation planning using multiobjective evolutionary
optimization has been studied in (Saadatseresht, Mansourian, & Taleai, 2009). One of the key
problems of all proposed solution is an information delivery to end user. Any strategy can fail if end
user doesn’t have clear and timely instruction for the emergency behavior.
In this paper we try to investigate the applicability of existing mobile infrastructure to emergency
evacuation when no specific emergency algorithms are applied and only a fraction of society follows
more reasonable evacuation strategy. Furthermore we want to quantify the system effect and
advantage for DSS users.

3 Simulation of Emergency Evacuation with personal
decision support system
3.1 Urban models for transportation
Despite the presence of a large number of microsimulation (multi-agent) models even with free
source code we decided to implement our dedicated model specifically for the problem being studied.
This decision is motivated by the full source code control and flexibility of implementation for the
new features. Transportation model is used in two ways, one for the estimation of realistic initial
condition for evacuation, and the other for simulation of agents’ movement in emergency situations
under specific logic. The input data for the simulations is the transport demand which refers to the
amount and type of traveling people. It allows making a dynamic generation of agents with the
specific properties and a binding to geographical location and time. Transport demand model involves
the following:
•
•
•
•

Traffic depends on the hours of a day.
There are different routes between two specific points.
Time spending by agents at various points complies with a regular schedule, which can be
considered as deterministic.
Daily activity chains depend on social group.

In general the transportation model is based on a synthetic population, which is a randomly
generated set of individuals that is based as much as possible on existing data. In Figure 1 the input
data for demand modeling is shown.
Route generation is done on the map which is represented by a road graph. A OpenStreetMap
(OSM) was chosen as a main source of GIS data. An additional work for the converting from the OSM
format to the new representation of the road graph has been done. OSM data covers both road
infrastructure and buildings. The land use is obtained from the population database provided by the
Federal Migration Service. All the buildings were divided into two categories: residential and offices
(with other type of usage). All the buildings displayed in Figure 1a have the specific color. The color
palette shows the number of residents (from green to red). Non-residential buildings are highlighted
with grey color. The route is chosen randomly between residential and non-residential buildings for
every active agent. The schedule of daily activity is shown in Figure 1b. It is approximated in the form
of histogram with 1-hour step and reflects the work timetable for the most of the companies (including
offices and commerce). The accuracy of this approximation is not crucial to the evacuation problem
because it generates an initial configuration of agents at the time of danger notification which is much
more dependent on the current hour than on agents’ time distribution.

1658

Evaluation of in-vehicle decision support system ...

A)

Sergei Ivanov and Konstantin Knyazkov

B)

Figure 1: The input data for demand modeling: (a) fragment of the road network with four evacuation exits and
land use, (b) agents route start time distribution

For the case study area a Vasilyevsky Island in St.Petersburg (Russia) was chosen. It is bordered
by two distributaries of the Neva River in the south and northeast, and by the Gulf of Finland in the
west. The area of the island is approximately 11 square kilometers and the population is about 200
thousands of people. This is a lowest district in St.Petersburg and it is vulnerable to flood risk despite
of the active city protection by the barrier (Ivanov, Kosukhin, Kaluzhnaya, & Boukhanovsky, 2012;
Krzhizhanovskaya, Melnikova, Chirkin, Ivanov, Boukhanovsky, & Sloot, 2013). This is a very
interesting case study for evacuation management as the island has only four exits relatively close to
each other (See Figure 1a).
Traffic model is composed of several sub-models which cover different aspects of vehicle
movement: departure, movement on an edge, intersection transit, routing. Simulation space in a model
is represented by the directed road graph. Each moving agent is attached to a one edge of the graph.
When an agent receives the notification it leaves point of residence (some node in the road graph)
and starts traveling according to its evacuation route. If the agent can’t enter the edge because of
traffic congestion it waits for departure in a queue. Such queues of leaving agents are attached to each
node of a road graph.
On the edge of the road graph agents move according to the intelligent driver model (IDM). It is a
time-continuous car following model for the simulation of freeway and urban traffic (Treiber, 2000). It
describes the dynamics of the positions and velocities of single vehicles on free road, at high
approaching rates and at small net distances. IDM has the following parameters: desired velocity,
minimum spacing, desired time headway, acceleration and comfortable braking deceleration. Different
values of these parameters determine the different categories of drivers. For the traffic simulation the
following categories were used: timid driver, normal driver, aggressive driver and trucks.
The model of agents’ movement takes into account intersections transit. Agents decrease speed
before the cross. A value of velocity reduction depends on the fact: is the next edge after the cross is
busy or not. It means that if there is not enough space at the beginning of the next edge, the agent will
stop before the intersection. Otherwise it will only reduce its speed to a value which allows making a
turn safely. This techniques is implemented for the agents which have no leader according to IDM.
For these agents a virtual leader is introduced and represents the intersection ahead.
Both types of agents: with DSS and without DSS, determine their route by minimizing of its
estimated travel time. For agents without DSS fastest route is defined as the shortest path to the closest
exit. For this purpose Dijkstra algorithm is used. For agents with DSS routing procedure is performed
with a certain period (10 minutes of model/real time) in order to find optimal way based on the actual

1659

Evaluation of in-vehicle decision support system ...

Sergei Ivanov and Konstantin Knyazkov

information about traffic. For this purpose each agent has its own update timer which starts at agent
departure time. Weight of an edge in this case is represented by the average edge transit time. This
value is calculated for each edge within a certain time window on the base of the individual agents’
travel times measured for agents who have passed the edge within this time window.

3.2 Decision making and evacuation model
The distinguishing features of traffic simulation in emergency situations can be summarized by the
following:
•
•
•
•

•

Every agent follows its pre-calculated route until notification about danger.
Agents’ population consists of two types of agents: agent with and without DSS which
interact with each other in the same environment.
Notified agent without DSS follows the shortest route to the nearest exit (one of four bridges)
and doesn’t change the decision.
Notified agent with DSS follows the recommendation of the system. The update period is
setup to ten minutes. That means that new recommendation can lead to the evacuation
through another exit.
DSS aims to find the fastest route for the user. The fastest route is almost always longer than
shortest route because the system tries to avoid the most congested zones.

The shortest and fastest route is calculated by the Dijkstra algorithm. The difference between two
cases (with and without DSS) lies in the mode of edge weight assessment. In the first case the weight
of the edge is its length. In the second case the weight of the edge is calculated as a mean edge transit
time.
In general it is intended to mimic the real situation at the most without unnecessary complications.
The architecture of the framework for the simulation of the evacuation process is shown in Figure 2.
Demographic
data

Road
network

Demand modeling

Land use
data

Individual properties
of agents

Agent-based traffic simulation
Simulation of daily
activity

Daily activity chains
(agents routes)

Dynamic visualization

Simulation
of evacuation
Decision making with DSS

Population
notification

Decision making without
DSS

Evacuation
statistics

Figure 2: The architecture of the framework for the evacuation process simulation

Grey blocs in the Figure represent the input or output data. White blocks with rounded corners
represent computational modules. Simulation of evacuation process is a part of agent-based traffic
simulation module that is supplemented by the special logic for agents with and without DSS. Here the
individual properties of agents are the categories of drivers that play no role in demand modeling.

1660

Evaluation of in-vehicle decision support system ...

Sergei Ivanov and Konstantin Knyazkov

Simulation of evacuation process can be started from any desired moment, but the most interesting
result is expected when the number of agents is close to the maximum.
Model assumptions which are not always true:
•

•
•
•

Every agent always follows the chosen route (as with as without DSS) and never makes
wrong turns or change its decision under certain circumstances (for example, one can see free
road).
An agent without DSS always knows the nearest exit. In reality in some locations it is hard to
estimate the nearest exit even with a map.
The difference between different DSS with optimal route calculation is neglected.
An in-vehicle mobile device always keeps connection with the server.

The behavior of agents is quite complicated. Thus the basic verification method is a dynamic
visualization of agents’ movement and additional cumulative statistics. Figure 3 (a,b) depicts two
examples of simulation visualization (screenshots). Underlying map is downloaded from the
OpenStreetMap server as graphic tiles. The visualization module supports different layers reflecting
the most relevant information for real-time observations. For example, the most congested roads are
highlighted with the red blocks of different size.
А)

B)

C)

D)

Figure 3: Visualization of simulation process (a,b), notification function (c) and cumulative diagram of
bridge use (d)

The notification of agents is not instant and it is distributed in time (see Figure 3c). This function is
chosen according to the studies of Lewis (Lewis, 1985).

1661

Evaluation of in-vehicle decision support system ...

Sergei Ivanov and Konstantin Knyazkov

Each agent is depicted as a dot whose color indicates the desired exit. This enables to track
changes of the agent decision to use different exits over time. Form of representation on a black
background (see Figure 3b) gives the clearest view of this kind of changes. In-vehicle DSS has a
certain update period and for some experiments with a high proportion of DSS-users it shows dramatic
changes in agents’ behavior over time. All the experiments were carried out with the five-minute
update period for each DSS (not for all at the same time). The change of decisions leads to periodic
fluctuations in the number of agents (see Figure 3d) moving through given exit (bridge). Moreover
these fluctuations make the evacuation process quite unbalanced at given moment and thus throughput
of bridges is not used at full capacity.
There is an option of running the simulation in batch mode without visualization in order to get
better performance. Actual simulation time mostly depends on the number of agents. The ratio of
model time to the real time ranges between 5 (nobody uses DSS) and 10 (everybody uses DSS) on
Xeon E5-2650 (2GHz).

4 Evaluation metrics
Evaluation metrics of DSS for emergency evacuation is closely related to overall process of
evacuation efficiency. According to (Alsnih & Stopher, 2004) emergency situation analysis usually
involves the following: the specification of disaster scenarios, definition of evacuation transport zones,
the determination of the size of the evacuation population, updating traffic conditions, simulating
changes in the roads resulting from extreme events, identifying heavily used roads, centralized or
decentralized evacuation management, calculating clearance times for each scenario. In our study we
do not determine the specific cause of the evacuation and complete evacuation is supposed. Thus we
do not simulate closed roads resulting from extreme events, although technically our framework has
the feature of water propagation simulation resulting from flooding. Traffic is considered known for
the DSS server as nowadays the number of DSS users combined with other data sources (cameras,
sensors etc) gives sufficiently accurate traffic information. All the exits from the island are considered
equivalent and none of them is considered to be preferable. Thus the expected improvement of traffic
is related to the more balanced evacuation through all the exits. We do not introduce any centralized
management of the evacuation process as it is difficult for quantification and the most interesting is
the study of the self-organization process that will to take place anyway. Thus the efficiency for a
DSS, i.e. system effect of its mass use, is considered as the reduction of total evacuation time when a
certain fraction of people uses DSS compared to a scenario where no one uses DSS. Effectiveness is
considered is a the reduction of evacuation time for a particular DSS user compared to evacuation time
of agents that do not use it and follow the simple logic of the nearest exit.

5 Simulation result
Various simulation scenarios are determined by the different numbers of DSS users. Step of
change is set at 5% with the range of DSS users’ percent from 0 to 100. Evacuation start time is the
same for all the computational experiments and is set at 6 pm. The number of agents is chosen at
12500, 25000 and 50000. Evacuation time is the difference between the notification started and the
moment when the last agent left the island. During the computational experiment we trace the
following values for each agent: evacuation time, the desired exit and each case of decision change
(for DSS users), an expected and actual length of the route. In addition, we trace the number of agents
passing through each exit (bridge) every 10 seconds. This allows us to estimate the balance of the use
of different bridges. Figure 4 depicts two main indicators of simulation reflecting the system effect:

1662

Evaluation of in-vehicle decision support system ...

Sergei Ivanov and Konstantin Knyazkov

exit use balance and the total evacuation time for each scenario which is normalized for percentage
representation.
Exit use balance is presented as follows. The proportion of agents who were evacuated through
each bridge is calculated. The difference between minimum and maximum values is considered as a
main indicator of the exit use balance. It is assumed that the better balance results in the least
evacuation time (Figure 4b). Actually for 25000 of agents we found that the least evacuation time was
reached very close to the first balanced use of exits. But despite the fact that the balance is maintained
up to 100% of DSS user the actual evacuation time starts to decrease just after the optimum at 80%.
Although the efficiency drop is not very big one can expect the continued growth of efficiency with
the increasing number of DSS users. For this case special algorithms are required.
А)

B)

Figure 4: Simulation result of computational experiments: (a) evaluation of the exit use balance for 25000 of
agents, (b) the relative evacuation time for each scenario

One of the interesting findings is that the rate of evacuation time fall is linear from zero percent of
DSS users up to the optimum. After that a sharp change in trend is observed and a total evacuation
time grows slowly up to saturation. One can assume that a trend change is determined by the DSS
logic focused on individual user benefits and system effect when the most efficient route for a single
user is not optimal for the entire system. However, at this moment the number of users of navigation
systems is far from 50% and existing algorithms may be quite effective for the purpose of evacuation.
But with the growing popularity of their use or when autonomous vehicles will become a reality in the
future other algorithms that will operate on the concept of transport flow will be needed. For other
numbers of agents key findings are roughly the same, yet the optimum tends to a larger percentage of
DSS user and overall efficiency of DSS use is growing with the number of agents.
It should be noted that the system optimum is in conflict with individual benefits. One can see in
Figure 5 that the greatest personal benefit of the DSS use is achieved with a low percentage (~25%) of
its use in the entire population. The relatively big mean evacuation time for DSS users at low
percentage can be explained with the effect of very high congestion blocking free exits for all the
users. When the effect of “smart” users takes place at 25-35% the mean evacuation time for DSS users
tends to minimum.
At 80% of DSS users the efficiency of evacuation is approximately the same for all agents. After
that an amazing effect that means evacuation time for DSS users is higher than for users without DSS
is observed. This can be explained by the fact that the system directs users to the same paths, and after
finding their high loading it changes the route. This can happen often and leads to a very inefficient
route of evacuation. At the same time, the evacuation time for agents that do not use DSS decreases
continuously up to the maximum percentage of agents using DSS.
The results in Figure 4b and 5a are related to each other with the following equation:

1663

Evaluation of in-vehicle decision support system ...

Sergei Ivanov and Konstantin Knyazkov

min(Tall ) ↔ min(T DSS ⋅ p + T noDSS ⋅ (1 − p)) ,

Tall

(1)

T DSS – mean evacuation time for DSS users, T noDSS – mean
evacuation time for users without DSS, p – percent of DSS users, "↔
↔" – concordance between
values. We can see that the optimum is reached at the level of p ≈ 80% for both datasets.
where

– total evacuation time,

А)

B)

Figure 5: Evaluation of DSS users benefits for 25000 of agents: (a) mean evacuation time, (b) mean actual
route length

We found that for some agents at different points in time the route to all four exits has been
proposed. However, this has not been reflected explicitly in the mean length of the route. Change in
the length of the route does not have explicit and intuitive trend but in all cases the length of the route
for DSS users is significantly longer. The mean traveled route length for agents without DSS is the
same for all the experiments. This confirms that as opposed to the travel time there is no influence of
DSS users on the travel route length of agent without DSS.

6 Discussion
In general, the computational experiments exhibit the logical and interpretable results of simulation
and under certain assumptions some conclusions can be made. First of all, the use of the DSS greatly
reduces total time of evacuation even without optimal algorithm for centralized flow traffic
management rather than for individual users. This can be achieved on existing infrastructure without
significant modifications. The second main conclusion is that when an approximately half of DSS
users in the total number of agents is reached other routing algorithms are required. Indirect evidence
that better time of the evacuation can be achieved is the relatively large imbalance in the use of exist
(bridges) for the optimal scenario (system efficiency). It is obvious that the best result is to be
achieved with a balanced use of bridges. In addition, we found significant oscillations in the number
of evacuees through each bridge in time that shows insufficient effectiveness of their use. We believe
that these conclusions remain relevant in certain changes in the input data. Baseline scenario has

1664

Evaluation of in-vehicle decision support system ...

Sergei Ivanov and Konstantin Knyazkov

obvious disadvantages concerning relatively simple logic of agents’ behavior. For example for the
most dangerous situations most of agents will try to help their family too. Thus, family links must also
be taken into account. In an emergency, many people can behave inadequately that may be a problem
for simulation. Moreover, only one geographical region was considered. Some of the conclusions may
be inappropriate for the other geographical location. Fortunately our framework can easily be adjusted
to any region and this is a part of the future work. Another important research direction is to find the
optimal routing algorithm for the case when most people use DSS. Some prominent algorithms were
found in existing literature. Last important issue for the research accuracy is the sensitivity of results
to the input parameters. For example the impact of microsimualtion model parameters on the
simulation output is unclear. Some conclusions can be different for other numbers of agents.
Other important issue is a reliability of infrastructure. Our experiments were carried out under the
assumption that the mobile network is always available. In reality this may not be true. Moreover the
personal routing algorithm works well on existing mobile devices. For the centralized management a
routing algorithm with a high probability have to work on the central server of the system serving at
the same time a large number of clients. For that a special urgent computing infrastructure is required.

7 Conclusion
This paper has outlined the tasks involved in the evaluation of in-vehicle decision support system
for emergency evacuation. On the basis of simulation it was shown that the use of the in-vehicle DSS
greatly reduces total time of evacuation as for DSS users as for the rest of agents. The key finding is
that the significant effect can be achieved on existing infrastructure without drastic modifications. The
overall effectiveness of the evacuation depends on the fraction of DSS users in a total evacuee
number. For our case study the best time of evacuation was reached at 80%-85% (12.5 – 50 thousands
of agent) of DSS users and it is approximately two times faster than without the use of DSS at all.
Before optimum the rate of evacuation time falls linearly. After that, the efficiency of evacuation
started to decline and other routing algorithms dealing with traffic flow rather than with individual
users are required. A proposed framework has a flexible architecture for the implementation of new
features and can easily be adjusted to any region. Future research is related to a more accurate taking
into account behavior characteristics in critical situations and the study of geographical structures for
more effective evacuation.

8 Acknowledgements
This work was financially supported by the Government of the Russian Federation, Grants 074U01 and 11.G34.31.0019.

References
Alsnih, R., & Stopher, P. R. (2004). Review of procedures associated with devising emergency
evacuation plans. Transportation Research Record: Journal of the Transportation Research
Board, , 1865 (1), 89-97.
Cova, T. J., & Johnson, J. P. (2003). A network flow model for lane-based evacuation routing.
Transportation Research Part A: Policy and Practice , 37 (7), 579-604.
Evans, G. E., & Riha, J. R. (1989). Assessing DSS effectiveness using evaluation research
methods. Information & management, , 16 (4), 197-206.

1665

Evaluation of in-vehicle decision support system ...

Sergei Ivanov and Konstantin Knyazkov

Ivanov, S. V., Kosukhin, S. S., Kaluzhnaya, A. V., & Boukhanovsky, A. V. (2012).
Simulation-based collaborative decision support for surge floods prevention in St. Petersburg.
Journal of Computational Science , 3 (6), 450-455.
Kirakowski, J., & Corbett, M. (1990). Effective Methodology for the Study of HCI (Human
Factors in Information Technology). Amsterdam: North-Holland.
Krzhizhanovskaya, V. V., Melnikova, N. B., Chirkin, A. M., Ivanov, S. V., Boukhanovsky, A.
V., & Sloot, P. M. (2013). Distributed simulation of city inundation by coupled surface and
subsurface porous flow for urban flood decision support system. Procedia Computer Science , 18,
1046-1056.
Kuwata, Y., Noda, I., Ohta, M., Ito, N., Shinhoda, K., & Matsuno, F. (2002, August).
Evaluation of decision support systems for emergency management. In SICE 2002. Proceedings of
the 41st SICE Annual Conference (Vol. 2) (pp. 860-864). IEEE.
Lammel, G., & Flotterod, G. (2009). Towards system optimum: Finding optimal routing
strategies in time-dependent networks for large-scale evacuation problems. In KI 2009: Advances
in Artificial Intelligence (pp. 532-539). Berlin Heidelberg: Springer.
Lewis, D. C. (1985). Transportation Planning for Hurricane Evacuations. ITE Journal , 31-35.
Ren, G., Huang, Z., Cheng, Y., Zhao, X., & Zhang, Y. (2013). An integrated model for
evacuation routing and traffic signal optimization with background demand uncertainty. Journal of
Advanced Transportation , 47 (1), 4-27.
Rhee, C., & Rao, H. R. (2008). Evaluation of decision support systems. In Handbook on
Decision Support Systems 2 (pp. 313-327). Berlin Heidelberg: Springer.
Saadatseresht, M., Mansourian, A., & Taleai, M. (2009). Evacuation planning using
multiobjective evolutionary optimization approach. European Journal of Operational Research ,
198 (1), 305-314.
Tarantilis, C. D., & Kiranoudis, C. T. (2002). Using a spatial decision support system for
solving the vehicle routing problem. Information & Management , 39 (5), 359-375.
Treiber, M., Hennecke, A., & Helbing, D. (2000). Congested traffic states in empirical
observations and microscopic simulations. Physical Review E , 62 (2), 1805.
Vitetta, A., Musolino, G., & Marciano, F. A. (2009). Safety of users in road evacuation:
Modelling and DSS for transport supply and supply-demand interaction. In Fourth International
Conference on Sustainable Development and Planning.

1666

