Procedia Computer Science
Volume 80, 2016, Pages 782–791
ICCS 2016. The International Conference on Computational
Science

A Priori Fourier Analysis for
2.5D Finite Elements Simulations of
Logging-While-Drilling (LWD)
Resistivity Measurements
´
Angel
Rodr´ıguez-Rozas1,2 and David Pardo1,2,3
1
2
3

University of the Basque Country (UPV/EHU), Leioa, Spain
Basque Center for Applied Mathematics (BCAM), Bilbao, Spain
IKERBASQUE (Basque Foundation for Sciences), Bilbao, Spain
angel.rodriguez.rozas@gmail.com,dzubiaur@gmail.com

Abstract
Triaxial induction measurements provided by LWD tools generate crucial petrophysical data to
determine several quantities of interest around the drilled formation under exploration, such as
a map of resistivities. However, the corresponding forward modeling requires the simulation of a
large-scale three-dimensional computational problem for each tool position. When the material
properties are assumed to be homogeneous in one spatial direction, the problem dimensionality
can be reduced to a so called 2.5 dimensional (2.5D) formulation.
In this paper, we propose an a priori adaptive algorithm for properly selecting and interpolating Fourier modes in 2.5D simulations in order to speed up computer simulations. The
proposed method ﬁrst considers an adequate range of Fourier modes, and it then determines
a subset of those which need to be estimated via solution of a Partial Diﬀerential Equation
(PDE), while the remaining ones are simply interpolated in a logarithmic scale, without the
need of solving any additional PDE. Numerical results validate our selection of Fourier modes,
delivering superb results in real simulations when solving via PDE only for a very limited
number of Fourier modes (below 50%).
Keywords: LWD simulations, 2.5D simulations, Fourier analysis, a priori adaptativity, Formation
exploration, Quantities of interest, Electromagnetic simulations

1

Introduction

Triaxial induction logging plays nowadays an important role for characterizing Earth formation
in the context of oil and gas geophysical exploration [6, 2]. Complex measured data provided by
LWD tools help analysts to determine and study several formation quantities of interest such
782

Selection and peer-review under responsibility of the Scientiﬁc Programme Committee of ICCS 2016
c The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V.

doi:10.1016/j.procs.2016.05.368

Fourier Analysis for 2.5D FEM of LWD Measurements

´ Rodr´ıguez-Rozas, D. Pardo
A.

as formation anisotropy [5]. To that end, these tools incorporate three mutually orthogonal
transmitter coils located at a ﬁxed position along the tool axis, and three receivers coils all
placed at a ﬁxed distance from the transmitters [7]. Combining every transmitter with every
receiver, nine magnetic ﬁeld components are measured, the so-called XX, XY, XZ, YX, YY,
YZ, ZX, ZY and ZZ couplings [5]. Although all components play a signiﬁcant role for inversion
[8], we restrict our study to the ZZ component, since it provides prominent information [14].
Inversion techniques using numerical simulations involving LWD measurements require solving multiple times a computationally expensive forward problem described by Maxwell’s equations [5]. For every iteration of the inversion algorithm, several logging positions are considered
along the tool trajectory of interest, say Np (typically several hundreds), each one requiring
solving a full 3D problem. Thus, if the inversion procedure consists of Ni iterations, Ni Np
forward problems need to be solved.
Alleviating the computational cost of the forward problem impacts drastically in the total
computational time spent in the inversion process. To that end, 2.5D simulations of this problem
have been considered in the past [10, 9, 11, 1] by introducing a Fourier transform along one
of the two horizontal axis (say y−axis), for which the material properties are constant, i.e.,
materials are assumed to be two-dimensional. The main advantage of this approach is that the
full 3D solution is obtained by combining the partial solutions of a sequence of 2D uncoupled
problems, one for each Fourier mode under consideration. The main issues that impinge upon
the computational cost of a 2.5D algorithm are related to the adaptativity in (i) the x − z plane
(in the conﬁguration space); and in (ii) the Fourier space. While in the conﬁguration space
much research eﬀort has been devoted to electromagnetics [3, 4], adaptativity in Fourier space
is less common. In [13], only applicable to ﬁnite diﬀerence schemes, authors proposed a criteria
based on a ﬁnite diﬀerence node spacing to optimally select the range of Fourier modes, but did
not consider the study of the optimal Fourier modes for interpolation, nor for speciﬁc quantities
of interest related to LWD simulations.
Given a 2.5D problem, in this work we introduce an a priori algorithm for selecting a
subset of Fourier modes to be computed by solving numerically the corresponding PDE, while
the remaining modes are merely determined by interpolation. This algorithm can also be
interpreted as an a priori integration rule in the Fourier domain. The initial design decision
corresponds to the selection of a set of uniformly distributed homogeneous (0D) materials,
including the materials that appears in the original 3D problem. Then, we build a criteria
for selection of Fourier modes that provides accurate results for all possible 0D problems.
The resulting algorithm is directly applied to 2.5D problems, assuming that for the higher
dimensional case we will obtain a similar accuracy for the Fourier integration. As a result, it
enables an a priori construction of a Fourier integration rule in 2.5D, and due to the observed
low number of Fourier modes needed to be computed by solving the corresponding PDE, it is
indeed cheaper than a posteriori adaptativity. In any case, it is also complementary to most a
posteriori adaptive methods.
The rest of the article is organized as follows: the mathematical problem for LWD forward
simulations is described in the next section. Then, the proposed a priori algorithm is described.
We subsequently show the application of the algorithm via an example for a particular LWD
tool conﬁguration. Finally, section 5 summarizes and concludes the paper.
783

Fourier Analysis for 2.5D FEM of LWD Measurements

2

´ Rodr´ıguez-Rozas, D. Pardo
A.

The mathematical problem

We consider the two time-harmonic curl Maxwell’s equations in a unbounded, piecewisehomogeneous and isotropic medium:
∇ × E = iωμH − M,
∇ × H = (σ − iωε) E,

(1)
(2)

satisfying the Sommerfeld radiation condition [12], where E is the electric ﬁeld, H is the magnetic ﬁeld, i is the imaginary unit, μ = μ0 = 4π 10−7 H/m is the free-space magnetic permeability, σ is the piecewise-homogeneous conductivity of the medium, ε = ε0 ≈ 8.85 × 10−12
F/m is the constant permittivity of the medium, k is the wave number, k 2 = ωμ (ωε + iσ),
ω = 2πf is the angular frequency and f is the constant frequency determined by a ﬁxed mode
(frequency) of operation of the LWD tool. We will also refer to the resistivity of the medium
as ρ = σ −1 .
The time-harmonic magnetic dipole sources M induced by the tri-axial transmitter coils
mounted on the LWD tool are mathematically modeled by a time-dependent factor eiωt (where
t is time), its magnetic moment M0 and the transmitter location xtx = (xtx , ytx , ztx ), so that
M = M0 δ(xtx ). In this work, materials are considered two-dimensional, only varying along
x- and z-axis, as shown in Fig. 1 for an scenario with a geological fault and three layers with
piecewise constant resistivities.

Figure 1: Illustration of the LWD tool whose borehole trajectory dip angle is assumed to be
80 degrees and crosses a geological fault. Materials are assumed to be two-dimensional varying
only along the x-axis (horizontal direction) and the z-axis (vertical direction).

Despite the numerical solution of the magnetic ﬁeld is to be computed everywhere in Ω using
a numerical method such as the Finite Element Method (FEM), we are only interested in having
a good numerical accuracy at the two receivers of the LWD tool, namely Rx1 and Rx2 . Also, we
will restrict our study to the two commonly used frequencies of operation for LWD tools, namely
f1 = 2 MHz and f2 = 400 KHz, and to conductivities in the range of Sσ := [σmin , σmax ] =
[1/ρmax , 1/ρmin ] = [1/103 , 1/10−1], characteristic of the Earth’s formation under study. In our
simulations, for x and z directions, we truncate our computational domain far enough from the
source location, where we can safely impose a homogeneous Dirichlet boundary condition. In y
direction, we choose a period L large enough so that the periodic Fourier series representation
784

Fourier Analysis for 2.5D FEM of LWD Measurements

´ Rodr´ıguez-Rozas, D. Pardo
A.

of the non-periodic source does not induce signiﬁcant numerical errors. For the two frequencies
of operation deﬁned above, we consider y ∈ [−L/2, L/2], L = 4π.

3

The Fourier Modes Selection algorithm

Our algorithm is based on the assumption that the behavior of the 0D solution for diﬀerent
material properties, including those that appear in the original 3D problem, provides us a
valuable information into the behavior of the solution at the position of the receivers for the
original 3D problem with 2D materials. The 0D solution at the receivers of the tool depends
solely on the distance from the source but not on its particular location. Considering that the
source is located at the origin of the coordinate system, the Hzz component of the magnetic
ﬁeld solution (the 0D solution) is given by [15]:
Hzz (x, y, z) =

πM0 z eikd
4πd

k2 +

ik k 2 z 2 + 1 3ikz 2 3z 2
−
−
+ 4
d
d2
d3
d

,

(3)

where d = x2 + y 2 + z 2 is the distance from the source. In Fig. 2, we show |Hzz | as a function
of y for the two frequencies of interest. We distinguish two regions with diﬀerent behavior: one
near the source, around y = 0, where the solution varies strongly; and a second region where
eikd
.
the solution decays with a factor dominated by the term
4πd

Figure 2: |Hzz | in logarithmic scale, as a function of y, for σ = 10−1 S/m.
We now represent the periodic solution along the y−axis as the following Fourier series
+∞

Hzzn (x, z)einy2π/L ,

Hzz (x, y, z) =

(4)

n=−∞

where for every Fourier mode n, the Fourier coeﬃcient Hzzn (x, z) is given by
Hzzn (x, z) =

1
L

L/2
−L/2

Hzz (x, y, z)e−iny2π/L .

(5)

Fig. 3 shows how |Hzzn (x, z)| decays as a function of n at the position of the receiver Rx1 . The
785

´ Rodr´ıguez-Rozas, D. Pardo
A.

Fourier Analysis for 2.5D FEM of LWD Measurements

Figure 3: |Hzzn (Rx1 )| in logarithmic scale, as a function of the Fourier mode number n, for
σ = 10−1 and the two frequencies of operation of interest.

smooth decay shown for the two tool frequencies of operation of interest are qualitatively very
similar for all σ ∈ Sσ . Small wrinkles formed in the region where n ∈ [70, 90] are related to the
abrupt change in the spectrum of Hzz observed at the vicinity of y = ± 0.8 m (Fig. 2). By
inspection of Fig. 3, for this particular resistivity distribution, we can: (i) truncate the Fourier
series according to an error tolerance criteria; and (ii) discern, in the non-truncated regime,
which Fourier modes are to be computed and which ones are to be interpolated (using the
computed ones).
In order to determine the criteria to truncate the Fourier series for a general 0D case, we now
turn our attention into how we compute the ﬁrst quantity of interest (QoI) in our simulations,
which is the attenuation A, given by
A = log

Hzz (Rx1 )
= log |Hzz (Rx1 )| − log |Hzz (Rx2 )| .
Hzz (Rx2 ))

(6)

Substituting the Fourier series expansion in (4) into (6) gives
+∞

+∞

Hzzn (x, z)einy 2π/L

A = log
n=−∞

Rx1

+∞

n=−∞

n=−∞

Rx2

+∞

Hzzn (Rx1 ) − log

= log

Hzzn (x, z)einy 2π/L

− log

Hzzn (Rx2 ) .

(7)

n=−∞

In the above, we have selected y = 0 for the location of both transmitters and receivers. This
selection is justiﬁed because 0D solutions are invariant under rotations around the z-axis. For
every σ in Sσ , by truncating the Fourier series in (4) at ﬁxed value N (σ), expressed as
N (σ)

Hzzn (x, z)einy2π/L ,

Hzz (x, y, z) =

(8)

n=−N (σ)

we introduce an error in the estimation of A. Denoting A(N (σ)) the estimation of A, we now
consider its corresponding relative error, deﬁned as
Aerr (N (σ)) =

786

A (N (σ)) − A
· 100.
A

(9)

´ Rodr´ıguez-Rozas, D. Pardo
A.

Fourier Analysis for 2.5D FEM of LWD Measurements

(a) 2 MHz

(b) 400 KHz

Figure 4: Aerr described in Eq. (9) as a function of the Fourier mode, n. Each blue line
corresponds to a particular value for σ in Sσ , while the red line determines the value for
truncation.
We select the value of N (σ) ∈ N in Eq. (8) as the minimum value n ∈ N such that Aerr (n) is
under the tolerance α = 0.1%. That is,
N (σ) := min ({m ∈ N|Aerr (m) < α}) .

(10)

Finally, the optimal value for N , denoted by Nopt , is selected according to the worst-case, that
is
Nopt =

max

σ ∈ σmin ,...,σmax

N (σ).

(11)

This value is shown in Fig. 4 for the two frequencies of operation of interest. For each frequency
of operation, we show in blue quantity Aerr as a function of n, for diﬀerent conductivities
given in Sσ . The worst-case crossing the red line at constant value α suggests selecting as
a reasonable value Nopt = 30 for 2 MHz, and Nopt = 50 for 400 KHz. Once we select the
range of Fourier modes to be calculated, we describe how to determine the subset of modes
to be computed by the FEM and the complementary subset of modes to be interpolated. As
mentioned before, our goal is to approximate the well log at the receivers. More precisely, the
objective is to estimate accurately enough the quantities log |Hzz (Rx1 )| and log |Hzz (Rx2 )|.
We ﬁrst analyze this quantity at the ﬁrst receiver, for which the Fourier series of Hzz takes the
following expression
N (ρ)

Hzz (Rx1 ) =

N (ρ)

10log Hzzn (Rx1 ) .

Hzzn (Rx1 ) =
n=−N (ρ)

(12)

n=−N (ρ)

We proceed now to deﬁne pp (n) as the polynomial interpolant of degree p for the target function
f (n) we want to interpolate,
f (n) := log Hzzn (Rx1 ),

(13)

that we can express by its polynomial interpolant pp (n) and its corresponding truncation error
ep (n), as
p

f (n) = pp (n) +

f p+1 (ξ)
(n − ni ) := pp (n) + ep (n),
(p + 1)! i=0

(14)

787

´ Rodr´ıguez-Rozas, D. Pardo
A.

Fourier Analysis for 2.5D FEM of LWD Measurements

for some ξ ∈ (nmin , nmax ), where ni is the i−th Fourier mode chosen for interpolation. Therefore, we can now rewrite Hzz as a function of its interpolant pp (n) and its error ep (n), as
follows
N (ρ)

10pp (n) · 10

Hzz (Rx1 ) =

f p+1 (ξ)
(p+1)!

p
i=0 (n−ni )

n=−N (ρ)

N (ρ)

10pp (n) · 10ep (n) ,

=

(15)

n=−N (ρ)

as well as its approximation in (12), as
N (ρ)

10pp (n) .

Hzz (Rx1 ) ≈

(16)

n=−N (ρ)

With the above expressions and aiming to satisfy the criteria in (10), we can now control the
error induced by interpolation for the following quantity
log Hzz (Rx1 ) − log Hzz (Rx1 )

⎛
log ⎝

=

⎛
log ⎝

=

N (ρ)
n=−N (ρ)

10pp (n) · 1 − 10ep (n)
Hzz (Rx1 )

N (ρ)
n=−N (ρ)

⎞
+ 1⎠

Hzzn (Rx1 ) · 1/10ep (n) − 1
Hzz (Rx1 )

⎞
+ 1⎠ .
(17)

That is, we need
N (ρ)
n=−N (ρ)

Hzzn (Rx1 )
· 1/10ep (n) − 1
Hzz (Rx1 )

(18)

to be small, in particular, very small for every n in the range of interpolation. Let us deﬁne
Hzzn (Rx1 )
· 1/10ep(n) − 1 . In ﬁgures 5 and 6
the local error function locerr (Rx1 , n) :=
Hzz (Rx1 )
we show the behavior of the two factors of locerr as a function of n, for diﬀerent polynomials
orders p with the choice (n− ni ) = p, and Fig. 7 displays the overall error. These ﬁgures suggest
that it is not advisable to interpolate between the ﬁrst ten Fourier modes. However, from the
mode n = 10 on, it is recommended and safe to interpolate with a polynomial of increasing
degree p (starting with p = 2) and computing by FEM only one Fourier mode every p modes,
saving therefore (1 − 1/p) · 100 % of the total computations.

4

Numerical examples

In this section we consider a numerical example to show the applicability of our algorithm.
The formation under consideration is the one depicted in Fig. 1. The coordinate system is
deﬁned in meters (m). The geological fault occurs at the origin of the x-axis (horizontal axis),
deﬁned in the range x ∈ [−50, 50], whereas the vertical z-axis is deﬁned in z ∈ [4950, 5050].
The logging trajectory is ﬁxed at 100 evenly distributed positions, starting at the position
788

Fourier Analysis for 2.5D FEM of LWD Measurements

(a) 2 MHz

´ Rodr´ıguez-Rozas, D. Pardo
A.

(b) 400 KHz

Figure 5: |Hzzn (Rx1 )/Hzz (Rx1 )|, as a function of the Fourier mode, n.

(a) 2 MHz

(b) 400 KHz

Figure 6: |1/10e(n) − 1|, as a function of the Fourier mode, n. Each line corresponds to a
particular value of p, ranging from 1 to 6.

(a) 2 MHz

(b) 400 KHz

Figure 7: locerr (Rx1 , n), as a function of the Fourier mode, n. Each line corresponds to a
particular value of p, ranging from 1 to 6.

789

´ Rodr´ıguez-Rozas, D. Pardo
A.

Fourier Analysis for 2.5D FEM of LWD Measurements

(xinit , zinit ) = (−7.4, 4998.7) and ﬁnishing at (xend , zend ) = (7.45, 5001.32), for y = 0 and
a dip angle of 80 degrees. The tool operates at a frequency of 2 MHz. For this test, our
algorithm suggests to compute a range of 26 Fourier modes, from the mode 0 to 25. We
select two diﬀerent subset of Fourier modes, Finterp11 := {7, 9, 11, 13, 15, 16, 18, 19, 21, 22, 24}
and Finterp15 := {7, 9, 11 − 14, 16 − 24}, to be estimated by interpolation, while the remaining
ones are computed by the 2.5D FEM. In Fig. 8 we show the relative error in percentage when
computing the QoI deﬁned in (6) as a function of the tool trajectory for the two cases of
interpolating the subset of Fourier modes deﬁned in Finterp11 and Finterp15 . In both cases, this
error is always below 1%, as predicted theoretically by our method for all 0D cases. It is also
remarkable that the number of interpolated modes for the case Finterp15 represents more than
50% of the total modes in the range of selected Fourier modes.

10

2

10

11 (out of 26) Fourier Modes Interpolated
15 (out of 26) Fourier Modes Interpolated
Upper Estimated Threshold

1

Error (in %)

1
10
10
10
10
10

-1

-2

-3

-4

-5

0

20

40
60
Tool Position Number

80

100

Figure 8: Relative error (in %) for the QoI deﬁned in (6), shown for the two cases of interpolating
the subsets of Fourier modes Finterp11 and Finterp15 .

5

Conclusions

We have studied the qualitative and quantitative behavior of the Fourier series over a direction
along which materials are constant in a given LWD 3D problem. The analysis focused on the
computations of the attenuation, a quantity of interest for inversion that involves the solution
of the so-called ZZ−component of the magnetic ﬁeld at the receivers of the LWD tool.
We ﬁrst considered a 0D model. Then, for such cases, we designed an a priori rule to replace
computation of the solution corresponding to certain Fourier modes by the interpolation in the
logarithmic scale when computing the attenuation in an LWD tool. We then selected the
790

Fourier Analysis for 2.5D FEM of LWD Measurements

´ Rodr´ıguez-Rozas, D. Pardo
A.

interpolation rule that satisﬁes a given tolerance error for all 0D problems, and we applied it
to 2.5D problems along the direction where materials are constant.
Numerical results showed that such a priori rule for computing/interpolating Fourier modes
produced prominent savings from the computational point of view (over 50%) while the discretization error was maintained below 1%.

References
[1] A. Abubakar, T. Habashy, V. Druskin, D. Alumbaugh, A. Zerelli, and L. Knizhnerman. Two-andhalf-dimensional forward and inverse modeling for marine csem problems. In 76th Ann. International Meeting, Society of Exploration Geophysicists. Expanded Abstracts, 2006.
[2] M. Bittar and A. Aki. Advancement and economic beneﬁt of geosteering and well-placement
technology. The Leading Edge, 34(5):524–528, 2015.
[3] V. M. Calo, D. Pardo, and M. R. Paszy´
nski. Goal-oriented self-adaptive hp ﬁnite element simulation of 3D DC borehole resistivity simulations. Procedia Computer Science, 4:1485 – 1495, 2011.
Proceedings of the International Conference on Computational Science, ICCS, 2011.
[4] V. Darrigrand, D. Pardo, and I. Muga. Goal-oriented adaptivity using unconventional error representations for the 1D helmholtz equation. Comput. Math. Appl., 69(9):964–979, 2015.
[5] S. Davydycheva. Two triaxial induction tools: sensitivity to radial invasion proﬁle. Geophysical
Prospecting, 59(2):323–340, 2011.
[6] C. Dupuis and J.-M. Denichou. Automatic inversion of deep-directional-resistivity measurements
for well placement and reservoir description. The Leading Edge, 34(5):504–512, 2015.
[7] J. Hou and M. Bittar. Correction for the borehole eﬀect of multi-component array induction log
data. In Progress In Electromagnetics Research Symposium Proceedings, 2010.
[8] R. K. Mallan and C. Torres-Verd´ın. Eﬀects of petrophysical, environmental, and geometrical
parameters on multi-component induction measurements acquired in high-angle wells. In SPWLA
47th Annual Logging Symposium, Society of Petrophysicists and Well-Log Analysts., 2006.
[9] M. J. Nam, D. Pardo, and C. Torres-Verd´ın. Simulation of borehole-eccentered tri-axial induction
measurements using a fourier hp ﬁnite-element method. Geophysics, 78(1):D41–D52, 2013.
[10] D. Pardo, V. M. Calo, C. Torres-Verd´ın, and M. J. Nam. Fourier series expansion in a nonorthogonal system of coordinates for simulation of 3D DC borehole resistivity measurements.
Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering, 197:1906–1925, 2008.
[11] D. Pardo and C. Torres-Verd´ın. Fast 1D inversion of logging-while-drilling resistivity measurements
for improved estimation of formation resistivity in high-angle and horizontal wells. Geophysics,
80(2):E111–E124, 2015.
[12] E. J. Rothwell and M. J. Cloud. Electromagnetics. Electrical Engineering Textbook Series. Taylor
& Francis, 2010.
[13] J. Shen and W. Sun. 2.5-d modeling of cross-hole electromagnetic measurement by ﬁnite element
method. Petroleum Science, 5(2):126–134, 2008.
[14] L. Yu, B. Kriegsh, T. Wang, and B. Driskill. Real-time processing of multicomponent induction
tool data in highly deviated and horizontal wells. In SPWLA 45th Annual Logging Symposium,
6-9 June, Noordwijk, Netherlands, Society of Petrophysicists and Well-Log Analysts. Expanded
Abstracts, 2004.
[15] M. Zhdanov, D. Kennedy, and E. Peksen. Foundations of tensor induction well-logging. Petrophysics, 42(6):588–610, 2001.

791

