Procedia Computer Science
Volume 29, 2014, Pages 2496–2506
ICCS 2014. 14th International Conference on Computational Science

Interpolation of Sensory Data in the Presence of Obstacles
Dongzhi Zhang and Ickjai Lee
School of Business (IT), James Cook University, Cairns, Queensland, Australia
Dongzhi.Zhang@my.jcu.edu.au, Ickjai.Lee@jcu.edu.au

Abstract
Due to the inherent discrete nature of sensing, interpolation is a key activity in sensing. Interpolation in urban computing faces an unprecedented inference issue that was not present in
large scale traditional sensing environments. Obstacles such as buildings and walls are prevalent in urban sensing, and it is important to consider them in urban sensing interpolation.
This paper introduces an obstacle handling interpolation in urban sensing where obstacles are
present. Experimental results demonstrate that our proposed method outperforms traditional
well-known interpolation methods, and test statistics veriﬁes our method signiﬁcantly improves
performance at the expense of small amount of extra time.
Keywords: Interpolation, Obstacle, Sensory data, Urban sensing

1

Introduction

Sensing becomes an important task in urban computing as various sensors are placed in urban
settings. As sensors are discretely located, and they cannot cover the entire study area, there
is a strong need for estimating values where sensors are not located. That is, it is required
to build a continuous sensor map (2.5D contour map) from a set of discrete sensors in many
situations. Interpolation is a method of measuring value of a non-sampled point from a set of
discrete sensory points, and it is one of the widely studied areas in sensor networks. Therefore,
interpolation in urban computing is becoming an increasingly important task as more urban
sensors are adopted. One important characteristic that makes interpolation in urban sensing
unique and diﬀerent from interpolation in traditional sensor settings is the presence of obstacles
such as walls, buildings and doors. In traditional sensor settings, scales are large and thus
obstacles do not directly interfere interactions among sensors. However, this is not the case
in urban sensing where scales are small and obstacles block interactions. For instance, sensors
for air temperature in a large scale environmental setting are not signiﬁcantly disturbed by
obstacles whilst sensors in urban settings are greatly aﬀected by buildings, walls and other
obstacles present.
Interpolation in the presence of obstacles in these urban sensing has attracted no attention
in the research ﬁeld, and this paper is going to investigate eﬀective interpolation approaches
in the presence of obstacles for urban sensing. This paper ﬁrst reviews popular interpolation
2496

Selection and peer-review under responsibility of the Scientiﬁc Programme Committee of ICCS 2014
c The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V.
doi:10.1016/j.procs.2014.05.233

Interpolation of Sensory Data in the Presence of Obstacles

Zhang and Lee

methods and obstacle handling techniques, and then proposes an obstacle handling interpolation
method based on the most popular interpolation method (inverse distance weighting) with three
obstacle handling detour algorithms (A*, Dijstra with ant colony optimization and constrained
Delaunay triangulation). Experimental results highlight the promising performance of our
proposed methods over traditional interpolation approaches. Various performance measures
such as root mean square error, mean absolute error, and Index of Agreement d value conﬁrm
that our method is well suited for urban sensing environments where obstacles are present.
Statistical test veriﬁes the signiﬁcance of our ﬁnding. The rest of paper is organized as follows.
Section 2 brieﬂy reviews interpolation and obstacle handing approaches. Section 3 introduces
a framework of our proposed method and system, and Section 4 presents experimental results
whilst Section 5 draws conclusive ﬁnal remarks.

2
2.1

Preliminaries
Interpolation

Interpolation is a method of measuring values of non-sampled data from a set of discrete sensory
data. In recent years, data interpolation is becoming increasingly important in sensor network
and urban sensing. It is required since sensors do not continuously cover the study region, but
discretely sense the region. It is an essential process for sensor networks and there exist many
interpolation approaches for discrete sensory datasets.
Nearest Neighbor (NN) interpolation is the simplest method for spatial interpolation data.
It was commonly used for climatology ﬁeld in the earlier application domain [13, 16, 17]. NN
is also known as Thiessen Polygon method. This generates one polygon for each of the sample
point which is located in the center of the polygon. In each polygon, all points are the nearest
to its enclosed sample point other than to any other sample points.
Spline function method belongs to mathematical function interpolation with the ﬁrst derivative and second derivative to be continuous in piecewise polynomial, approximation datum
stronghold, and produces smooth and interpolation curve. The polynomials are described by
pieces of a line or surface (i.e., they are exactly ﬁtted to a small number of data points) and
are integrated so that they can be joined smoothly [1].
The Natural Neighbors (NaN) method combines the features of NN and triangulated irregular network [17]. NaN interpolation is based on Thiessen polygon, a triangulated network of
discrete points. In the process of estimating a non-sampled value, the non-sampled point is
inserted into the tessellation and then the non-sampled value is calculated by sample points
within its adjacent polygons. For each neighbor, the area of the part of its original polygon is
integrated in the tile of the new point being calculated. These areas are scaled to sum to 1 and
are used as weights to respond to the corresponding sampled data [17].
Linear interpolation is one of the simplest interpolation methods. There is a polygonal line
generated when linear interpolation is applied for a sequence of points. In the polygonal line,
each straight line segment links two consecutive points of the sequence.
Radial Basis Functions (RBF) is a complex of ﬁve exact deterministic interpolation methods including thin plate spline, spline with tension, inverse multi-quadratic function, multiquadratic function and completely regularized spline. RBF interpolation methods estimate
values that change from beyond the maximum or below the minimum of the estimated values.
Comparing the ﬁve RBF methods, there is the same parameter that aﬀects the smoothness
of the interpolation surface. The estimated values are taken from a mathematical function or
formula that minimizes overall surface curvature and generates surfaces that are very smooth.
2497

Interpolation of Sensory Data in the Presence of Obstacles

Zhang and Lee

There is a very small diﬀerence among them, so the generated interpolation surfaces are about
the same.
The Inverse Distance Weighting (IDW) is the most commonly used spatial interpolation
method for earth science. IDW method estimates the value at a non-sampled point using a
linear combination of values at sampled points weighted by an inverse function of the distance
from the non-sampled point to the sampled points. It is based on the principle of similarity. If
two objects are closer to each other, their properties are more similar. If two objects are farther
away, the similarity is less likely. The weight formula is:
λi =

1/dpi
,
1/dpi

n
i=1

(1)

where di is the distance between estimated value x0 and the sample value xi , p is a power
estimated value estimated value x0 and the sampled parameter and n represents the number of
sampled points for estimating. The main factor that aﬀects the accuracy of IDW is the value of
the power parameter [13]. The weight of each observation is determined by the distance between
interpolated points: the shortest distance, the larger weight, the longer distance, and the smaller
weight. They are inversely related as weight decreases while the distance increases. So there
are heavier and more considerable inﬂuencies for closer sample points for the estimation [13].
Notably, the distance function is non-linear. The choice of power parameter and radius of area
is arbitrary [17]. The most popular choice of p is 2 and the resulting method is often called
inverse square distance or inverse distance squared. The power parameter can also be chosen
on the basis of error measurement, such as minimum mean absolute error, resulting the optimal
IDW [4]. The smoothness of the estimated spatial continuous surface increases with the power
parameter increasing. It is found that the estimated results become less satisfactory when p
is 1 and 2 comparing with p equals to 4 [16]. IDW is regarded as moving average when p is
0 [2, 12, 14]. It becomes linear interpolation when p is 1 and “weighted moving average” when
p is not equal to 1 [1]. A detailed comparison of interpolation methods suggests that IDW is
a solid candidate for interpolation in the presence of obstacles, thus, it is chosen as a default
method for obstacle interpolation in this study.

2.2

Obstacle Handling Approaches

There are unique characteristics of sensing in urban sensing environments that are diﬀerent
from traditional environments. One of them is the presence of obstacles such as walls or buildings. There are three approaches to deal with this issue of obstacle avoidance: Constrained
Delaunay Triangulation (CDT), Dijkstra-Ant Colony Optimization (Dij-ACO) and A*. Dijkstra’s algorithm [6] is also known as the single source shortest path problem and a graph from
one vertex to the rest to solve the shortest path problem. The algorithm ﬁnds the shortest path
from a source node to every other node. It has been widely used for many applications, and
many implementations are available for use. Please refer to [6] for more details. Ant Colony
Algorithm (ACO) is one of the latest development to simulate ants foraging behavior bionic
optimization algorithm [7]. There is a highlighted applicable characteristic of ACO algorithm to
solve combinatorial optimization problems [3, 5, 10]. Dij-ACO includes three steps: (1) establishing a free space model in the presence of obstacles according to MAKLINK graph theory [9];
(2) using the Dijkstra algorithm to ﬁnd a sub-optimal collision-free path; (3) utilizing the ACO
algorithm to optimize the location of the sub-optimal path for generating the globally optimal
path (detour distance).
A* is a search algorithm widely used in path ﬁnding and graph search [11]. The process is to
measure an eﬃciently navigable path between points. It became famous due to its recognized
2498

Interpolation of Sensory Data in the Presence of Obstacles

Zhang and Lee

performance and accuracy. A* is the shortest path ﬁnding algorithm which uses heuristic
search technique to ﬁnd the least-cost path from the start node to the target node. The classic
representation of A* algorithm is as follows:
f (x) = g(x) + h(x),

(2)

where f (x) is called the distance-plus-cost heuristic function or F cost, it is equal to path-cost
function g(x) plus heuristic function h(x). The path-cost function g(x), G cost, it is the actual
total cost of the path from the start node to current node x. The heuristic function h(x)
is the estimated cost or H cost, it is the path cost from current node x to the target node.
h(x) is an admissible heuristic estimation. A heuristic function can be accepted if the cost of
path estimation never exceeds the lowest-cost path. The h(x) is an element of f (x), f (x) is
dependable on h(x) for the lowest cost of path. It means when h(x) is accepted, there is a
shortest path generated from A*, if exists. Therefore, h(x) must not overestimate the cost.
With the rapid development of computer software and analysis of more complex objects,
Delaunay Triangulation (DT) plays a signiﬁcant role in visualization, environmental science
and sensor networks [15]. DT can be used to generate a continuous surface from a set of data
sample points by creating a triangular mesh or surface of triangular planes connecting sample
points. DT is considered to be a desirable method for creating natural-looking surfaces because
minimum interior angles of all triangles are maximized and triangles are as equiangular as possible. Thus long and thin triangles are avoided. DT is a regular triangulation, the high quality
triangulate net can be created, but there are some restrictions in practice, such as inability to
represent multiply-connected complex regions and all kinds of obstacles. Constrained Delaunay
Triangulation (CDT) overcomes some of these restrictions [8, 9]. CDT is based on DT, but
considers obstacles. Thus, CDT can be used solve the obstacle issue. Note that, CDT inherits
many sound mathematical DT properties.

3

Framework of Interpolation in the Presence of Obstacles

The process of interpoation in the presence of obstacles consists of three main parts: (1) input:
urban sensor data and obstacles; (2) interpolation in the presence of obstacles: three methods
comprising of IDW with CDT, IDW with Dijkstra with ACO, and IDW with A*; (3) output:
producing experimental results and validation. The algorithms are designed and implmented
within MATLAB environments, and also evaluation measures and test were conducted with
MATLAB codes. As brieﬂy explained in Section 2, IDW is the most widely used and most
ﬂexible, and does not require a model that makes it extensible. It has outstanding eﬀectiveness
and accuracy. Figure 1 displays a framework of interpolation in the presence of obstacles in
this paper.

4
4.1

Experimental Studies
Dataset

An artiﬁcial data mimicking a real-world smart oﬃce in urban sensing settings was created in
20x20m two dimensional space. The oﬃce has 4 closed areas (rooms with doors and some rooms
with air-conditioning on whilst others oﬀ) and one big open area. 39 temperature sensors are
placed to collect discrete temperature data in the oﬃce. Figure 2 depicts the dataset with 39
2499

Interpolation of Sensory Data in the Presence of Obstacles

Zhang and Lee

Figure 1: Framework of interpolation in the presence of obstacles.
temperature sensors. Blue circles denote sensors, red lines represent obstacles and their physical
locations.

Figure 2: Dataset(|n|=39).
Temperature values of sensors are shown in Table 1 which illustrates the distribution of
temperature values over the study region. Note that the dataset was created based on the fact
that the room temperature is not constant in the room due to inconsistent direct and indirect
sun light and also air-conditioning in some closed rooms and areas.
Figure 3, 4, and 5 display shortest path outcomes in the presence of obstacles with proposed
three methods: MAKLINK Dij-ACO, CDT, and A* generated within MATLAB. In Figure 3,
black lines represent MAKLINK graph links whilst green thick lines show the Dijstras suboptimal shortest path from the source point S to the destination point T. ACO is now combined
with Dijstras algorithm to ﬁnd an optimum path in the presence of obstacles that is in a set of
blue line segments. In Figure 4, CDT is displayed in blue lines and similarly the A* shortest
path is shown in blue lines in Figure 5.
2500

Interpolation of Sensory Data in the Presence of Obstacles

Zhang and Lee

Table 1: Sensor values of dataset (Sensor: sensor ID, Temp: temperature in celsius).
Sensor
1
6
11
16
21
26
31
36

Temp
30
31
26
28
30
32
30
31

Sensor
2
7
12
17
22
27
32
37

Temp
31
32
25
27
31
36
32
31

Sensor
3
8
13
18
23
28
33
38

Temp
30
30
25
27
31
35
31
32

Sensor
4
9
14
19
24
29
34
39

Temp
31
31
25
28
30
36
32
31

Sensor
5
10
15
20
25
30
35

Temp
32
32
27
27
31
34
33

Figure 3: MAKLINK Dij-ACO shortest path with the dataset.

4.2

Validation Measures

The error analysis is carried out between actual sample and interpolated observation values
by three statistical methods: the Root-Mean-Square Error (RMSE), the Mean Absolute Error
(MAE) and Index of Agreement d (higher d value) to describe average model-performance error
are examined. Lower MAE and RMSE values and higher d value are for better performance.
RMSE is used to measure the success rate of numeric prediction. It is a signiﬁcant statistical
method for error analysis that is the square root of the square of the diﬀerence between estimated
point and interpolated point, the mathematic formula is as follows:
RM SE =

n
i=1 (xi

n

− yi ) 2

,

(3)

where xi is the value of i-th point in sample set X, yi is the value of y-th point in sample set
Y , n is the total number of sample points in X and Y .
2501

Interpolation of Sensory Data in the Presence of Obstacles

Zhang and Lee

Figure 4: CDT shortest path with the dataset.

Figure 5: A* shortest path with the dataset.
MAE is another signiﬁcant statistical method for error analysis. MAE is a quantity used
to measure how close forecasts or predictions are to the eventual outcomes. The mathematic
formula is as follows:
n
1
M AE =
|xi − yi |,
(4)
n i=1
where xi is the value of i-th point in sample set X, yi is the value of y-th point in sample set
Y , n is the total number of sample points in X and Y .
Similar to RMSE and MAE, d, in the Index of Agreement d, is used for estimating the close
2502

Interpolation of Sensory Data in the Presence of Obstacles

Zhang and Lee

degree between actual sample value and interpolated data value.
d=1−[

n
i=1 (xi
n
(|x
i − μs |
i=1

− yi ) 2
],
+ |yi − μs |)2

(5)

where xi is the value of i-th point in sample set X, yi is the value of i-th point in sample set
Y , n is the total number of sample points in X and Y . μs is the mean of the estimated point
values. The d is a dimensionless parameter that varies from 0 to 1.

4.3

Experimental Results

Three statistical methods are used for comparison of accuracy, including RMSE, MAE and
higher d value. Lower RMSE and MAE values and higher value of d are used for better
performance. Six existing interpolation methods (NN, Cubic Spline, NaN, IDW, Linear, RBF)
are selected to compare with Dij-ACO-IDW, CDT-IDW and A*-IDW. Three values of neighbors
were utilized for IDW namely 1, 2 and 3. For instance, Dij-ACO-1 IDW means that Dijstras
shortest algorithm is combined with ACO with the ﬁrst nearest neighbor of IDW.

Figure 6: Bar chart of RMSE values.
Figure 6 displays a bar chart of RMSE values of 15 approaches (6 traditional and 9 proposed
methods). RMSE corresponding to the dataset varies from 1.4581 to 2.0788 for the 6 traditional
approaches, and 0.802 to 1.0327 for the proposed obstacle handling interpolation approaches
respectively. It demonstrates that the 9 proposed methods show much better performance
in terms of RMSE values. All the 9 obstacle handling interpolation methods exhibit RMSE
values lower than 1 (except CDT-3 IDW which is very close to 1) whilst all the 6 traditional
approaches show values much higher than 1. In particular NN performs the worst exhibiting
more than 2 RMSE value. Figure 7 displaying a bar chart of MAE values exhibits a similar
trend. In MAE, errors vary from 1.0789 to 1.4643 for the traditional approaches whilst 0.7129
to 0.8553 for the proposed methods. Again NN performs the worst whilst the ﬁrst nearest IDW
with obstacle handling method performs better than higher order neighbors. Figure 8 shows
a bar chart of Index of Agreement d values. Values of d change from 0.7463 to 0.8752 for the
traditional approaches whilst values range from 0.9284 to 0.9619 for our proposed methods. It
is clear that our proposed methods outperform the traditional approaches with this d value as
2503

Interpolation of Sensory Data in the Presence of Obstacles

Zhang and Lee

Figure 7: Bar chart of AME values.

Figure 8: Bar chart of Index of Agreement d values.
well. Figure 9 summarizes performance measures with a line graph. Individually, comparing
among CDT, Dij-ACO and A*, in RMSE, MAE and higher d value statistics, A* with IDW
obtains the best accuracy. Dij-ACO with IDW is better than CDT with IDW.

5

Final Remarks

Sensing is the heart of urban sensing. Due to the advances in sensor technologies, various
sensors are utilized in urban environments. Physical obstacles blocking interactions of sensors,
and hinder sensor data collection and communication process are a major hurdle in sensor
networks, and of course in sensor interpolation. This paper investigates this important issue
of sensor interpolation in the presence of obstacles. We devise and implement three obstacle
handling interpolation approaches: Dijstra with ACO, A* and CDT obstacle handling approaches combined with the most popular interpolation approach, IDW. Experimental results
2504

Interpolation of Sensory Data in the Presence of Obstacles

Zhang and Lee

Figure 9: Line graphs of RMSE, MAE, and Index of Agreement d values.
display interesting ﬁndings, and demonstrate the superiority of our approaches over traditional
approaches. Various error measures verify our obstacle handling methods outperform traditional non-obstacle handing approaches. Statistical validation veriﬁes the overall performance
improvement is signiﬁcant with 99% of conﬁdence with our dataset. However, more comprehensive experiments are required to conﬁrm this. Current study could be expanded into few
directions. First, one needs more experiments with various urban environmental sensing settings. Also, it needs to include various types of obstacles not only physical linear obstacles, but
complex arbitrary shaped obstacles. Second, a continuous map generation based on obstacle
interpolation would generate an interesting and useful knowledge base that could be used for
various decision-making. Third, extensions of obstacle handing interpolation to other interpolation methods such as areal stealing interpolation and kriging are the next step to move
forward.

References
[1] P. A. Burrough and R. A. McDonnell. Oxford University Press, 1998.
[2] D. J. Brus, J. J. De Gruijter, B. A. Marsman, R. Visschers, A. K. Bregt, A. Breeuwsma, and
J. Bouma. The performance of spatial interpolation methods and choropleth maps to estimate
properties at points: A soil survey case study. Environmetrics, 7(1):1–16, 1996.
[3] S. Chen and S. Smith. Commonality and genetic algorithms. Technical Report CMU-RI-TR-96-27,
Carnegie Mellon University, 1996.
[4] F. C. Collins and P. V. Bolstad. A comparison of spatial interpolation techniques in temperature estimation. In Proceedings of the Third International Conference on Integrating GIS and
Environmental Modeling, Santa Fe, NM, Santa Barbara, CA, 1996.
[5] G. di Caro and M. Dorigo. Antnet: Distributed stigmergetic control for communications networks.
Journal of Artiﬁcial Intelligence Research, 9:317–365, 1998.
[6] E. Dijkstra and J. M. Thomas. An interview with edsger w. dijkstra. Communications of the
ACM, 53(8):41–47, 2010.
[7] M. Dorigo, V. Maniezzo, and A. Colomi. Ant system: Optimization by a colony of cooperating
agents. IEEE Transactions on SMC, 26(1):8–41, 1996.
[8] O. D. Faugeras, E. Le Bras-Mehlman, and J. D. Boissonnat. Representing stereo data with the
delaunay triangulation. Artiﬁcial Intelligence, 44:41–87, 1990.

2505

Interpolation of Sensory Data in the Presence of Obstacles

Zhang and Lee

[9] L. D. Floriani and E. Puppo. Constrained delaunay for multiresolution surface description. In
Proceedings of the 9th International Conference on Pattern Recognition, pages 566–569, 1988.
[10] M. K. Habib and H. Asama. Eﬃcient method to generate collision free paths for autonomous mobile
robot based on new free space structuring approach. In Proceedings of IEEE/RSJ International
Workshop on Intelligent Robots and Systems, pages 563–567, 1991.
[11] P. E. Hart, N. J. Nilsson, and B. Raphael. A formal basis for the heuristic determination of
minimum cost paths. IEEE Transactions on Systems Science and Cybernetics, 4(2):100–107,
1968.
[12] E. Hosseini, J. Gallichand, and J. Caron. Comparison of several interpolators for smoothing
hydraulic conductivity data in south west iran. In American Society of Agricultural Engineers,
volume 36, pages 1687–1693, 1993.
[13] E. H. Isaaks and R. M. Srivastava. Applied Geostatistics. Oxford University Press, 1998.
[14] G. M. Laslett, A. B. McBratney, P. J. Pahl, and M. F. Hutchinson. Comparison of several spatial
prediction methods for soil ph. Journal of Soil Science, 38:325–341, 1987.
[15] F. De Rienzo, P. Oreste, and S. Pelizza. Subsurface geological-ggotechnical modeling to sustain
underground civil planning. Eigineering Geology, 96(1):187–204, 2008.
[16] B. D. Ripley. Spatial Statistics. Wiley & Sons, 1981.
[17] R. Webster and M. Oliver. Geostatistics for Environmental Scientists. John Wiley & Sons, 2001.

2506

