Procedia Computer Science
Volume 29, 2014, Pages 2045–2054
ICCS 2014. 14th International Conference on Computational Science

Automated estimation and analysis of lung function
test parameters from spirometric data for respiratory
disease diagnostics
Aruneema Das1, David P Johns1, Ritaban Dutta2 and Haydn E Walters1
1

School of Medicine, University of Tasmania, Hobart, Australia
2
CCI, CSIRO, Hobart, Australia
aruneema.das@utas.edu.au, ritaban.dutta@csiro.au

Abstract
A spirometer is used for basic lung function test for preliminary diagnosis of respiratory diseases.
There are significant amount of calculations and graphical analysis required to transform the raw
spirometric data into meaningful parameters. This parameters and graphs help the physicians in
preliminary patient diagnosis for respiratory disorders like asthma, chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease, etc. This study was undertaken for the development of a software system which can be used
with any spirometric instrument to automate the calculations of pulmonary dead space volumes and
analysis of raw data. The clinician can feed the raw data from patient testing into the easy to use
graphical user interface of the software which will be analyzed instantly and all the parameters,
regression slopes, shape analysis plots and the results will be displayed graphically. The estimation of
the vital parameters and regression slopes are based on standard protocols and equations. This system
will eliminate presently practiced time consuming manual calculations and graphical analysis; will
have increased precision, be considerably faster and more versatile.
Keywords: spirometry; spirometer; respiratory rate; lung function test; data analysis; respiratory disease
diagnostics; dead space volume; regression.

1 Introduction
Spirometry is a basic Pulmonary Function Test (PFT) measured using a spirometer (Pierce &
Johns, 2003). A spirometer is a precision differential pressure transducer based apparatus for
measuring the volume of air inspired and expired by the lungs and the respiration flow rates. Many
other key lung function parameters like vital capacity, tidal volume, peak expiratory flow (PEF), etc.
can be calculated from these values. The most common ones are the forced vital capacity (FVC) and
the forced expired volume in one second (FEV1) (Pierce & Johns, 2003). It is useful as a preliminary
test of the health condition for patient's lung (Johns, Burton, Walters, & Wood-Baker, 2006). The
Selection and peer-review under responsibility of the Scientiﬁc Programme Committee of ICCS 2014
c The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V.
doi:10.1016/j.procs.2014.05.188

2045

Automated estimation and analysis of pulmonary function test parameters ...

R. Dutta

shapes and measurement of other vital parameters like respiratory rate (RR) and pulmonary dead space
(VD) from the flow and volume curves (Schachter, Kapp, Maunder, Beck, & Witek, 1986) provides
indices for the primary diagnosis of respiratory disease caused by obstruction in lungs like asthma and
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) (Wildhaber, et al., 2007). Other measures like the ratio
of FVC and forced expiratory volume (FEV) (Nathel, Nathell, Malmberg, & Larsson, 2007), ratio of
the forced expiratory flow (FEF) to the ideal value and regression slopes of dead space volumes at
various flow volumes (Thamrin, Latzin, Sauteur, Riedel, Hall, & Frey, 2007) are also important
factors to assess airway distensibility or dilation capacity of airways (Johns, Wilson, Harding, &
Walters, 2000).
Figure 1(a) shows Spiroson (Easy-on-PC model), a hand held spirometer (developed by ndd
Medizintechnik AG) used in this study (www.ndd.ch). It measures air flow using an ultrasonic
transducer. Figure 1(b) shows the cross-section of the Spiroson (Easy-on-PC model). The sensor
consists of a flow tube and an oblique channel in which two ultrasonic transducers are mounted on
opposite sides as shown in Figure 1(b). At short intervals ultrasonic pulses are emitted and received by
the transducers in alternating directions.

(a)

(b)
Figure 1: (a) Spiroson Easy-on-PC model developed by ndd Medizintechnik AG. (b) Cross-section of the
Spiroson Easy-on-PC model (www.ndd.ch)

2046

Automated estimation and analysis of pulmonary function test parameters ...

R. Dutta

The observed up and down-stream transit times are determined with a resolution of at least 10 ns.
Mean flow velocity of the gas flow through the breathing tube can be derived from the transit times.
At a given tube geometry, flow and volume can be calculated and are independent of gas composition,
humidity and temperature. Unlike many other types of spirometer, the Spiroson (Easy-on-PC) has no
moving parts; therefore accuracy is independent of any mechanical function and measurement of
variables such as pressure or displacement volume. Providing the tube geometry (cross-sectional area
of the gas stream) is fixed, the only variable requiring accurate measurement is the transit-time of the
ultrasonic pulses between the two transmitters to receivers making this a stable system. In addition to
flow, molecular mass of the test gas can be derived in the same measuring cycle. Offered as an option
to flow/volume measurement the molecular gas analysis requires no additional hardware but an
upgrade to the signal processor software. Based on a purely digital working principle Spiroson needs a
once in a life-time calibration only (www.ndd.ch).
The Spiroson can be connected to the PC via USB as shown in Figure 2 and its own data logger
called WBreath acts as an interface for all the raw data collection. It records raw data (e.g. flow,
volume, etc.) when the subject breath in and out through the white mouthpiece. The data files provided
by WBreath after completion of a testing cycle consists of a text file with the raw data of volume, flow
and molar mass (MM) against sampling time and a Microsoft Excel file with the other estimated key
parameters.
There are some problems with WBreath:
a.

Display of the raw data is uncalibrated so there is no information about any values of
time, flow, volume and MM.

b.

The manufacturer produces no information about the method/formula used for estimating
parameters like dead space volume hence there is no means for cross validation.

c.

It has no scope of any other analysis or plot generation specific to research needs like
regression slopes of VD against flow volumes etc.

Figure 2: Spiroson Easy-on-PC model connected to the PC and the raw data displayed in the data logger.

2047

Automated estimation and analysis of pulmonary function test parameters ...

R. Dutta

Figure 3: Spiroson Easy-on-PC model connected to the PC and the raw data displayed in the data logger.

This study aims to develop a user friendly software system providing a solution to the above
problems. The main purpose will be to semi-automate the calculations of airway distensibility and
flow-dependence of VD. The next section describes the details of the software development and the
final section contains discussion and further work.

2 Software Development
The software for calibrated data display of flow, volume & molar mass and VD estimation and
analysis is developed in MATLAB (www.mathworks.com) for pc. Figure 3 shows the software with
the plot of raw flow, volume and molar mass data from Spiroson after a 30 second patient breath
testing. It also displays the estimated VD in two different methods namely VD 10% (Thamrin, Latzin,
Sauteur, Riedel, Hall, & Frey, 2007).

Figure 4: The VD estimation menu.

2048

Automated estimation and analysis of pulmonary function test parameters ...

R. Dutta

Figure 5: Dead space volume estimation from the flow, volume and MM curves.

The raw data file from Spiroson can be selected by the user from the ‘VD estimation’ menu as shown
in Figure 4 and the software then displays the data and also displays the VD values after estimation.
The system also pre-processes the data by filtering the noise out. The VD values can be saved using
the ‘Save VD’ option as shown in . The name of the selected data file is displayed as well.

2.1 Dead space volume estimation
Dead space volume is a key parameter to determine any obstruction in the small airways of the
patient’s lungs (Bouhuys, 1964). There is a defined normal range for male and female subjects. VD
has been estimated by the software from the flow and volume data as described below and shown in
Figure 5.
Expiration starts at red dot on line ‘a’ when the volume starts falling in downward direction and
flow goes below the 0 axis Expiration ends at line ‘b’ when the volume starts rising in upward
direction and flow goes above 0 axis.The 10% rise point (from the start of expiration to the next peak)
is the red dot for each breath on the MM plot as shown in in Figure 3and marked by line ‘c’ in
Figure 5. The minimum value (after start of expiration) is the black dot for each breath on the MM
plot
as
shown
in
Figure
3
and
marked
by
line
‘d’
in
Figure 5.
VD 10% is the area under the Flow curve between line ‘a’ to line ‘c’ and the red line passing
through the minimum value of the flow curve for that expiration cycle. The Alveolar dead space
(VDP) is the area under the Flow curve in Figure 5 between line ‘a’ to line ‘d’ and the red line passing
through the minimum value of the flow curve for that expiration cycle. An inspiration and expiration
together forms a complete breath cycle. A value of VD and VDP is estimated for each breath and
displayed in the table as shown in Figure 3.

2049

Automated estimation and analysis of pulmonary function test parameters ...

R. Dutta

Figure 6 : The “Regression” menu.

2.2 Regression plots
The user can select the regression option from the ‘Regression’ menu in the software as shown in
Figure 6. The ‘select file for regression’ option allows the user to choose the data file containing the
RR and PEF values corresponding to the flow and volume data used for VD estimations.

Figure 7: The Excel file format for the saved regression data points.

2050

Automated estimation and analysis of pulmonary function test parameters ...

R. Dutta

Figure 8: Dead space volume estimation from the flow, volume and MM curves.

The estimated values of VD and VDP are plotted against RR and PEF respectively and a linear
regression is performed. Data points from each of the regression plots are saved as separate labeled
sheets in an Excel file automatically as shown in Figure 7, in the same folder where the previous data
files belong and named as the corresponding raw data text file. The file name is displayed under Excel
file as shown in Figure 8. All the plots are displayed in the software as shown in Figure 8. The
equation for the linear regression and R2 value is also displayed for each of the plots. If some of the
data points are far apart from the regression line in any of the plots, the user can use the ‘open & edit
regression option as shown in Figure 6 to open the saved Excel file as shown in Figure 7 and delete
the problematic data points. The ‘repeat regression’ option as shown in Figure 6 can then be used for
repeating the regression calculation and re-plotting with modified R2 values and regression equations.
The total process can be repeated multiple times until the user is satisfied with the regression values in
reaching a meaningful conclusion about the patient’s lung condition.

2051

Automated estimation and analysis of pulmonary function test parameters ...

R. Dutta

Figure 9: Flow volume curve shapes.

3 Further Development
Other measures of lung obstruction estimation are being developed based on the shape of the flow
volume curve for each breath sample. They will be added to the software along with the traditional
measures and put to patient testing. Figure 9 shows the shape of ideal flow volume curve and also for
a person with obstructive lungs. The forced expiratory flow at 75% of flow volume (FEF 75%) and
forced expiratory flow at 50% of flow volume (FEF50%) are reference points for deviation of the
curve from the ideal curve. In the global concave pattern curve, both FEF75% and FEF50% are
reduced than the ideal values. In the peripheral concave pattern curve, FEF50% is normal but FEF75%
is reduced from the ideal values. Another measure of lung obstruction is being developed based on the
ratios of deviation from the ideal point.
The angle ẞ (Schachter, Kapp, Maunder, Beck, & Witek, 1986) is a measure of the degree of
concavity which signifies the obstruction. We have developed another angle α as shown in Figure 10
which in addition to angle ẞ will produce a more accurate measure of the degree of concavity and thus
the obstruction. Here X is volume expired to PEF.
Angle α is estimated from Figure 10 as follows:
Tan FBE = (PEF – FEF50%)/ (0.5 x FVC)
Tan ABE = (PEF – FEF50%)/ ((0.5 x FVC) – X)
ABF = ABE – FBE
= tan-1[(PEF – FEF50%)/ ((0.5 x FVC) – X)] – tan-1 [(PEF – FEF50%)/ (0.5 x FVC)]
Angle α = Angle CBD
≈ Angle ABF
= tan -1 [(PEF – FEF50%)/ ((0.5 x FVC) – X)] – tan -1 [(PEF – FEF50%)/ (0.5 x FVC)]

2052

Automated estimation and analysis of pulmonary function test parameters ...

R. Dutta

Figure 10: Angle α estimation.

The disadvantages of using the traditional FEV1 (forced expiratory volume at 1 second) to FVC
ratio as a measure of concavity is its dependence on FVC. If a patient fails to blow out fully during the
test then will be overestimated and airflow obstruction underestimated. Another new index is under
development to overcome this disadvantage. All the additional measures will be added to the software
for a comparative study of the effectiveness and validity of all of them.

4 Discussion
There are various indices in spirometry to measure airway obstruction in lungs and the superiority
of one index over the other is still debated. The estimation of VD and the linear regression plots
obtained from the developed software will be used for patient trial to measure airway distensibility and
flow-dependence of VD. People with asthma or COPD have limited airway distensibility compared to
normal subjects. As the estimations and plots are automated it will generate results much faster after
completion of patient sampling. The software has been compiled to an application package, hence it is
free to use without requirement of any paid license. As the software interface is easy to operate,
anyone can start using it with very little training. The software is also quite generic and can be made
compatible for any spirometer with some basic modifications. Other new indices based on the shape of
flow and volume curve is still under development as described in Section 3. These additional indices
and other medical tests will run in parallel for cross validation of the results.

5 Acknowledgement
The authors would like to thank Paula Fottrell for her efforts in conducting the trial data collection
experiments which helped in the software development process.

2053

Automated estimation and analysis of pulmonary function test parameters ...

R. Dutta

References
Bouhuys, A. (1964). Respiratory dead space. In A. Bouhuys, W. O. Fenn, & H. Rahn (Eds.),
Handbook of Physiology (Vol. 1, p. Section 3: Respiration). Washington: American
Physiological Society.
Johns, D. P., Burton, D., Walters, J. A., & Wood-Baker, R. (2006). National survey of spirometer
ownership and usage in general practice in Australia. Respirology, 11(3), 292-298.
Johns, D. P., Wilson, J., Harding, R., & Walters, E. H. (2000). Airway distensibility in healthy and
asthmatic subjects: effect of lung volume history. Journal of Applied Physiology, 88(4),
1413-1420.
Nathel, L., Nathell, M., Malmberg, P., & Larsson, K. (2007). COPD diagnosis related to different
guidelines and spirometry techniques. Respiratory research, 8(1), 89-95.
Pierce, R., & Johns, D. P. (2003). Pocket guide to Spirometry. McGraw-Hill Australia.
Schachter, E. N., Kapp, M. C., Maunder, L. R., Beck, G., & Witek, T. J. (1986). Smoking and cotton
dust effects in cotton textile workers: an analysis of the shape of the maximum expiratory
flow volume curve. Environmental health perspectives, 66, 145-148.
Thamrin, C., Latzin, P., Sauteur, L., Riedel, T., Hall, G. L., & Frey, U. (2007). Deadspace estimation
from CO2 versus molar mass measurements in infants. Pediatric pulmonology, 42(10), 920928.
Wildhaber, J. H., Sznitman, J., Harpes, P., Straub, D., Moller, A., Basek, P., et al. (2007). Correlation
of spirometry and symptom scores in childhood asthma and the usefulness of curvature
assessment in expiratory flow-volume curves. Respiratory Care, 52(12), 1744-1752.

2054

