Procedia Computer Science
Volume 29, 2014, Pages 1504–1514
ICCS 2014. 14th International Conference on Computational Science

Near Real-time Data Analysis of Core-Collapse
Supernova Simulations With Bellerophon
E. J. Lingerfelt1, O. E. B. Messer1,2, S. S. Desai2, C. A. Holt3,
and E. J. Lentz2
1

Oak Ridge National Laboratory, Oak Ridge, TN
lingerfeltej@ornl.gov, bronson@ornl.gov
2
University of Tennessee, Knoxville, TN
sdesai7@utk.edu, elentz@utk.edu
3
Appalachian State University, Boone, NC
holtca1@appstate.edu

Abstract
We present an overview of a software system, Bellerophon, built to support a production-level HPC
application called CHIMERA, which simulates core-collapse supernova events at the petascale.
Developed over the last four years, Bellerophon enables CHIMERA’s geographically dispersed team
of collaborators to perform data analysis in near real-time. Its n-tier architecture provides an
encapsulated, end-to-end software solution that enables the CHIMERA team to quickly and easily
access highly customizable animated and static views of results from anywhere in the world via a webdeliverable, cross-platform desktop application. In addition, Bellerophon addresses software
engineering tasks for the CHIMERA team by providing an automated mechanism for performing
regression testing on a variety of supercomputing platforms. Elements of the team’s workflow
management needs are met with software tools that dynamically generate code repository statistics,
access important online resources, and monitor the current status of several supercomputing resources.
Keywords: data analysis, visualization, core-collapse supernovae, n-tier architecture, software engineering,
usability, workflow management, artifact management

1 Introduction
Leadership-class simulation science is already, at the petascale, an enterprise fraught not primarily
with concerns regarding raw computational power, but rather, with problems concerning the generated
data and the human interactions required to obtain scientific insight from these data. The sheer volume
of data, policies designed to ensure their integrity, and efficient methods to interpret them are
immediate obstacles faced by almost all computational scientists running capability-class simulations.

1504

Selection and peer-review under responsibility of the Scientiﬁc Programme Committee of ICCS 2014
c The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V.
doi:10.1016/j.procs.2014.05.136

Near Real-time Data Analysis of Core-Collapse Supernova Simulations ...

Lingerfelt et al.

Most importantly, little of this bleeding-edge computational science is done by individuals alone, or
even within very small teams in close physical proximity. In addition, these teams are often
augmented by individual researchers who need access to the simulation data to further the scientific
aims of the project. This access is often hampered by (necessary) security policies at the computing
facilities, and, more often than not, requires third-party intervention (i.e., a consultant must be called
on the phone and UNIX permissions are set by hand for a period of time). All of these difficulties
often occur in an environment of rapid and incessant code development. The nature of computing at
leadership-class facilities invariably leads to teams of developers and users working in concert.
Indeed, these groups rarely have sharp divisions, i.e., users of the codes are often the primary
developers as well. Intensive code development, constant (with a cadence of less than 18 months over
the last decade) platform evolution, growing data volumes, and higher and more serious data security
concerns have all led to a situation in which computing on the world's largest supercomputers is a
daunting task for the most sophisticated computational scientists.
Over the past decade, research efforts anchored at Oak Ridge National Laboratory (ORNL) have
resulted in the development and deployment of several codes designed to perform simulations of corecollapse supernovae. The current production “workhorse" for the group is the CHIMERA code [1].
CHIMERA is used in production mode on a variety of supercomputer platforms to perform two- and
three-dimensional simulations. The code is typically run with as few as 256 Message Passing Interface
(MPI) tasks to as many as 131,000 tasks, and at a variety of sizes in between, depending on the
dimensionality of the simulation and the resolution used in space, neutrino phase space, and nuclear
network size. Typical simulations can produce between 30 Gigabytes (GB) to well over 80 Terabytes
(TB) of data per run. In these ways and others, CHIMERA is a typical leadership-class simulation
code. Importantly, the nature of the CHIMERA collaboration itself - a moderately sized development
team with a large overlap between developers and users - is also common among other HPC
application efforts. In addition to the developers located at ORNL, major outposts of development
exist throughout the United States. These developers have produced an application that has well over
250,000 lines of code. Consistent, efficient production at leadership scales requires near-constant code
development, and any code changes must be motivated by scientific targets. Unfortunately, with only
a few geographically dispersed investigators to accomplish both tasks, the wrangling of TB's of data to
gain scientific insight and the incessant need to manage enterprise-scale code development has already
proven to be impossible without the help of a sophisticated software system designed to facilitate both
tasks at once.
Bellerophon is a support system developed at ORNL over roughly the past four years to address
precisely these challenges with a goal of automating data analysis, workflow management, and
software engineering tasks. It has enabled the CHIMERA team to discover and isolate multiple bugs
and other subtle issues. It has also resulted in a direct impact on simulation results and facilitated
several publications [2, 3]. Bellerophon is an integrated system of standalone, reusable
subcomponents, tools, libraries, and services deployed across several supercomputing facilities, a
dedicated web and data server, and multiple client-side implementations, providing an encapsulated,
end-to-end software solution. The design of Bellerophon’s n-tier architecture includes a logic, data,
and presentation tier as well as a supercomputing tier as seen in Figure 1. Elements of the
supercomputing tier monitor simulation progress, process and analyze results, archive data, and
transmit new data to Bellerophon’s data server in near real-time. Components from Bellerophon’s
supercomputing tier have been ported and installed on Titan at the Oak Ridge Leadership Computing
Facility (OLCF), Kraken and Darter at the National Institute for Computational Sciences (NICS), and
Hopper and Edison at the National Energy Research Scientific Computing Center (NERSC). These
installations also integrate the High Performance Storage System (HPSS) associated with each
supercomputing platform. Bellerophon’s logic tier and data tier components, which reside on a
dedicated web and data server, are responsible for processing data received from the supercomputing
tier and enabling authenticated access to source data and analysis artifacts via a secure PHP web

1505

Near Real-time Data Analysis of Core-Collapse Supernova Simulations ...

Lingerfelt et al.

service. The client-side implementations, which form the presentation tier, include a web-deliverable
Java desktop application and, currently in development, Android phone and tablet apps.

Figure 1: A schematic representation of Bellerophon’s n-tier architecture.

Other data analysis and workflow management systems with user-friendly clients have been
developed for HPC applications. For example, the Electronic Simulation Monitoring System (eSiMon)
[4, 5] is a web-based dashboard system enabling a collaborative environment for scientists to monitor
simulations and analyze their results. Users of eSiMon can determine system and job status, list and
archive simulation runs, manipulate data, and automatically generate customized renderings of this
data changing over time. Built using the Adobe Flex framework, eSiMon is a cross-platform Flash
application designed with a user-centric theme. Kepler is another workflow management software
system that provides users the ability to design and execute scientific models and automatically
analyze and share output data [6, 7]. Kepler’s cross-platform, Java-based client application offers
highly interactive tools to graphically create reusable, nested workflows integrated with essential
software components. Kepler natively supports parallel processing and interfaces with several grid
technologies including Globus, SRB, Web, and Soaplab Services. Another Java-based system, the
Nuclear Energy Advanced Modeling and Simulation (NEAMS) Program’s Integrated Computational
Environment (NiCE) [8, 9] provides tools to interactively analyze and visualize input and output data
from a variety of nuclear reactor simulation types using rendering engines such as VisIt [10] and swtxy-graph [11]. NiCE also provides Java and C++ APIs for reading and writing this data to the HDF5
format [12]. All of these workflow systems share characteristics with Bellerophon, but none offer the
ease of use and specific developer-user hybrid features we have built into Bellerophon. Our design aim
has been to provide a CHIMERA development and simulation tool first and foremost, with a plan to
extend Bellerophon for general use in the future. This stands in contrast to the general nature of tools
like eSiMon and Kepler, each of which was designed for use by multiple codes and teams from the
outset.

1506

Near Real-time Data Analysis of Core-Collapse Supernova Simulations ...

Lingerfelt et al.

2 Near Real-time Data Analysis
Bellerophon’s automated data analysis capability provides robust access and customization of
animations and plots generated concurrent to ongoing CHIMERA simulations. Encompassing all tiers
of Bellerophon’s architecture, this system seamlessly binds results from ongoing simulations, or
archived results from previous runs, with the logic, data, and presentation tiers. A wealth of
provenance metadata stored with the animations uniquely links them to the simulation model and
contains information regarding the platform, job, data location, and time of creation for each frame
produced. Creating and customizing visualization artifacts is simplified with the Visualization Set
Manager tool accessible from Bellerophon’s client-side Java application. Another tool, the
Visualization Set Explorer, provides users the capability to load and play animations in a viewer with
VCR-like controls, to create custom frames dynamically, to download QuickTime-compatible MP4
movies (including frames as Portable Network Graphics (PNG) images), and to access provenance
metadata for each frame.

Figure 2: A flowchart detailing processes within Bellerophon’s supercomputing tier.

2.1 Supercomputing Tier Subsystem
Bellerophon’s near real-time data analysis and visualization capabilities provide the CHIMERA
team direct insight into the production runs. Once a run is bound to Bellerophon, a simulation’s results
are processed, rendered, and viewed with a latency as low as five minutes through the client-side
application. A central component of the supercomputing tier subsystem is the data_generator
program, which is launched as a serial process from within the PBS script for a CHIMERA job (see
Figure 2). Once a single configuration file is customized, this program monitors the simulation for
new data, executes data analysis or conversion programs when new data is detected, and transmits the
modified results and other metadata to the remote data server. This metadata includes the name of the
supercomputing platform, the full paths to the run’s input and output data files, and the job’s start
time. Once the data_generator has accessed information from Bellerophon’s remote server, it begins
monitoring CHIMERA for new data to process. The data_generator currently utilizes two executables,
chimera2silo and Chimeralyzer, to process simulation results. The chimera2silo program converts
selected CHIMERA binary output to the Silo data format [13]. Chimeralyzer performs time-sequenced
analysis of CHIMERA output and exports important tabulated quantities such as shock radius, gain
radius, and proto-neutron star (PNS) radius vs. time, three measures of explosion energy vs. time and
temperature vs. radius over time. Analyzing these quantities is essential to CHIMERA development

1507

Near Real-time Data Analysis of Core-Collapse Supernova Simulations ...

Lingerfelt et al.

because explosion energy is the primary indicator of the efficacy of the explosion mechanism and the
shock, gain, and PNS radii outline the supernova heating profile. The data_generator transmits the Silo
files and data sets to the data server and archives a copy of the results in the supercomputing
platform’s mirrored storage area for Bellerophon’s data. Another program, data_archiver, creates a
compressed copy of this storage area and transfers it to the platform’s HPSS using the HTAR utility
on a weekly basis. Since CHIMERA is a long-running simulation that rewinds before each restart
point, the data_generator program is also responsible for keeping Bellerophon’s archived data for each
run up to date. If the program automatically detects a restart point, it deletes all data within
Bellerophon’s database past the associated restart cycle. Conversely, if new CHIMERA data exists
that was not previously processed, the data_generator will automatically bring Bellerophon’s database
up to date with the simulation’s current state.

2.2 Data and Logic Tier Components
In addition to the archives stored in systems within the supercomputing tier, Bellerophon’s data
tier consists of a MySQL database and a flat file database comprised of a hierarchical set of directories
containing processed CHIMERA output data and renderings of this data. An object model for this
database, which links MySQL tables and records to Bellerophon’s data files, has been developed. The
top-level object in Bellerophon’s data model is the visualization set. A visualization set is a collection
of animations and visualization jobs with metadata tied to a unique scientific model. It also includes
an associated data directory that contains the output files created by the data_generator program. An
animation object represents how this data is rendered. It is comprised of customizable animation
attributes, a rendering engine, and an associated media directory containing the resulting artifacts (e.g.,
PNG images and MP4 movies). A visualization job tracks the provenance of CHIMERA’s output data
and renderings by processing metadata transmitted to the data server by the data_generator program
for each batch job. This metadata includes the batch job’s id, supercomputing platform, input and
output data paths, start and end frame numbers, and start and end wall times.

Figure 3: A flowchart detailing elements and processes within Bellerophon’s logic and data tiers.

Bellerophon’s logic tier is tasked with processing incoming data, rendering the data, and providing
a mechanism to securely access the data and its artifacts through the Bellerophon web service (see
Figure 3). Every hour, data and visualization processors on the server check for new post-processed
output data and metadata files transmitted by the data_generator program. They process these files,
update the relevant MySQL database tables, and render animations according to user-defined
specifications stored in the database. Bellerophon’s logic tier components currently use two backend
rendering engines: the VisIt Visualization Tool and Grace [14], a 2D plotting tool. VisIt is used to
generate animated 2D colormaps of more than a dozen quantities over time. These quantities include
temperature, density, pressure, entropy, and electron fraction. Bellerophon leverages Grace and the

1508

Near Real-time Data Analysis of Core-Collapse Supernova Simulations ...

Lingerfelt et al.

ImageMagick library [15] to generate static 2D line plots of shock radius, gain radius, and PNS radius
vs. time as well as three measures of explosion energy vs. time. It is also used to create animations of
2D line plots of temperature vs. radius over time. The Bellerophon web service allows authenticated
users to access this database and execute other backend programs from a client-side application using
a well-defined specification.

2.3 Client-side Analysis Software Tools
Bellerophon’s presentation tier is currently implemented as a cross-platform, digitally signed Java
application, which is deployed over the network using Java WebStart technology [16]. Java WebStart
enables installation and execution of the client-side user interface by simply clicking a hyperlink in a
web page. Once launched, the application delivers a suite of easy-to-use software tools. Augmented by
an aesthetically pleasing look and feel, its dashboard design employs the WYSIWYG (i.e., “What You
See Is What You Get”) approach to graphical user interface development. Under this implementation
of WYSIWYG design, users can access any function with only one or two mouse clicks. In addition,
the user interface employs the windows wizard motif. In this design, users accomplish complex tasks
in a simplified manner over multiple steps. Each step requires the user to enter a small amount of
information or make one or more selections before going forward. Visual clues are also utilized in the
Bellerophon Java client. Bellerophon’s intuitive use of icons, text, and color for each UI component
enable users to quickly navigate to their desired selection. This emphasis on usability allows for
remarkable ease-of-use, ease-of-adoption, and aesthetic quality.

Figure 4: A screenshot of the Visualization Set Manager’s animation editor interface displaying a dynamically
generated preview of radial velocity data from 512 x 256 CHIMERA 2D simulation with a 15 solar mass
Woosley-Heger progenitor [17].

In order to bind a particular CHIMERA model to the data analysis system, Bellerophon users must
create a visualization set by entering some metadata describing the simulation and creating at least one

1509

Near Real-time Data Analysis of Core-Collapse Supernova Simulations ...

Lingerfelt et al.

animation using the Visualization Set Manager. Upon starting the manager, users have the choice of
updating an existing visualization set or creating a new set. If the user decides to update an existing set
then the visualization set selection user interface is displayed. This interface allows users to view all
existing visualization sets in a table, filter the table by the sets’ attributes, and sort the table rows by
these attributes. Once a visualization set is selected, the user can modify the set’s metadata and create,
delete, or modify its animations using the Visualization Set Manager’s animation editor interface (as
seen in Figure 4). When creating or modifying an animation, users can dynamically generate a
preview of any frame in the data set by modifying the animation attributes and refreshing the
preview’s image. In the case where VisIt is the selected rendering engine, this set of attributes includes
the physical quantity, color table, range, domain, scale (e.g., linear, logarithmic, or skewed), and size
of the animation in pixels. Flags can also be set to apply zone smoothing and to display the date that
the source data was generated in the lower right hand corner of the animation. After the attributes of
the animation have been saved, the altered visualization set is submitted to the server.

Figure 5: A screenshot displaying various functions for accessing, viewing, customizing and
downloading an animation.

Once a CHIMERA simulation is transmitting output to Bellerophon, users can access the
simulation’s visualization set with the Visualization Set Explorer tool. The first step is to select one or
more sets using an instance of the visualization set selection user interface seen in the Visualization
Set Manager, which allows sets to be filtered and sorted easily. The interface displays each
visualization set’s index, unique id, creation date, and optional notes. In addition, information
concerning the simulation - such as resolution, the number of the last frame produced, and the current
physical time - is available. Once one or more visualization sets have been chosen, the Visualization
Set Explorer provides robust access to its animations and provenance metadata. When an animation is
selected, a small popup window populated with six options appears (see Figure 5). The user can load
and play all animation frames in a viewer with VCR-like controls (see Figure 6); browse individual
frames by loading them one at a time; create custom frames by modifying the animation’s attributes;
download the MP4 movie; download a tar file consisting of the MP4 movie, all PNG images and the
animation’s metadata (called a snapshot); or bookmark an animation of particular interest (called a hot

1510

Near Real-time Data Analysis of Core-Collapse Supernova Simulations ...

Lingerfelt et al.

animation). Users can also download the PNG image and source data file for the frame currently being
viewed.

3 Software Engineering and Scientific Workflow Tools
In addition to data analysis, Bellerophon facilitates software engineering tasks for the CHIMERA
development team [18]. Verification tasks are performed by an automated regression test system,
which spans all components of Bellerophon’s n-tier architecture beginning with the supercomputing
tier where programs attempt to checkout, compile, and execute the latest revision of CHIMERA every
24 hours. These results are transmitted to the web server where they are processed and then made
available through the client-side Regression Test Explorer tool. When a test failure is detected, an
email containing a hyperlinked stack trace is automatically sent to the responsible developers. These
hyperlinks direct the developers to the file, line, and revision in CHIMERA’s online Trac repository
browser [19]. Another tool, SVN Statistics On-Demand, allows users to execute the StatSVN code
repository statistics generator [20] via Bellerophon’s web service over a custom date and/or revision
range. StatSVN generates a set of interlinking HTML pages with tables and plots detailing statistical
information about a project’s code development, including metrics like code churn and per-file
heatmaps. Bellerophon addresses workflow management needs through the Important Links and
Information feature. This client-side tool provides direct links to Trac’s source code browser for
CHIMERA and the code’s public and private wikis, along with links to the OLCF, NICS, and NERSC
homepages. With this tool, a user can also post to the CHIMERA mailing list, browse the mailing list
archives, and create a new Trac ticket, as well as receive real time status updates on OLCF, NICS and
NERSC resources.

Figure 6: A screenshot of the Visualization Set Explorer animation viewer interface loaded with an animation
of entropy data from a 512 x 256 CHIMERA 2D simulation with a 12 solar mass Woosley-Heger progenitor
[18].

1511

Near Real-time Data Analysis of Core-Collapse Supernova Simulations ...

Lingerfelt et al.

4 Utilization and Impact
The degree to which Bellerophon has become completely indispensable to the CHIMERA
collaboration’s day-to-day work is its greatest triumph to date. Bellerophon has become the de facto
work environment for development, regression testing, and analysis by the CHIMERA collaboration.
All of the disparate members of the collaboration use Bellerophon on a daily basis for development
and data analysis. This use occurs both in a collaboratory mode, where several members examine a
particular topic together, as well as in individual cases, where one person uses Bellerophon to produce
a visualization artifact or test a new piece of code simply because it is the easiest environment in
which to work.
Bellerophon’s data analysis capabilities are leveraged by the CHIMERA team in a myriad of ways.
They provide collaborators the ability to monitor the progress of each simulation online. Users can
keep tabs on important quantities such as current physical time, wall time, and cycle number.
Bellerophon’s success as a debugger cannot be understated. Several insidious bugs and subtle runtime
issues, which would have been difficult to deduce otherwise, have been discovered and isolated using
these analysis tools. Usage metrics can also be calculated using Bellerophon. Important metrics, like
wall time or physical time per run and throughput per platform, can be determined and used to plan
future runs and allocation requests. Bellerophon also serves as the artifact manager for CHIMERA.
Every data file processed by the system, along with its metadata and renderings, are accessible and
tracked in Bellerophon’s database. This database now includes more than 25,000 Silo files, 350,000
PNG images, 60 continuously updated MP4 movies, and the complete results of over 2,200 regression
tests.

5 Future Developments
Future enhancements to Bellerophon’s presentation tier include the development and deployment
of Android tablet and phone apps enabling mobile access and control of Bellerophon. The mobile apps
will allow users to text or email lightweight artifacts (e.g., images or plain text files) to collaborators,
upload movies to a Bellerophon YouTube channel, and post updates to social media outlets such as
Twitter. The next milestone concerning Bellerophon’s data analysis capability is an expansion to
include the analysis of 3D results and generation of associated artifacts through the integration of
visualization clusters into Bellerophon’s architecture. Given the sheer volume of CHIMERA 3D
results, transmitting data over the network for rendering is simply unfeasible. This modification will
also include an implementation of automated long-term storage of data (to, e.g., an HPSS repository).
Finally, the generalization of Bellerophon to other HPC applications beyond the CHIMERA is well
within sight. The first step in this generalization is to apply the system to GenASiS [21, 22], a
computational astrophysics code under development at ORNL, and then on to other codes representing
a variety of domains.

6 Conclusion
A software support system, Bellerophon, has been created over the past four years to facilitate the
data analysis, software engineering and scientific workflow needs of the development team for
CHIMERA, a multi-dimensional, multi-physics HPC code designed to study core-collapse
supernovae. Bellerophon’s n-tier architecture integrates supercomputing resources at the OLCF,
NICS, and NERSC facilities with a dedicated web and data server and a web-deliverable, crossplatform desktop application. This suite of easy-to-use online tools enables users of the system to

1512

Near Real-time Data Analysis of Core-Collapse Supernova Simulations ...

Lingerfelt et al.

quickly view, in near real-time, animated 2D colormaps and lineplots of over a dozen physical
quantities over time. The tools also allow users to robustly customize animations and to access and
manage each simulation’s artifacts (e.g., source data, provenance data, images, and movies).
Bellerophon assists with software engineering tasks by providing an automated regression test
platform for CHIMERA. Now that an initial suite of tools has been developed, our next goal is to
generalize the Bellerophon system to other codes and platforms.

Acknowledgements
This work has been supported by the U.S. Department of Energy Offices of Nuclear Physics and
Advanced Scientific Computing Research as well as the National Center for Computational Sciences
at Oak Ridge National Laboratory. ORNL is managed by UT-Battelle, LLC for the U.S. Department
of Energy under Contract No. DE-AC05-00OR22725. This material is based upon work supported by
the National Science Foundation under Grant numbers 0711134, 0933959, 1041709, and 1041710 and
the University of Tennessee through the use of the Kraken computing resource at the National Institute
for Computational Sciences. An award of computer time was provided by the Innovative and Novel
Computational Impact on Theory and Experiment (INCITE) program. This research used resources of
the Oak Ridge Leadership Computing Facility at the Oak Ridge National Laboratory, which is
supported by the Office of Science of the U.S. Department of Energy under Contract No. DE-AC0500OR22725, and resources of the National Energy Research Scientific Computing Center, which is
supported by the Office of Science of the U.S. Department of Energy under Contract No. DE-AC0205CH11231.

References
1. O. E. B. Messer, S. W. Bruenn, J. M. Blondin, W. R. Hix, A. Mezzacappa and C. J. Dirk. “Petascale
supernova simulation with CHIMERA”, J. Phys.: Conf. Ser., 78 012049 2007.
2. S.W. Bruenn, A. Mezzacappa, W.R. Hix, E.J. Lentz, O.E.B. Messer, E.J. Lingerfelt, J.N. Blondin,
E. Endeve, P. Marronetti, K. N. Yakunin. “Axisymmetric Ab Initio Core-Collapse Supernova
Simulations of 12-25 MSolar Stars”, ApJ 767, no. 1, L6, Apr. 10 2013.
3. S.W. Bruenn, E.J. Lentz, E.J. Lingerfelt, A. Mezzacappa, W.R. Hix, J.N. Blondin, O.E.B. Messer,
P. Marronetti. “Neutrinos and Supernovae”, Hamburg Neutrinos from Supernova Explosions (HAvSE
2011) Proceedings, DESY, Hamburg, Germany, Dec 2011.
4. R. Tchoua, S. Klasky, N. Podhorszki, B. Grimm, A. Khan, E. Santos, C. Silva, P. Mouallem, M.
Vouk. “Collaborative Monitoring and Analysis for Simulation Scientists”, 2010 International
Symposium on Collaborative Technologies and Systems, (CTS 2010), Chicago, Illinois, USA, May
2010.
5. E. Santos, J. Tierny, A. Khan, B. Grimm, L. Lins, J. Freire, V. Pascucci, C. Silva, S. Klasky, R.
Barreto, N. Podhorszki. “Enabling Advanced Visualization Tools in a Web-Based Simulation
Monitoring System”, IEEE International Conference on eScience 2009.
6. B. Ludäscher, I. Altintas, S. Bowers, J. Cummings, T. Critchlow, E. Deelman, D. De Roure, J.
Freire, C. Goble, M. Jones, S. Klasky, T. McPhillips, N. Podhorszki, C. Silva, I. Taylor, M. Vouk.
Scientific Data Management, Chapter 13, Chapman & Hall, 2009.
7. https://kepler-project.org/
8.https://www.eclipsecon.org/na2014/session/prevent-three-eyed-fish-analyze-your-nuclear-reactoreclipse
9. http://niceproject.sourceforge.net/
10. https://wci.llnl.gov/codes/visit/

1513

Near Real-time Data Analysis of Core-Collapse Supernova Simulations ...

Lingerfelt et al.

11. http://code.google.com/p/swt-xy-graph/
12. http://www.hdfgroup.org/HDF5/
13. https://wci.llnl.gov/codes/silo/
14. http://plasma-gate.weizmann.ac.il/Grace/
15. http://www.imagemagick.org/script/index.php
16. http://www.oracle.com/technetwork/java/javase/javawebstart/index.html
17. S. E. Woosley and A. Heger. “Nucleosynthesis and remnants in massive stars of solar metallicity”,
Physics Reports, Vol 442, Issues 1-6, The Hans Bethe Centennial Volume 1906-2006, April 2007,
Pages 269-283.
18. E.J. Lingerfelt, O.E.B. Messer, J.A. Osborne, R.D. Budiardja, A. Mezzacappa. “A Multitier
System for the Verification, Visualization and Management of CHIMERA”, Procedia Computer
Science, Vol 4, Proceedings of the ICCS 2011, Pages 2076-2085, 2011.
19. http://trac.edgewall.org/
20. http://www.statsvn.org/
21. C. Y. Cardall, E. Endeve, R. D. Budiardja, P. Marronetti and A. Mezzacappa. “Towards exascale
supernova simulations with GenASiS”, SciDAC 2010, July 11-15.
22. C. Y. Cardall, R. D. Budiardja, E. Endeve, and A. Mezzacappa. “GenASiS: General Astrophysical
Simulation System. I. Refinable Mesh And Nonrelativistic Hydrodynamics”, 2014 ApJS 210 17.

1514

