Procedia Computer Science
Volume 51, 2015, Pages 924–933
ICCS 2015 International Conference On Computational Science

Identiﬁcation of Multi-inclusion Statistically Similar
Representative Volume Element for Advanced High
Strength Steels by Using Data Farming Approach
Lukasz Rauch1 , Danuta Szeliga1 , Daniel Bachniak1 , Krzysztof Bzowski1 , Renata
Slota1,2 , Maciej Pietrzyk1 , and Jacek Kitowski1,2
1
AGH University, ACC Cyfronet AGH, Krakow, Poland
AGH University, Department of Computer Science, Krakow, Poland
{lrauch, szeliga, bachniak, kbzowski, rena, mpietrz, kito}@agh.edu.pl
2

Abstract
Statistically Similar Representative Volume Element (SSRVE) is used to simplify computational
domain for microstructure representation of material in multiscale modelling. The procedure
of SSRVE creation is based on optimization loop which allows to ﬁnd the highest similarity
between SSRVE and an original material microstructure. The objective function in this optimization is built upon computationally intensive numerical methods, including simulations of
virtual material deformation, which is very time consuming. To avoid such long lasting calculations we propose to use the data farming approach to identiﬁcation of SSRVE for Advanced
High Strength Steels (AHSS) characterized by multiphase microstructure. The optimization
method is based on a nature inspired approach which facilitates distribution and parallelization.
The concept of SSRVE creation as well as the software architecture of the proposed solution is
described in the paper in details. It is followed by examples of the results obtained for the identiﬁcation of SSRVE parameters for DP steels which are widely exploited in modern automotive
industry. Possible directions for further development as well as possible industrial applications
are described in the conclusions.
Keywords: SSRVE, multiscale modelling, AHSS, data farming, HPC

1

Introduction

Numerical simulations of metallurgical industrial processes require computationally costly
multiscale procedures [6]. In case of computer aided technology design, the use of such methods
is very time consuming due to the applied multi-iterative optimization approaches. Exertions
that lead to improvements in numerical eﬃciency are focused mainly on two areas of development, i.e. the parallelization of numerical procedures or simpliﬁcation of virtual material
924

Selection and peer-review under responsibility of the Scientiﬁc Programme Committee of ICCS 2015
c The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V.

doi:10.1016/j.procs.2015.05.227

Identiﬁcation of Multi-inclusion SSRVE for AHSS . . .

Rauch at al

representation in micro scale [11]. The approach presented in our paper covers both these subjects, while it applies the idea of Statistically Similar Representative Volume Element (SSRVE)
to simplify the computational domain, as well as it uses High Performance Computing hardware
architectures to increase the computing performance.
SSRVE is an extension of the RVE idea, which is very well known and widely applied in
multiscale simulations [2]. In the macro-micro modelling approach an RVE representing the
underlying microstructure is attached to each Gauss point of the macroscopic solution. A usual
RVE is determined by the smallest possible sub-domain, which is still able to represent the macroscopic behavior of the material. Although these RVEs are the smallest possible by deﬁnition,
they still can be too complex for the eﬃcient calculations. Therefore, the construction of statistically similar RVEs, which feature a lower complexity than the smallest possible substructure,
was proposed in [16]. The basic idea is to replace an RVE with an arbitrary complex inclusion
morphology by a periodic representation composed of optimal unit inclusions (see Figure 1),
which feature similar material properties as the original RVE. In the context of this paper the
inclusion is deﬁned as the part of material composed of one phase, which is characterized by
diﬀerent properties than the rest of the surrounding phase. In the case of dual phase steels,
the inclusion is hard martensitic island inside soft ferritic phase. The number of inclusions in
SSRVE usually is not higher than three. However, most of the papers, related to SSRVE, are
focused on theoretical considerations or creation of single element SSRVE.
(a)

(b)

Figure 1: Original micrograph (usually binarized to obtain RVE) of DP steel (a) and periodical
SSRVE with three inclusions (b)

The algorithm of SSRVE creation is based on an optimization loop, whose objective function
is built upon computationally intensive numerical methods. To accelerate computing procedure
we propose use of data farming approach oﬀered by the Scalarm platform (www.scalarm.com).
The proposed solution will be applied at the stage of the sensitivity analysis and optimization
procedure. The second section gives a description of the SSRVE methodology including all the
steps required to obtain the ﬁnal multi-inclusion SSRVE. The subsequent sections (3 and 4)
present the sensitivity analysis and optimization procedures, which are followed by a description
of the computer system architecture that implements the data farming approach. Afterwards,
the results in 2D and 3D are shown and the paper is concluded with some perspectives for
future work.
925

Identiﬁcation of Multi-inclusion SSRVE for AHSS . . .

2

Rauch at al

Procedure of SSRVE Creation

The scheme of the procedure dedicated to SSRVE creation consists of four main steps dedicated
to: preparation of microstructure images, processing of images to determine features describing
material, performance of sensitivity analysis, and optimization procedure. These steps are
presented in Figure 2.

Figure 2: Procedure of SSRVE creation
The procedure of SSRVE creation starts with analysis of original micrographs, which aims at
creation of binary (segmented) images with separated martensitic inclusions. The algorithms for
processing of various micrographs are presented in details in [12]. Then, in case of 2D SSRVE,
the shape coeﬃcients of inclusions in original images are estimated directly from the segmented
pictures. In case of 3D procedure, the reconstruction of three dimensional microstructure on
the basis of 2D images has to be performed [10]. Afterwards, the shape coeﬃcients of 3D
inclusions are estimated. Four basic parameters for statistical shape description were proposed
in [8]. A few more parameters, which are used in the image analysis, were added and described
by Authors in [14]. As a result, the following parameters describing the shape of inclusions
were considered: volume fraction, area/volume, roundness, ellipsoid ﬁt, contour-to-center ratio,
border index, mean curvature, total curvature, Malinowska coeﬃcient, Blair-Bliss coeﬃcient,
Danielsson coeﬃcient, and Haralick coeﬃcient. Not all of these parameters can be adapted
from 2D to 3D. Thus, some of the coeﬃcients are used only for 2D SSRVE.
Additionally, statistical and rheological coeﬃcients are calculated to obtain the full set of
the reference coeﬃcients which describe all the aspects of material properties and which are
further used in the optimization procedure. The statistical measures used for microstructure
characterization in the SSRVE for micro-macro modelling of DP steels, are described in details
in [14]. Higher order statistical measures for microstructures, i.e., n-point probability functions, spectral density and lineal-path function were introduced in [1]. The latter parameter is
crucial in the description of anisotropic microstructures, since it describes the probability that
→
a complete line segment a = −
a−
1 a2 is located in a speciﬁc direction in the same phase, where
a1 = {x1 , y1 } and a2 = {x2 , y2 } are the coordinates of the ends of the line segment. A general
mathematical description of this measure for multi-phase anisotropic materials was given in
[5]. A simpliﬁed approach that is applicable to DP microstructures is deﬁned by the following
equation:
1
ζLP (m, k) =
Nx Ny
926

Nx N y
p=1 q=1

→
χ(−
a−
1 a2 )

(1)

Identiﬁcation of Multi-inclusion SSRVE for AHSS . . .

Rauch at al

→
where Nx , Ny are the dimensions of micrograph in pixels, and χ(i) (−
a−
1 a2 ) is the modiﬁed indic(i)
ator function deﬁned for phase D as:
→
(i)
1 if −
a−
1 a2 ∈ D
0 otherwise

→
a−
χ(i) (−
1 a2 ) =

(2)

The estimated shape coeﬃcients as well as statistical measures are the main elements of the
optimization function aimed at SSRVE creation. The optimization procedure is based on the
approach proposed in [14]. Originally, a method for construction of simple periodic structures
for the special case of randomly distributed circular inclusions with constant equal diameters
was proposed in [9]. In that work the positions of circular inclusions with a given diameter were
found by minimizing the objective function, which was deﬁned as a square root error between
the spectral density of the periodic RVE and a non-periodic real microstructure. In our work
this function was adapted in the following form:
n

wi

Φ=
i=1

ςi − ςiSSRV E
ςi

(3)

where: wi - normalized weights, n - number of coeﬃcients, ζi - ith reference coeﬃcient
obtained from an original microstructure, ζiSSRV E - ith coeﬃcient obtained from SSRVE. The
coeﬃcients encompass all the mentioned parameters describing the shape, rheology and statistics.
The current implementation of the optimization procedure is based on a genetic algorithm
(GA), where a chromosome is composed of m elements representing the coordinates of NonUniform Relational B-Splines (NURBS) control points describing the shape of SSRVE inclusions. Calculations of the objective function are performed iteratively for each proposition of a
new SSRVE shape. The optimization loop is preceded by a sensitivity analysis, which allows to
determine the most inﬂuential parameters of the optimization or to determine the weights used
in the objective function 3. The sensitivity analysis is described in the next section, which is
followed by a presentation of the optimization procedure.

3

Sensitivity Analysis

Sensitivity Analysis (SA) is the ﬁeld of knowledge investigating the model behavior for various
input data and model parameters [15]. It determines how the variations of input data and
parameters are distributed on the variations of model outputs and inﬂuence them. In this work
some global sensitivity methods were applied, which calculate one (global) value expressing the
sensitivity of a parameter for the whole parameter domain. These methods are derived from
statistics and the probability theory. Global SA requires a deﬁnition of the following terms:
• expression which characterizes the measure of model output/outputs,
• deﬁnition of the variation interval for each input parameter,
• selection of points in the parameters domain (design of experiment techniques are applied),
• sensitivity measure - the sensitivities are estimated based on the model outputs measure
variations, caused by changes in the model parameters.
927

Identiﬁcation of Multi-inclusion SSRVE for AHSS . . .

Rauch at al

We have selected two algorithms for the purposes of this work: Morris Design [7], which is a
screening method and the Sobol algorithm [17], based on variance analysis. The term screening
design characterizes the approach to input parameters domain processing. The methods of
this group calculate the parameter sensitivities as the global indices and they search systematically in the whole parameters domain, thus, they are called screening methods. The main
idea of these algorithms is to investigate the model parameters which have the biggest inﬂuence on the variability of the model output and to keep computing costs as low as possible.
Due to the assumption of low computing costs, these procedures estimate the importance of
the input parameters qualitatively, not quantitatively. The One-At-a-Time (OAT) approach,
originally developed by Morris in 1991, was selected. This technique investigates the impact of
the variation of each parameter in turn. The OAT design is called the global sensitivity analysis, because the algorithm explores the entire space over which the parameters vary. In the
algorithm, the term of parameter main eﬀect is introduced and it is determined by computing a
number of local measures at diﬀerent points in the input space and next is estimated by mean
value and standard deviation. In the Morris method the results of the sensitivity of the model
output with respect to the input model parameters are expressed by normalized quantities:
μ˜i =

μi
μ

σ˜i =

σi
σ

(4)

where μ = (μ1 , ..., μn ), σ = (σ1 , ..., σn ) are the vectors of means and standard deviations
calculated for all the input parameters xi , i = 1, . . . , n.
Sobol developed a method of the global SA based on the variance analysis and the Monte
Carlo algorithm. Sobol deﬁned a decomposition of the analyzed model as a sum of the increasing
dimensionality addends. Finally he proved that such a decomposition is unique and all the
decomposition addends can be evaluated as multidimensional integrals. Following that, the
total variance V ar and partial variances V ar1...n are estimated and the sensitivity measures
are deﬁned as follows:
V ar1...n
(5)
V ar
where Si is called the ﬁrst order sensitivity index for the parameter xi and it measures the
main eﬀect of xi on the model output. Sij , for i = j, is the second order sensitivity index and it
measures the interacted eﬀect of the two parameters xi and xj on the model output. The higher
order sensitivity indices can be deﬁned in the same way. The multidimensional integration in
calculations of variances is performed with the Monte Carlo method.
S1...n =

4

Optimization Procedure

On the basis of the results obtained from sensitivity analysis, the reference coeﬃcients, their
values and weights are established. A set of these parameters is further used in the optimization
procedure as ςi in Eq. 3. In our work the procedure is implemented in two versions, i.e., for
2D and 3D, however the core part of the applied optimization algorithm is the same for both
solutions. The implemented multi-iterative genetic algorithm [4] is composed of the following
steps:
1. Generation of initial population - random generation of n specimens containing information about the coordinates of control points and their weights. The size of the specimen
depends strongly on the number of control points describing martensitic inclusions in
928

Identiﬁcation of Multi-inclusion SSRVE for AHSS . . .

Rauch at al

SSRVE. At the beginning of calculations the control points form m circles, where m is a
number of inclusions. The main assumption is that those circles cannot touch each other
and the summary phase fraction of these inclusions has to be equal to the phase fraction
determined for the original microstructure.
2. Estimation of objective function value - the procedure calculates values of ςiSSRV E on
the basis of the shapes of martensitic inclusions in succeeding SSRVEs. The shapes of
martensitic inclusions inﬂuence also the rheological properties and statistical description
of the microstructure. The rheological model of SSRVE is determined by the performance
of the virtual uniaxial compression, tensile and shear deformation tests. Obtained stressstrain relations allow to calculate an equivalent tensile stress which describes the material
rheology. The main statistical measure is linear-path function, calculated directly from
the pixels or voxels values of SSRVE.
3. Stop conditions - two fundamental conditions are implemented, i.e., the number of iterations and mean square error between the expected and actual objective function.
4. Application of genetic operators - the following operators were implemented in the presented approach: 1x crossing and 2x mutation operators. The former operator is responsible
for exchange of a random number of genes between two specimens (see Figure 3).
The ﬁrst one of the mutation operators changes the positions of control points regarding
the center of gravity of the shape. The operator determines a random set of control
points which will be mutated, and then a new position is also calculated on the basis
of the randomized operations. The second mutation operator changes the positions of
control points in the X or Y axis direction using random values of the coordinates in the
vector of translation.
5. Generation of new population - the specimens obtained after operations of crossing and
mutation are included in the new population. In each subsequent iteration, every specimen
is validated. On the basis of the validation the worst specimens are removed from the
population, some of the best specimens go further without changes and the rest is passed
again to the crossing and mutation operators.
The procedure of NURBS generation, crossing and mutation operators, representation of
specimen are the main diﬀerences between 2D and 3D approach. The shape of inclusion in
3D is composed of 2D layers, which were used in the reconstruction algorithm mentioned at
the beginning of this section. Thus, the specimen in 3D contains an additional Z coordinate,
which inﬂuences all the algorithms inside the optimization procedure. Therefore, the crossing
operator is based on exchange of a set of the whole layers between two specimens instead of a
set of single control points. The ﬁrst mutation operator behaves similarly by translating the
whole layers in the Z axis direction, while the second mutation operator chooses two layers
randomly and replaces them within one SSRVE.

5

Software Architecture

Two scenarios of calculations have been established, i.e., (i) SA, where all the vectors of input data are generated at the beginning of calculations and (ii) optimization, where just the
ﬁrst population is known and the remaining values are generated after each iteration of the
optimization procedure. Each of these steps has diﬀerent requirements regarding the easiness
929

Identiﬁcation of Multi-inclusion SSRVE for AHSS . . .

Rauch at al

Figure 3: Illustration of the crossing operator for 2D specimens
of use, computing power, and progress monitoring. Therefore, a computer system being the
main eﬀect of this work was developed. An overview of the system along with main steps of
the workﬂow is depicted in Figure 4.

Figure 4: An overview of a system for studying the workﬂow of optimization and sensitivity
analysis as a part of SSRVE procedure
The system is composed of a client side, the Scalarm platform and server side. The client
side is standalone software containing image processing and sensitivity analysis methods. It is
used to prepare an experiment and to pass all the required parameters to Scalarm, which is
applied for data farming purposes [3]. In case of SA calculations the whole set of input values
is generated at the client side by using Morris or Sobol methods. Opposite situation takes
place in case of optimization, where only a range of optimization variables is passed to Scalarm
930

Identiﬁcation of Multi-inclusion SSRVE for AHSS . . .

Rauch at al

along with conﬁguring an optimization method. Scalarm is domain-agnostic, i.e., it supports
all types of simulations and can be used to conduct experiments coming from various science
disciplines. The server side is responsible for evaluation of objective function, which is based
on the shape and statistical coeﬃcients, and numerical simulations of virtual material deformation. The server side runs an MPI based optimization procedure which allows to perform a
parallel evaluation of the objective function for all specimens in a population of the genetic
algorithm. The results obtained on the server side are continuously aggregated and passed
back to the parameter study process, which includes: (a) computational tasks scheduling to
high-performance computational infrastructures, (b) on-line progress monitoring of the executing simulations with a capability to adjust computing power or extend the parameter study
interactively and (c) collecting the results and further analysis.
The last step is the exploration of results on the client side, which is mainly responsible for
the performance of Morris and Sobol methods, and the analysis of objective function values in
each iteration of the optimization procedure.

6

Obtained Results

The calculations in this work were performed for dual phase steel containing martensite (30%)
and ferrite (70%) phases. The original micrograph was analysed using the ﬁltering methods
based on convolution algorithms and the noise reduction methods based on the algorithm of
dynamic particles [12]. The ﬁnal segmentation is a result of a watershed algorithm implemented
using cellular automata [13]. After the image processing, SA was performed to obtain the most
important parameters.
(a)

(b)

Figure 5: Results of sensitivity analysis for Morris Design (a) and Sobol method (b)

It can be seen (Figure 5) that the parameter which has the most palpable inﬂuence on the
time of calculations and accuracy of the model, is the number of control points. A less important
coeﬃcient is the number of inclusions per SSRVE, which does not increase qualitative nor
quantitative results. However in case of a strong diversiﬁcation of grains in a microstructure, it
is recommended to design an SSRVE based on two or three inclusions. The procedure applied
in this work took into account four reference shape coeﬃcients (maximum curvature = 4.964,
border index = 0.831 and Malinowska = 0.341), rheological model, lineal-path function and
phase fraction = 0.45. The results obtained for diﬀerent numbers of control points are presented
in Figure 6a-d for 2D. A three dimensional result is presented in Figure 6e. The values of the
931

Identiﬁcation of Multi-inclusion SSRVE for AHSS . . .

Rauch at al

objective function were in all cases below 0.01, while the best numerical performance was
obtained in case of 8 and 12 control points. However, the best accuracy of rheological model
was obtained for 20 control points. The solution based on 8 control points was selected and
applied in 3D on 8 layers in Z axis direction. Therefore we obtained 64 control points which
oﬀered a value of the objective function similar to 2D cases.

Figure 6: Results of optimization for 2D SSRVE in case of (a) 8, (b) 12, (c) 16, (d) 20 control
points for each inclusion in SSRVE and 3D SSRVE (e)

7

Conclusions

The paper presents an eﬃcient procedure of SSRVE creation, preceded by sensitivity analysis.
The results obtained in this work prove high reliability of material representation by using
SSRVE as well as satisfactory numerical performance. The optimization procedure based on
the results of sensitivity analysis allows to setup better weights of parameters in the objective function and to reduce its complexity. Therefore, 2D and 3D elements are created very
eﬃciently. The implementations of supporting algorithms were integrated with the Scalarm
platform, which allows to perform data farming and management of computing jobs in modern
e-infrastructures, hence a strong parallelization of SA was obtained. As for the optimization
procedure the parallelization was supported by an MPI based genetic algorithm which was applied on the server side. Due to the proposed approach, it is possible to apply sophisticated
multiscale numerical simulations in industrial practice. The main recipient of this solution is
automotive industry, which is highly interested in DP steels and optimization of production
technologies related to this material grade. The development in the future will be focused on
the performance issues of multiscale numerical simulations with SSRVE applied in micro scale
for metal forming industrial processes.
932

Identiﬁcation of Multi-inclusion SSRVE for AHSS . . .

Rauch at al

Acknowledgments
The research leading to these results has received funding from the European Union’s Research
Fund for Coal and Steel (RFCS) research programme under grant agreement RFSR-CT-201300007 and from the Polish Ministry of Science and Higher Education for the years 2013-2016
under grant agreement nr 2945/FBWiS/2013/2.

References
[1] S. Brands, J. Schroeder, and D. Balzani. Statistically similar reconstruction of dual-phase steel
microstructures for engineering applications. In International Conference on Computer Methods
in Mechanics, Warsaw, Poland, May 2011.
[2] R. Hill. Elastic properties of reinforced solids: some theoretical principles. Journal of the Mechanics
and Physics of Solids, (5):357–372, 1963.
[3] D. Kr´
ol, R. Slota, J. Kitowski, L. Dutka, and J. Liput. Data farming on heterogeneous clouds. In
C. Kesselman ed., 2014 IEEE Int. Conf. on Cloud Computing, pages 873–880. Anchorage: IEEE
Computer Society, 2014.
[4] W. Ku´s and T. Burczy´
nski. Parallel evolutionary optimization in multiscale problems. Computer
Methods in Materials Science, pages 347–351, 2009.
[5] B. Lu and S. Torquato. Lineal-path function for random heterogeneous materials. Journal of
Applied Mechanics, pages 922–929, 1992.
[6] L. Madej, A. Mrozek, W. Kus, T. Burczy´
nski, and M. Pietrzyk. Concurrent and upscaling methods
in multi scale modelling - case studies. Computer Methods in Materials Science, pages 1–15, 2008.
[7] M. Morris. Factorial sampling plans for preliminary computational experiments. Technometrics,
pages 161–174, 1991.
[8] J. Ohser and F. Muecklich. Statistical analysis of microstructure in materials science. John Wiley
& Sons, New York, NY, USA, 2000.
[9] G. Povrik. Incorporation of microstructural information into models of two-phase materials. Acta
Metallurgica, pages 3199–3206, 1995.
[10] L. Rauch and K. Imiolek. Reconstruction of 3d material microstructure of one phase steels. Rudy
i Metale Nie˙zelazne, (11):726–730, 2013.
[11] L. Rauch, R. Kuziak, and M. Pietrzyk. From high accuracy to high eﬃciency in simulations of
processing of dual-phase steel. Metallurgical and Material Transactions B, 2014.
[12] L. Rauch and L. Madej. Application of the automatic image processing in modelling of the deformation mechanisms based on the digital representation of microstructure. International Journal for
Multiscale Computational Engineering, pages 1–14, 2010.
[13] L. Rauch, L. Madej, and J. Kusiak. Modelling of microstructure deformation based on digital
material representation integrated with watershed image segmentation algorithm. Steel Research
International, (9):1446–1449, 2010.
[14] L. Rauch, M. Pernach, K. Bzowski, and M. Pietrzyk. On application of shape coeﬃcients to
creation of the statistically similar representative element of dp steels. Computer Methods in
Materials Science, pages 531–541, 2011.
[15] A. Saltelli, M. Ratto, T. Andres, and et al. Global Sensitivity Analysise. The Primer. John Wiley
& Sons, New York, NY, USA, 2008.
[16] J. Schroeder, D. Balzani, and S. Brands. Approximation of random microstructures by periodic
statistically similar representative volume elements based on lineal-path functions. Archives of
Applied Mechanics, pages 975–997, 2011.
[17] I. M. Sobol. Sensitivity analysis for non-linear mathematical models. Mathematical Modelling and
Computational Experiment, pages 407–414, 1993.

933

