A Multi-spectral Test and Simulation Facility to
Support Missile Development, Production, and
Surveillance Programs
1

2

James B. Johnson, Jr. and Jerry A. Ray
1

U.S. Army Developmental Test Command, Redstone Technical Test Center,
CSTE-DTC-RT-E-SA, Redstone Arsenal, AL 35898, USA
James.Johnson@rttc.army.mil
2
U.S. Army Aviation and Missile Command, Research, Development and
Engineering Center, AMSAM-RD-SS-HW, Redstone Arsenal, AL 35898, USA
jerry.a.ray@redstone.army.mil

Abstract. The Multi-Spectral Missile Life-Cycle Test Facility (MSMLCTF) is
a single hardware-in-the-loop (HWIL) simulation complex that will uniquely
have the capability to perform life-cycle simulation/testing on next-generation
multi-sensor missile systems. The facility will allow for simulated end-to-end
flight tests in a non-destructive manner as well as complete evaluation of all
missile electronics and software. This testing will be performed at both the AllUp-Round (AUR) level and the Guidance Section (GS) level. The MSMLCTF
will be used to support the Army Transformation by evaluating operational
flexibility before fielding, reducing life-cycle costs, improving system
performance by evaluating technology insertions and evaluating interoperability
impacts. This paper gives a general description of the MSMLCTF, cost
tradeoffs between live flight testing and simulation, and an update on facility
development status.

1 Introduction
In the past, missile systems were tested solely at an open-air flight range. This
technique was relatively simple. In recent years, missile systems have become much
more complex utilizing multiple sensors such as millimeter wave and infrared. Also
in the past, weapon developers developed and used simulation facilities to develop a
weapon and testers developed and used simulation facilities to test a weapon. This
paper describes a new multi-spectral simulation facility which will be utilized to both
develop and test next-generation multi-spectral missile systems.

2 Historical Perspective
The authors played an integral role in developing two previous simulation facilities –
the Millimeter System Simulator One (MSS-1) and the Simulation/Test Acceptance
V.N. Alexandrov et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2001, LNCS 2074, pp. 515–520, 2001.
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2001

516

J.B. Johnson and J.A. Ray

Facility (STAF). Lessons were learned in the development of these facilities which
led us to the development of the Multi-Spectral facility. A brief description of each of
these facilities is provided.
2.1 Millimeter System Simulator One (MSS-1)
The MSS-1 facility was developed by the U.S. Army Aviation and Missile
Command’s (AMCOM) Research, Development and Engineering Center (RDEC) in
the mid-1980’s primarily for the Longbow HELLFIRE missile system guidance
electronics (no explosives). The Longbow HELLFIRE is a millimeter wave radar
guided system. This facility featured a high fidelity target array, flight motion
simulation, and signal injection. The principal utility of the facility was development
of the weapon system in a repeatable edge-of-the-envelope environment. Capabilities
included end-to-end hardware-in-the-loop simulations using multiple targets and
countermeasures. Early prototype guidance systems were placed in the facility for
development of weapon system software algorithms. Also, many guidance packages
scheduled to be flown on a missile system were placed in the facility to judge flight
readiness. The missile system is in production today; however, guidance packages
are still inserted into the facility to periodically check edge-of-the-envelope
performance. An artist’s sketch of the facility is shown in Figure 1.

Fig. 1. Millimeter-wave System Simulator One (MSS-1) Facility

2.2 Simulation/Test Acceptance Facility (STAF)
The STAF facility was developed jointly by the U.S. Army Developmental Test
Command’s (DTC) Redstone Technical Test Center (RTTC) and AMCOM RDEC in
the mid-1990’s. The mission of STAF was to perform functional testing on Longbow

A Multi-spectral Test and Simulation Facility to Support Missile Development

517

HELLFIRE missiles (complete all-up-rounds with explosives). The STAF operated
in a similar fashion to the MSS-1 facility with the exceptions that the missile was
complete with explosives installed and the target array was much more simplistic.
The target array was deemed adequate for a production environment. The facility,
still in use today, is used for production sampling, special engineering tests, and
stockpile surveillance testing. An artist’s sketch of this facility is shown in Figure 2.

Fig. 2. Simulation/Test Acceptance Facility (STAF)

3 Next Generation Multi-spectral Simulation Facility
Many lessons were learned in the development of the MSS-1 and STAF facilities.
Emerging weapon system technologies indicate the requirement for a Multi-Spectral
hardware-in-the-loop simulation facility. Multi-Spectral implies the incorporation of
both Millimeter Wave and Imaging Infrared in the same guidance package. As such,
the simulation facility must be capable of providing multi-spectral targets.
3.1 Concept
Taking advantage of the lessons learned on the MSS-1 and STAF facilities, the
authors devised a concept for the Multi-Spectral facility which houses both a nonhazardous high-fidelity facility and a hazardous lower-fidelity facility. The facility
will consist of two test chambers, one high fidelity and the other lower fidelity, with a
common control building. The high fidelity chamber will be used primarily for
missile development and will feature multi-spectral multiple targets, countermeasures,
and edge-of-the-envelope evaluations. This facility will be used to design hardware

518

J.B. Johnson and J.A. Ray

and develop software algorithms. The lower-fidelity chamber will be used for preflight confidence testing, production lot sampling, stockpile reliability tests, and
special engineering tests. The multi-spectral targets in this facility will be more
simplistic relative to the high fidelity chamber.
3.2 Facility Description
A simplified block diagram of the facility is shown in Figure 3. The general concept
of operation is similar to the MSS-1 and STAF facilities. The missile under test is
provided with every stimuli it is capable of sensing. The missile is placed on a threeaxis flight motion simulator (pitch, yaw, and roll). The sensor of the missile is inside
an anechoic chamber. An exotic material is placed inside the chamber between the
sensor and millimeter wave target generation horns. The exotic material acts as a
window to millimeter wave energy and a mirror to infrared energy. A dynamic
infrared scene projector (DIRSP) is placed off-axis and aimed at the exotic material.
Inertial navigation information, driven by a six-degree-of-freedom, is injected into the
missile to simulate flight. Proper millimeter wave, infrared, and laser targeting is
supplied by the respective target generators. Fin commands are extracted from the
missile and this information is computed in an airframe model which in turn supplies
fin position information. This information is used to drive the three-axis flight motion
simulator. All of these activities occur from simulated trigger pull to simulated target
impact.

3.3 Facility Utilization
Multiple weapon systems are being targeted for test in the Multi-Spectral facility.
During system development and demonstration phases, the facility will be used to aid
in system design (hardware and software) and integration for system breadboards.
During the final stages of this acquisition phase, the facility will be used for pre-flight
risk reduction testing for all guidance sensors and all-up-rounds prior to live flight
testing. The facility will be made available to operational testers to augment their
operational test scenarios and possibly reduce operational flight test requirements.
The facility will be used for lot acceptance testing, engineering evaluations/tests, and
stockpile reliability tests during the Production and Deployment phases. During all
phases, the facility will be used to evaluate operational flexibility before fielding,
reducing life-cycle costs, improve system performance by evaluating technology
insertions, and evaluating interoperability impacts.

A Multi-spectral Test and Simulation Facility to Support Missile Development

519

Missile Dynamic
Trajectory Simulation
Millimeter Wave/Imaging Infrared/Laser
Anechoic Chamber

Airframe Model

Actuators

Aerodynamics

IMU

Kinematics
Scenario
Model

Missile Flight
Path Information

Relative
Geometry

Simulation
Control
Computers

Target
Dynamics

H/W
To
S/W
I/F

AutoPilot

Guidance
& Control

Central
MMW/IR/
Electronics Laser
Unit
Sensor

Flight
Motion
Simulator
(FMS)

Infrared/
Laser
Projector

IR Scene
Generator

MMW
Signal
Generation

Fig. 3. Multi-Spectral Simulation Facility Block Diagram

3.4 Cost Avoidance
The authors performed a cost tradeoff of performing only a flight test program at a
test range versus performing a combination of flight testing and hardware-in-the-loop
simulation testing.
Some assumptions that went into this analysis for each phase of the weapon life cycle
were: (1) the number of missiles that would be fired per year with no hardware-inthe-loop simulation, (2) the number of missiles undergoing hardware-in-the-loop
simulation per year in the multi-spectral simulation facility as well as the number of
missiles actually fired as augmentation. The results of the cost tradeoff using
conservative values result in a cost avoidance of at least $90M over the life of a
weapon system with potential of up to $100M. The tremendous cost avoidance is due
to the non-destructive nature of the simulated flights which allows the rounds to be
placed in inventory upon test completion. This same analysis indicates a facility cost
payback period of less than five years.

4 Conclusion
This paper gave a historical perspective on the development of hardware-in-the-loop
simulation facilities to test missile systems. Lessons learned have been applied to a

520

J.B. Johnson and J.A. Ray

new facility, under development, to test multi-spectral missile systems. An overall
description of how this facility works, how it will be utilized, and the benefits to the
U.S. Army have been provided.

