Procedia Computer Science
Volume 80, 2016, Pages 2216–2220
ICCS 2016. The International Conference on Computational
Science

Social Media Conversation Monitoring:
Visualize Information Contents of Twitter messages
using conversational metrics
Carlo Lipizzi1*, Dante Gama Dessavre1, Luca Iandoli2,1, and José Emmanuel
Ramirez Marquez1,3
1: School of Systems and Enterprises, Stevens Institute of Technology (USA)
2: Dept. of Industrial Engineering, University of Naples Federico II (Italy)
3: Graduate School, Tecnologico de Monterrey Campus Guadalajara (Mexico)
* corresponding author: clipizzi@stevens.edu

Abstract
In this paper we present a novel method to extract and visualize actionable information from streams
of social media messages, analyzed as conversational elements.
Our method has been applied to over 4 million messages related to more than 35 different events,
demonstrating good results identifying conversational patterns.
Keywords: Social media; Conversation Analysis; Visualization; Text mining; Content analysis

1 Introduction
Social media is not only creating new opportunities for companies to interact with customers
through online campaigns, but also offers businesses plentiful data that can be mined to better inform
marketing initiatives and support a variety of business intelligence applications (Royle & Laing,
2014), (Osatuyi, 2013), (Rud, 2009).
Among the several Social Media channels, the focus of this work is on Twitter due to its increasing
popularity (Twitter reached 23% of web users in September ’14 ((Duggan, Ellison, Lampe, Lenhart, &
Madden, 2015)). Additionally, access to Twitter data is relatively easy with low cost, since most users
create their content public. Twitter is increasingly gaining marketers’ attention when online users
employ this social medium as a backchannel (Dork, Gruen, Williamson, & Carpendale, 2012) to
follow ongoing events of general interest such as a TV show (Highfield & Bruns, 2013), emergency
events (Hughes & Palen, 2009), or conferences and other live events (Reinhardt, Ebner, Beham, &
Costa, 2009).

2216

Selection and peer-review under responsibility of the Scientiﬁc Programme Committee of ICCS 2016
c The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V.

doi:10.1016/j.procs.2016.05.384

Social Media Conversation Monitoring: Visualize ...

Lipizzi et al.

In the next sections we show that the dominant approaches to Social Media mining are biased
towards the analysis of users-generated content rather than of the process through which this content is
generated. Our challenge is instead to dig deeper into Twitter streams to observe the emergence of
shared meaning in online, large-scale conversations by using a quantitative methodology inspired to
ideas and theories from studies in discourse analysis. We extract concept maps from social streams,
compute a set of conversational and more traditional online analytics and then create visualizations to
display the conversational flows. In this paper we used as case study the Apple Keynote presentation
that took place in March 2015, a 90 minutes event focused on the new MacBook and the AppleWatch.

2 Current approaches to social media mining in business
applications
Commonly used approaches in social media mining are based on Information Diffusion in Social
Networks (Bird, Gourley, Gertz, Devanbu, & Swaminathan, 2006). Another important category of
methods is based on sentiment and reputation analysis (Brown, 2012) (Saif, He, & Alani, 2012) or on
text mining of the content published on social media site (W. He, Zha, & Li, 2013).
Both social and semantic models presume a pre-existing structure and do not capture effectively
how the structure of the judgments and contents emerges and evolves dynamically, thanks to the
accumulation and exchanges of opinions expressed by users in backchanneling applications.
Dominant approaches do not explicitly treat the nature of online interactions as the conversations they
frequently are. This is a shortcoming since conversations exhibit dynamics and features that are not
well captured by structural approaches.
In terms of visual representation of the analysis, current solutions are either:
• Data visualization and Statistical analysis addressing cases with high number of participants,
with low level of conversation
• Virtual conversation analysis focusing on cases with low number of participants and high
level of conversation.
Our analysis – and consequently our visual representations - focuses on cases with large number of
participants, with an intermediate level of conversation.

3 Methodology
We expanded the conversational framework detailed in (Lipizzi, Iandoli, & Marquez, 2015) with
additional metrics and with a visualization layer. The combined steps are:
• Data collection and Preprocessing
• Concept map Extraction: creating the Semantic and Social structures, performing the Traffic
analysis, Integrating the data
• Concept map Enrichment, with additional conversational indicators and with event-specific
time labeling
• Data Visualization.

3.1 Data collection and Preprocessing
The methodology and the related tool are applied to a corpus of tweets generated by the public
during the Apple Event last March 2015. The tweets collection started at the opening of the event and
stopped when it ended. We selected this event because it was very focused, very popular and there is a

2217

Social Media Conversation Monitoring: Visualize ...

Lipizzi et al.

wide availability of event documentation. The dataset we used was composed by 46,804 data points,
containing tweets in English only.

3.2 Concept map extraction
A concept map was created using a topology based method, as described in (Lipizzi et al., 2015).
Using this method, the data was partitioned into m time slices of 2 minutes with each bucket
containing an average of 924 tweets, and then 2 structures were created: semantic and relational. We
then calculated traffic related metrics and finally integrated all the results.
Semantic Structure. Senders and words were used as nodes. They are related if used in the same
tweet. The network resulting is a bipartite one. As an example, the 28th partition ( ) has 1160 nodes
and 1108 edges.
Following the above mentioned method (Lipizzi et al., 2015), we extracted from the bipartite
networks the words networks. Using the same 28th partition as example, the resulting network  is
composed by 370 nodes and 109 edges. We then extracted clusters using a combination of k-core and
Lauvain community detection methods.
Figure 1 represents the community network 
	 , extracted from  with k = 4,
leading to a total of 4 communities. The nodes labels size is based on their degree centrality value
Social Structure. In the social structure, nodes are users U connected one to the other is ui ∈ U
mentions in his/her tweet other users ux…z. Figure 2 is an example of this network.
Traffic Analysis. This is based on the overall number of tweets in each slice and their change
during each time interval.
Data Integration. The metrics collected in the above steps were compiled into a single dataset,
used to analyze and visualize the whole stream of communication. Statistical steps to improve the
quality of the data were also done.

Figure 1: Semantic clusters
Figure 2: Relation network

3.3 Concept map enrichment
To obtain more actionable visualization, we enriched the concept map by time labeling the event
that has been analyzed and adding conversational indicators.
Time labeling the event. In events like the one being analyzing, the conversational timeline is
defined by the speakers’ agenda. Using one of the blogs covering the event
(http://www.techradar.com/us/news/wearables/apple-watch-event-live-blog-march-1287686),
we
created a log of the event to time stamp each of the key moments (e.g.: the announcement of the new
MacBook).
Adding conversational indicators. To analyze the dynamic evolution of the conversation aspects,
we extracted the most relevant word in each cluster/topic and the semantic similarity between each

2218

Social Media Conversation Monitoring: Visualize ...

Lipizzi et al.

cluster/topic and the next one. For this task, we used the Natural Language Tool Kit in Python, a
lexical database – WordNet – and the Lin similarity.

3.4 Data visualization
Figure 3 below shows the first visualization for the Apple Keynote event over time. The vertical
axis refers to the semantic distance between two adjacent bubbles – representing clusters of
words/topics - , the size of the bubbles is proportional to the number of tweets in that time slice, and
the size of the inner white circle is proportional to the number of cluster/topic in the time slice. The
aura on the side of the bubbles represents the sentiment for the specific cluster/topic.
Globes are connected by their semantic similarity. This provides a visual of the evolution of the
conversation. In this case, the conversation is fragmented, being the subjects of the conversation
determined by the speakers.
From this visualization, it can be seen that the conversation about MacBook is much more focused
than the others. This may be because MacBook is an established product, generating less reactions, but
more specific conversations.
The Apple watch, that was real core of the event, generated overall less focused conversations,
most likely because was a new product whose applications and potential users are relatively unknown.

Relational Network

Semantic Distance

Words Network

Figure 4: Semantic and Relational
indicators
Figure 3: Conversation focus points
To better analyze the reactions to MacBook and AppleWatch, we used the visualization in Figure 4
above, based on clustering coefficient as a measure of homophily. Clustering coefficient gives a
measure of how structured networks are. Higher values indicate structured semantic structures in the
network of words, while in the relational network indicate more communities, making the subject of
the discussion more collective. The highest peak was during the announcement of the new MacBook
(around 10:30 AM). This confirms the analysis of the previous visualization. The Mac is a known and
appreciated product, so more people can articulate their opinion in a structured conversation,
interacting on some of the topics. During the announcement of the AppleWatch (around 11 AM), we
had isolated relational peaks with low semantic structures showing relatively highly related people
talking about unfocused subjects.
Time -

4 Conclusions
Our findings show that our method is able to capture and quantify several features of
backchanneling conversational interaction such as: how attention and focus change across the event,
identification and measurement of semantic switches in the conversation, exploration VS exploitation
oriented conversational dynamics, and evaluation of specific conversational elements.

2219

Social Media Conversation Monitoring: Visualize ...

Lipizzi et al.

5 Acknowledgements
The research leading to these results has received funding from the Strategic Research Counsel at
the Academy of Finland under grant agreement n:o 293446 – Platform Value Now: Value capturing in
the fast emerging platform ecosystems.

References
Bird, C., Gourley, A., Gertz, M., Devanbu, P., & Swaminathan, A. (2006). Mining Email Social
Networks. The 2006 International Workshop, 1–7. http://doi.org/10.1145/1137983.1138016
Brown, E. D. (2012). Will twitter make you a better investor? a look at sentiment, user reputation and
their effect on the stock market. Conference Proceedings for the Southern Association for
Information Systems SAIS Conference, 36–42.
Dork, M., Gruen, D., Williamson, C., & Carpendale, S. (2012). A Visual Backchannel for Large-Scale
Events. IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics, 16(6), 1129–1138.
http://doi.org/10.1109/TVCG.2010.129
Duggan, M., Ellison, N., Lampe, C., Lenhart, A., & Madden, M. (2015). Social Media Update 2014.
PewResearchCenter.
He, W., Zha, S., & Li, L. (2013). Social media competitive analysis and text mining: A case study in
the pizza industry. International Journal of Information Management, 33(3), 464–472.
Highfield, T., & Bruns, A. (2013). More than a backchannel: Twitter and television. Journal of
Audience Reception Studies, 1–5.
Hughes, A. L., & Palen, L. (2009). Twitter adoption and use in mass convergence and emergency
events. International Journal of Emergency Management, 6(3/4), 248.
http://doi.org/10.1504/IJEM.2009.031564
Lipizzi, C., Iandoli, L., & Marquez, J. (2015). Extracting and evaluating conversational patterns in
social media: A socio-semantic analysis of customers' reactions to the launch of new products
using Twitter …. International Journal of Information ….
Osatuyi, B. (2013). Information sharing on social media sites. Computers in Human Behavior, 29(6),
2622–2631.
Reinhardt, W., Ebner, M., Beham, G., & Costa, C. (2009). How people are using Twitter during
conferences. Creativity and Innovation ….
Royle, J., & Laing, A. (2014). The digital marketing skills gap: Developing a Digital Marketer Model
for the communication industries. International Journal of Information Management, 34(2), 65–
73.
Rud, O. P. (2009). Business intelligence success factors : tools for aligning your business in the global
economy. Hoboken, N.J. : Wiley & Sons.
Saif, H., He, Y., & Alani, H. (2012). Semantic sentiment analysis of twitter (Vol. Part I , Volume Part
I). Presented at the ISWC'12: Proceedings of the 11th international conference on The Semantic
Web, Springer-Verlag. http://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-35176-1_32

2220

