Procedia Computer Science
Volume 80, 2016, Pages 1374–1381
ICCS 2016. The International Conference on Computational
Science

MHD Relaxation with Flow in a Sphere
Kohei Yamamoto1 and Akira Kageyama2
1
2

Department of computational science, Kobe University, Kobe, 657-8501, Japan
161x220x@stu.kobe-u.ac.jp
Department of computational science, Kobe University, Kobe, 657-8501, Japan
kage@port.kobe-u.ac.jp

Abstract
Relaxation process of magnetohydrodynamics (MHD) inside a sphere is investigated by a newly
developed spherical grid system, Yin–Yang–Zhong grid. An MHD ﬂuid with low viscosity and
resistivity is conﬁned in a perfectly conducting, stress-free, and thermally insulating spherical
boundary. Starting from a simple and symmetric state (a ring-shaped magnetic ﬂux with no
ﬂow), a dynamical relaxation process of the magnetic energy is numerically integrated. The
system settles down to a quasi-stationary state after an initial phase of turbulence. The relaxed
state has a highly symmetric structure of the ﬂow in tandem with the magnetic ﬁeld in which
four swirls with the magnetic ﬁeld are located on vertices of a regular square.
Keywords: magnetohydrodynamics, self-organization, plasma relaxation, Yin–Yang–Zhong grid

1

Introduction

Relaxation processes in the magnetohydrodynamics (MHD) have attracted a lot of interests
in plasma physics [5]. Various experiments in RFP (Reversed-Field-Pinch), spheromak, and
other plasma devices show surprisingly good agreements with the relaxation theory proposed
by Woltjer [9, 8] and Taylor [6, 7].
The central idea in the theory is that a relaxed state is the minimum energy state under the
constraint of conserved total magnetic helicity. Let E and H be the total magnetic energy and
the total magnetic helicity, respectively: E = (1/2) V b · b dV , and H = V a · b dV , where b
and a are the (normalized) magnetic ﬁeld and its vector potential. Minimizing E under ﬁxed
H leads to a variational equation
δE − c δH = 0,
(1)
where c is a Lagrange multiplier. The solution of this equation is given by the so-called force-free
state:
∇ × b = c b.
(2)
Since ∇ × b is proportional to the electric current j and j × b is the magnetic force acting
on an MHD ﬂuid, the solution (2) states that the relaxed state is force-free [8]. Although the
1374

Selection and peer-review under responsibility of the Scientiﬁc Programme Committee of ICCS 2016
c The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V.

doi:10.1016/j.procs.2016.05.437

MHD Relaxation with Flow in a Sphere

Yamamoto and Kageyama

magnetic helicity H is exactly conserved only when the MHD ﬂuid has no electrical resistivity,
Taylor pointed out that the dissipation rate of H in a resistive MHD ﬂuid can be smaller than
that of E. Therefore, the force-free state appears after a relaxation in a practical plasma with
resistivity [6, 7].
Although plasma instabilities and the resulting ﬂows are believed to play essential roles
in the transition process from a higher energy state toward the minimum energy state, the
plasma ﬂow itself is not incorporated in the Woltjer–Taylor theory. The minimized energy in
the variational formulation of the theory, the kinetic energy of the ﬂuid ﬂow is neglected as well
as the thermal energy. The omission of the ﬂow energy is reasonable because the ﬁnal state of
the plasma is basically at rest in the above-mentioned plasma experiments.
We consider in this paper, plasma relaxation processes with ﬂow in the MHD model. When
the viscous dissipation time scale of an MHD medium is the same order as the resistive dissipation time scale, the relaxed state of the MHD ﬂuid from a given initial condition can have not
only the magnetic energy but also the ﬂow energy. In such a general relaxation, the ﬁnal state
would be a set of rotating bunches of magnetic ﬂux. To study those processes in an idealized
system, we investigate in this study an MHD ﬂuid conﬁned in a spherical vessel of unit radius.
In addition to the geometry, we consider as simple setting of initial and boundary conditions
as possible for the numerical experiment that will be described in the next section.
The sphere plays a paradigmatic role for idealized thought experiments in various problems [1]. On the other hand, the sphere is a notoriously diﬃcult geometry for numerics. The
diﬃculty becomes apparent when one considers the spherical region on the spherical polar coordinate system {r, ϑ, ϕ}, with r radius, ϑ colatitude, and ϕ longitude. The numerical challenge
appears near the coordinate singularities of the poles θ = 0, π and the origin r = 0 as the
concentrated grid points. The concentrated grids around a coordinate singularities drastically
reduce the time step due to the Courant–Friedrichs–Lewy (CFL) condition when an explicit
time integration scheme is adopted. Even when an implicit scheme is used, an unbalanced
distribution of the grids damages the computational eﬃciency because there is generally no
physical reason to place a very ﬁne grid mesh near a coordinate singularity.
We have recently proposed an overset grid system, Yin–Yang–Zhong grid [2], for the spatial
discretization of a spherical inside, or a ball region (see Fig. 1). The Yin–Yang–Zhong grid
is composed of three components; Yin, Yang, and Zhong. The Yin–Yang–Zhong grid is an
extension of the Yin–Yang gird, which is itself an overset grid system with two component grids
(Yin and Yang). The Zhong grid component, which is constructed on the Cartesian coordinates,
is placed at the center of the Yin–Yang grid. The three components cover a ball region with
partial overlaps on their borders. The borders are sewed by mutual interpolations, following
the standard overset grid methodology.

2

Model

We use the Yin-Yang-Zhong grid to solve numerically the time development of the following
(normalized) compressible MHD equations, with fundamental variables being the mass density
1375

MHD Relaxation with Flow in a Sphere

Yamamoto and Kageyama

Figure 1: Yin–Yang–Zhong grid. An overset grid system to cover a ball region with three
component grids; Yin, Yang, and Zhong.
ρ, mass ﬂux f , vector potential of the magnetic ﬁeld a, and pressure p in a ball of radius r = 1:
∂ρ
∂t
∂f
∂t
∂a
∂t
∂p
∂t

= −∇ · f ,

(3)

= −∇ · (f v) − ∇p + j × b + μ ∇ · T ,

(4)

= v × b + η ∇2 a − ∇ (η∇ · a − φ) ,

(5)

= −v · ∇p − γp ∇ · v + H,

(6)

where the ﬂuid velocity is given by v = f /ρ, the magnetic ﬁeld b = ∇ × a, and (normalized)
current density j = ∇ × b. We assume the equation of state for the ideal gas with the speciﬁc
heats ratio γ = 5/3. The last term in the right hand side of eq. (4), μ∇ · T , denots the
viscous force with viscosity μ. η is electrical resistivity. H = (γ − 1) κ ∇2 T + η j 2 + Φ is the
thermal diﬀusion and heatings, where κ is thermal diﬀusivity, T = p/ρ and Φ are (normalized)
temperature and the viscous dissipation function, respectively. In the right hand side of eq. (5)
an arbitrary scalar ﬁeld φ appears as the gauge freedom of the vector potential a. Since we
take the electromagnetic gauge φ = η∇ · a, the last term ∇(η∇ · a − φ) is dropped from eq. (5)
in the actual computation. There is no external force such as the gravity, and no apparent force
such as Coriolis force.
The standard free-slip, non-penetrative condition is assumed for the velocity’s boundary
condition at r = 1. We assume a perfectly conducting boundary at r = 1, which means that
the electric ﬁeld e = −v × b + ηj has only the radial component, i.e., rˆ × e = 0, where rˆ is
the unit vector in the radial direction. Therefore, the magnetic ﬁeld b = (br , bθ , bφ ) does not
penetrate into the boundary, i.e., ∂br /∂t = 0. Because we will apply br = 0 at r = 1 as the
initial condition at t = 0, br = 0 for t ≥ 0 on the boundary. Note that both the ﬂow and the
magnetic ﬁeld have no radial component at r = 1. The condition rˆ × e = 0, therefore, means
that the current has only the radial component; rˆ ×j = 0. The two components of the magnetic
1376

MHD Relaxation with Flow in a Sphere

Yamamoto and Kageyama

Figure 2: Initial magnetic ﬁeld of purely azimuthal component imposed as the initial condition.
ﬁeld bθ and bφ are determined by this current condition. The remaining boundary condition is
for the thermal one, for which we assume the perfect insulator condition, i.e., ∂T /∂r = 0.
The MHD dynamics in a unit sphere was investigated by [4, 3]. The major diﬀerence in the
present study from their approach is that our numerical scheme is a fully point-based approach
(ﬁnite diﬀerence method) in contrast that theirs are fully-spectral one. Another diﬀerence is the
adopted boundary condition. In their simulation, radial components of the electric current and
the vorticity are zero, while in our simulation, they can be non-zero. Therefore, our simulation
could be regarded as a complemental approach to that of Mininni et al. [4, 3] toward the
understanding of the MHD dynamics in a sphere.
We apply the second-order central diﬀerence method for the spatial discretization and the
fourth-order Runge–Kutta method for the temporal integration. The simulation parameters
adopted in this study are as follows: The total grid size is Nr × Nθ × Nφ × Yin/Yang + Nzhong =
201 × 204 × 608 × 2 + 2223 . Viscosity μ, thermal diﬀusivity κ, electrical resistivity η are same,
= 1 × 10−4 in the normalized equations (3)–(6).
Computations were performed by NEC SX-ACE of JAMSTEC, Japan. We have used the
hybrid-parallelized code (MPI + OpenMP) described in [2]. A typical number for the MPI
process is 58. The Zhong-component is divided into Nx × Ny × Nz = 1 × 2 × 4 = 8 pieces for
parallelization. The Yin- and Yang-components are divided into 25 pieces each.

3

Results

We put as an initial condition a purely toroidal magnetic ﬁeld b = (0, 0, bφ0 ) and the zero
velocity, v = (0, 0, 0). The azimuthal ﬁeld bφ0 is given by a vector potential a0 = (ar0 , 0, 0) =
(sin2 (πr) cos θ, 0, 0). The initial density
√ ρ and the pressure are both uniform (ρ = 1, and
p = 100). The sound velocity is cs = γ T ∼ 12.9. Since the magnetic tension force (inward)
dominates the magnetic pressure force (outward) in the above proﬁle of bφ0 , the magnetic ﬂux
ring of bφ0 starts shrinking when the simulation starts. The shrinking magnetic ﬂux causes an
inward ﬂow.
The inward ﬂow causes a pressure increase near the center of the sphere, leading to a twodimensional circulating ﬂow in meridional planes (with no azimuthal component vφ ). One of the
interesting ﬁndings in the present study is that, the poloidal ﬂow thus generated is unstable and
the axisymmetry is broken: A three-dimensional, turbulent, ﬂow is spontaneously generated.
1377

MHD Relaxation with Flow in a Sphere

Yamamoto and Kageyama

Figure 3: Time development of magnetic and ﬂow energy normalized by the maximum ﬂow
time scale τ .
In the following descriptions, the time is denoted by a scale unit τ = D/vmax = 4.65, where
D is the diameter of the sphere, D = 2, and vmax ∼ 0.43 is the maximum ﬂow induced in the
relaxation process described below. We have integrated the MHD equations for t = 50τ . Note
that the slowest diﬀusion (free decay) time in a unit sphere is (π 2 η)−1 = 1013.21 ∼ 220τ . (We
have performed quantitative checks of the free decay problem, along with other test problems
for the Yin–Yang–Zhong grid in our paper [2].)
Fig. 3 shows the time development of magnetic and kinetic (ﬂow) energies. The ﬂow energy
(blue curve in Fig. 3) jumps up just after the beginning of the simulation from the zero level.
On the other hand, the magnetic energy drops in the same rate until the energy equipartition
level is attained between the magnetic and ﬂow energies at t ∼ 1τ when the ﬂow speed reaches
the above-mentioned maximum value vmax ∼ 0.43. (Since the maximum Mach number at this
moment is M = 0.033, compressibility eﬀects would be negligibly small all over the simulation.)
After the transient phase from t = 1τ to t ∼ 10τ , both the magnetic and ﬂow ﬁelds slowly release
their energies through the thermalization.
Fig. 4 shows a snapshot sequence of the magnetic ﬁeld (upper three panels) and the ﬂow
(lower three panels). The leftmost panes at t = 9τ shows a remnant of the dynamic, turbulent
states during the initial transition phase. The middle panels for t = 21τ shows an intermediate
state and the rightmost panels for t = 49τ show the fully relaxed state that will be described
in more detail below.
In the Woltjer–Taylor theory of relaxation, (quasi-)conserved quantities play critical roles.
We have conﬁrmed the conservation properties in our simulation. For example, each component
of the angular momentum vector and the cross helicity Kvb = v · b dV are conserved in the
accuracy of O(10−10 ) and O(10−13 ), respectively.
The relaxed state (the rightmost panels at t = 49τ in Fig. 4) has an intriguing structure.
The magnetic ﬁeld and the ﬂow almost align with each other; they are parallel in some parts
and anti-parallel in other parts. This is an expected result from the conservation of the cross
helicity Kvb which is zero in the initial condition. The relaxed state is composed of four swirls
1378

MHD Relaxation with Flow in a Sphere

Yamamoto and Kageyama

Figure 4: Time sequences of magnetic and ﬂow ﬁeld lines normalized by the maximum ﬂow
time scale τ .
having dominant radial component of the vorticity ω = ∇ × v. Fig. 5 shows the same ﬂow
lines as the lower right panel of Fig. 4, but viewed from diﬀerent angles. Four ωr vortices (two
positive ωr and two negative ωr ) are observed. They are located on vertices of a regular square
in a plane. We believe that this state is one of the fundamental states in the MHD relaxation
(with ﬂow).

4

Summary and Discussion

In this study, we put a ring-shaped, axisymmetric, and purely azimuthal magnetic ﬂux to a
weakly dissipative MHD ﬂuid in a sphere. The initial velocity v = 0. The boundary on the
sphere is the free-slip, perfectly conducting, and thermally insulating wall.
The magnetic tension force of the initial ring-shaped ﬁeld induces a strong ﬂow in the
beginning of the simulation. An axisymmetric ﬂow without the azimuthal component, i.e.,
v = (vr , vθ , vφ = 0) is induced, and it soon becomes a three-dimensional, turbulent ﬂow. The
ﬂuid then settles into a quasi-stationary state. The relaxed state consists of four ﬂow vortices
with the magnetic ﬁeld. The magnetic ﬁeld lines are almost parallel to the ﬂow in most parts.
As far as we know, this kind of relaxed state in MHD with symmetric swirls is new.
It would be natural to expect in general that a relaxed state of an MHD with a ﬂow consists
of a set of large scale swirls with winding magnetic ﬁeld lines. Since the total angular momentum
is conserved, i.e., zero, in the present simulation, solutions with a single swirl in the sphere is
clearly prohibited. Solutions with odd number vortices with the same amplitude are not allowed
by the same reason.
The next simplest solution is, therefore, a kind of two-vortices state in which a pair of
two anti-parallel vortices are located along a straight line, for example, one in the northern
hemisphere and another in the southern hemisphere. There seems to be no reason to prohibit
the appearance this kind of anti-parallel twin-vortex solution as a relaxed state. We believe
that we will get such a solution when we start from a diﬀerent initial condition.
A geometrically simple conﬁguration with four vortices having zero total angular momentum
1379

MHD Relaxation with Flow in a Sphere

Yamamoto and Kageyama

Figure 5: The four-vortices structure of the relax state obtained by the simulation. They are
located on a plane, at a regular square’s vertices.
is the regular tetrahedron in which four vortices (two +ωr vortices and two −ωr vortices) are
located on the tetrahedron’s four vertices. In this conﬁguration, one of the four vortices (say
+ωr ), has three neighbors (one +ωr and two −ωr ). It is inevitable to have a strong shear
between one of the vortex pairs. On the other hand, in the square conﬁguration in a plane of
the four vortices shown in Fig. 5, one of the four vortices (say +ωr ) has two neighbors with the
opposite rotation (−ωr ) and the strong shear ﬂow is avoided in this conﬁguration.
The induced ﬂow by the initial ring-shaped magnetic ﬁeld is a result of an energy conversion
from the magnetic energy into the ﬂow energy. The energy conversion in a reverse way, from the
ﬂow energy into the magnetic energy, i.e., the MHD dynamo eﬀect, is absent, or at least quite
weak, in the present setup: Note that the induced ﬂow by the ring-shaped magnetic ﬁeld was
purely two-dimensional in each meridian plane that has no ﬂow helicity, v ·ω = 0, everywhere in
the sphere. The ﬂow helicity is known to be an important enhancer of the dynamo eﬃciency. We
may expect that putting an azimuthal ﬂow component vφ in the initial condition, for example
by putting a rigid rotation proﬁle, would drastically change the relaxation process reported
in this paper because it naturally leads to a ﬂow helicity proﬁle with opposite signs in two
hemispheres, by the combination of the induced meridional circulation and the inertially given
azimuthal ﬂow. We have performed this experiment and have conﬁrmed that it is certainly so:
The two-way conversions between the ﬂow and magnetic energies, with the dynamo process,
lead to a very diﬀerent relaxation process from that reported here. In particular, the relaxation
time scale of the magnetic ﬁeld becomes much larger. We will report the details of these results
in other place.

Acknowledgments
This work was supported by Grant-in-Aid for Scientiﬁc Research (KAKENHI) 23340128.

References
[1] John Harte and Leonard J. Soltzberg. Consider a spherical cow : a course in environmental problem
solving. University Science Books, Sausalito, Calif., 1988.
[2] Hiroshi Hayashi and Akira Kageyama. Yin-Yang-Zhong grid: An overset grid system for a sphere.
Journal of Computational Physics, 305:895-905, 2015.

1380

MHD Relaxation with Flow in a Sphere

Yamamoto and Kageyama

[3] P. D. Mininni, D. C. Montgomery, and L. Turner. Hydrodynamic and magnetohydrodynamic
computations inside a rotating sphere. New Journal of Physics, 9(8):303, 8 2007.
[4] Pablo D. Mininni and David C. Montgomery. Magnetohydrodynamic activity inside a sphere.
Physics of Fluids, 18(11):116602, 2006.
[5] S. Ortolani and Dalton D. Schnack. Magnetohydrodynamics of plasma relaxation. World Scientiﬁc,
Singapore; River Edge, NJ, 1993.
[6] J. B. Taylor. Relaxation of toroidal plasma and generation of reverse magnetic ﬁelds. Physical
Review Letters, 33(19):1139, 1974.
[7] J. B. Taylor. Relaxation and magnetic reconnection in plasmas. Reviews of Modern Physics,
58(3):741, 1986.
[8] L. Woltjer. A theorem on force-free magnetic ﬁelds. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A, 44(6):489–491,
1958.
[9] L. Woltjer. On the theory of hydromagnetic equilibrium. Reviews of Modern Physics, 32(4):914,
1960.

1381

