Procedia Computer Science
Volume 51, 2015, Pages 356–365
ICCS 2015 International Conference On Computational Science

Siting Multiple Observers for Maximum Coverage: An
Accurate Approach
A.R. Cervilla, S. Tabik, and L.F. Romero
Dpt. Computer Architecture, University of Malaga
29071 Malaga, Spain
amrocer@uma.es stabik@uma.es felipe@uma.es

Abstract
The selection of the minimal number of observers that ensures the maximum visual coverage
over an area represented by a digital elevation model (DEM) have great interest in many
ﬁelds, e.g., telecommunications, environment planning, among others. However, this problem
is complex and intractable when the number of points of the DEM is relatively high. This
complexity is due to three issues: 1) the diﬃculty in determining the visibility of the terrain
from one point, 2) the need to know the visibility at all points of the terrain and 3) the
combinatorial complexity of the selection of observers.
The recent progress in total-viewshed maps computation not only provides an eﬃcient solution to the ﬁrst two problems, but also opens other ways to new solutions that were unthinkable
previously. This paper presents a new type of cartography, called the masked total viewshed
map, and provides optimal solutions for both sequential and simultaneous observers location.
Keywords: maximun coverage, optimal located of observes, total visibility model

1

Introduction

The last decade has know the continuous creation of large numbers of DEMs (Digital Elevation
Models) of terrains and surfaces generated by photogrammetry and LIDAR (Laser Imaging
Detection and Ranging) clouds of points. This data allows the characterization of the surface heterogeneity with very high spatial resolutions, on the order of 1 cm2 . Indeed, there is
an increasing public and private demand for higher resolution DEMs of very large volumes.
This fact has produced a high interest for developing new eﬃcient algorithms able to extract
useful information from these grids. For instance, the viewshed model [11], solar irradiation
model [12, 10], win model, horizon model [13] and so forth. The existence of these algorithms
allows the opportunity to improve and create new useful real life applications which were not
possible before. Examples include, the determination of the minimum number of surveillance
cameras for early ﬁre detection in industrial areas, the determination of surveillance towers in
natural areas and national parks. However, there is no algorithms or tools able to determine
356

Selection and peer-review under responsibility of the Scientiﬁc Programme Committee of ICCS 2015
c The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V.

doi:10.1016/j.procs.2015.05.255

Siting Multiple Observers for Maximum Coverage

Cervilla, Tabik and Romero

the optimal location of the minimum number of observers to allow the maximum coverage.The
design of algorithms to solve the problem of maximum converge on DEMs with high resolution
is complex due to the huge volume of the data to be processed, which make it a Big data
problem. It was demonstrated that it is NP-complete problem [8] and it can be reduced to a
maximum coverage optimization problem [2].
As far as we know, there exist no tool in the market and literature to determine with reliability an optimal solution to this problem. There are heuristics that search the optimal set of
observers for the commonly called multi-observer siting problem: i) local search methods that
reduce the areas around the observers in a small radius in order to overcome the computational
requirements [9, 5] ii) greedy search methods that initially select a small set of candidates and
successively incorporate new points to that set until they cover the whole area of interest [9, 4],
iii) genetic algorithms [7] and iv) simulated annealing methods[3]. In addition, there are a
number of works that use either random or exhaustive search strategies [1].
Our algorithm, and also its accuracy, in comparison with all related works, relies on considering that all the points of the area of interest in a DEM are potential observers. We exhaustively
selects the set of observers with the highest total-viewshed and iteratively ﬁnds among that set
a sub-set that provides the maximum coverage. The proposed method can be used to improve
the surveillance in ﬁre-ﬁghting, anti-theft, environment control, occluded path calculation, mobile phone coverage and radio or television communications among other examples. The main
objective of this work is to provide a tool that ﬁnds the optimal placement of a set of observers
that give the maximum coverage.

2

Mask based Total-Viewshed

The proposed algorithm for the multi-observer siting problem is a variation of the algorithm
to calculate the total viewshed map developed by the authors in a previous work [11]. A
total-viewshed map indicates the number of visible points at each and all the points of terrain.
Total viewshed map may be useful in many ﬁelds, however in many other cases, there are
parts of the terrain in which there is few or null interest for the observers. In mobile cell
planning, for example, there are areas without population. For instance, in ﬁre–ﬁghting, there
is no need to have visual coverage of the sea. For theses cases, we propose in this work a new
cartography: the mask based total-viewshed map, which can be easily calculated by including
few additional operations in the total viewshed algorithm.

2.1

Total-Viewshed Algorithm

The total–viewshed algorithm developed by the authors and recently published in [11] calculates
the visibility of every point of the map in a discrete set of line of sights (usually, in 360 equally–
distributed azimuthal directions). For a given point of view (POV) and a given direction S,
the algorithm determines the visibility of point POV by means of a sequential analysis of every
point P in the line of sight determined by S, until the bounds of the DEM. For each encountered
point P, the analyzeP oint function is performed, see Algorithm 1.
This function determine if point P is visible or not, in order to detect visible stretches in the
line of sight. Then, it computes the total visible surface totalSurf ace from every point POV
in the DEM as a function of the stretch location.
357

Siting Multiple Observers for Maximum Coverage

Cervilla, Tabik and Romero

Algorithm 1: visibility kernel
p o i n t POV;
float visible stretch ;
f l o a t d i s t a n c e S t a r , maxangle ;
a n a l y z e P o i n t ( p o i n t P) {
f l o a t d i s t a n c e = P.d − P OV.d ;
f l o a t h e i g h t = P.h − P OV.h ;
f l o a t a n g l e =h e i g h t / d i s t a n c e ;
b o o l t h i s v i s i b l e = a n g l e > maxangle
b o o l s t a r t S t r e t c h = t h i s v i s i b l e && ! v i s i b l e s t r e t c h
//F irst point of a visible segment f ound
i f s t a r t S t r e t c h then
s t o r e S t a r t S t r e t c h (P ) // Save stretch geometry
d i s t a n c e S t a r t=d i s t a n c e ;
end
b o o l e n d S t r e t c h = ! t h i s v i s i b l e && v i s i b l e s t r e t c h
//F irst point of a non visible segment f ound
i f e n d S t r e t c h then
s t o r e E n d S t r e t c h (P ) ; // Save stretch geometry
t o t a l S u r f a c e += e v a l S u r f a c e ( d i s t a n c e S t a r t , d i s t a n c e ) ;
end
visible stretch = this visible
maxangle = max( a n g l e , maxangle)
}

2.2

Masked Total-Viewshed Algorithm

We propose to add a new line in analyzeP oint (as a last line) for every point P in a visible
stretch, so that, if the point does not belong to the area of interest in the landscape (we call it
an unmasked point), then we subtract the surface related of that point from totalSurf ace.
if (P.unmasked&&this visible) totalSurf ace− = evalSurf ace(distance)
Note that these additional ﬂoating point operations added to the function would increase the
cost of the algorithm. But there is another operation (a division) in every call to analyzeP oint
function which is very expensive in CPU cycles, and which will be performed in parallel with
the new operations, by considering the separate functional units and out-of-order execution in
the core microarchitecture employed in our experiments (intel Haswell) [6]. Experiments have
also shown that the new lines is performed without any increase of the CPU time.
Moreover, the boolean mask can be easily replaced by a byte–size integer which could also
indicate a graded interest of the point. In fact, a negative value for the parameter can also
indicate that the point has special relevance for the observer.
As a result, a masked total viewshed map is built, which indicates the surface of interest
358

Siting Multiple Observers for Maximum Coverage

Cervilla, Tabik and Romero

that is seen from every point. In Figure 1(d)) we show the masked total viewshed map for
a sample DEM (Figure 1(a))), in which the mask Figure 1(c)) has been applied. Note the
diﬀerences with the original total viewshed map (Figure 1(b)))

(a) DEM of the city of Malaga

(b) Total-viewshed map

(c) Mask (#0) for areas of interest,
abour 39%

(d) Masked Total Viewshed Map

Figure 1
The masked total viewshed map shown in the ﬁgure provides an excellent tool to calculate
the place for a single observer: we put it in the absolute maximum of the map.

3

The algorithm for Siting Observers

The algorithm proposed in this section iteratively determines the optimal set of observers that
guarantees the required coverage with a low computational cost.
In a ﬁrst iteration, the total-viewshed is calculated on an initial area of interest, called
mask, then the observer that produces the highest coverage is selected. Successively the same
approach is performed on an updated mask until the maximum coverage is obtained.
The input of this method are 1) the DEM that we want to analyze, an example is shown in
Figure 1(a)). 2) An initial mask (MASK 0) is provided, which indicates the areas of interest,
359

Siting Multiple Observers for Maximum Coverage

Cervilla, Tabik and Romero

i.e., where coverage is necessary. The mask is an useful tool to exclude the regions where the
interest is null or very low, because the coverage in that regions was guaranteed by a previous
existing observer or because simply it isn’t a region of interest. The coverage mask can be of
type boolean or based on a graded scale depending on the interest. An example is depicted in
Figure 1(c)).
The algorithm proceeds as follows. In the ﬁrst iteration, the masked total viewshed map
(MAP 1) is computed on the considered mask. Then, the observer that provides the best
coverage is found, OBS 1, by considering the absolute maximum in MAP 1. It is worthwhile to mention that the observer may be sited either outside or inside the masked area.
Finally, the viewshed from OBS 1 (VIEW 1) is subtracted from MASK 0 to obtain MASK 1
(MASK 1=MASK 0-VIEW 1)
In the following iterations, the masked total viewshed map (MAP i) is again calculated
on the current DEM, thus providing new observers (OBS i) and updated masks (MASK i).
Successively, the processes continues until the total coverage is guaranteed or until the desired
number of observers is reached.
Algorithm 2: The siting observers algorithm
i n p u t mask MASK 0
w h i l e ( c o n d i t i o n ) //either n==max n or c o v e r > max cover
{
MAP i= computeMaskedMap (DEM, MASK i−1);
p o i n t OBS i= max(MAP i) ;
VIEW i= viewshed ( OBS i , DEM) ;
MASK i= MASK i−1 − VIEW i ;
}

4

Evaluation and Results

For evaluation and comparison purposes we selected a DEM (already shown in the previous
section as Figure 1(a))) of a terrain that guarantee obtaining valid results. The city of Malaga,
in the south of Spain, is located between the Mediterranean sea and the highest mountains of
the peninsula, i.e., Sierra Nevada. Three types of terrain are included in this region, sea, valley
and mountains. The criteria to decide whether to provide coverage in speciﬁc zones can be
either highly populated areas or the areas situated near from the costs.
The black area in Figure 1(c) depicts the regions where the population is situated and where
the maximum coverage is needed, Figure 1(b) shows the total-viewshed map considering that
all the points of the terrain are observers situated at 10 m above the ground.
In a ﬁrst experiment, we limit to three the number of towers. The masks used in iteration
1, 2 and 3 to ﬁnd tower #1, #2 and #3 are shown in Figures 1 (a), 2 (a) and (b) respectively.
Figures 2 shows the resulting masks 1, 2 and 3 after siting each one of the three towers.
Figure 3(a), (b) and (c) show the masked total-viewshed maps that have been used in the
computation. Figure 3(a) shows the total-viewshed computed in the area of interest, the point
with the maximum viewshed is the location of the ﬁrst observer, tower #1. Figure 3(b) shows
the total-viewshed computed in the updated area of interest, where the areas covered by the
tower #1 is eliminated; the point with the maximum viewshed is the location for the second
360

Siting Multiple Observers for Maximum Coverage

(a) MASK 1

Cervilla, Tabik and Romero

(b) MASK 2

(c) MASK 3

Figure 2: Masks (covered areas) resulting after the sequential siting of towers #1, #2 and #3.
observer, tower #2. Finally, tower #3 is situated in the maximum of the area that was not yet
covered by tower # 1 and #2.

(a) MAP 1

(b) MAP 2

(c) MAP 3

Figure 3: Masked TVS maps #1, #2 and #3, using masks #0, #1 and #2 as input, respectively.
The star symbols (in red color) indicates the observer (tower) positions.
To ﬁnd three towers that provide the maximum coverage on the DEM shown in Figure 3(b),
we obtained the results shown in Table 1. Where, column 1 indicates the size of the used masks
expressed in number of points. Column 2, indicates the percentage occupied by the mask in
the terrain. Column 3 indicates the coordinates of the tower that gives the maximum coverage
in the area indicated by the mask. Columns 4 and 5 indicate the number of additional points
that covered by each observer (or tower) and the resulting coverage.

4.1

A discussion: Our method versus other methods

Let us use the analogy between terrain surveillance and radio-signals emission. Let P be the set
of potential locations for broadcasting towers and Q the set of potential locations for receptor
towers. Most methods in literature consider exhaustively searching the observers, Qcontinuous ,
among all the points of the terrain Pcontinuous as impossible. Note that continuous means,
361

Siting Multiple Observers for Maximum Coverage

Cervilla, Tabik and Romero

Table 1: Tower location and coverage
Mask
none
0 (2416436)
1 (3501910)
2 (3668002)

Mask cover
0%
60,41%
87,54%
91,70%

Max location (row,col)
958 / 1028
1016 / 1006 (tower 1)
1240 /1839 (tower 2)
1696/21 (tower 3)

Covered points

Tower coverage

+1085474
+166092
+102416 (3770418)

87,54% (#1)
91,70% (#1,2)
94,26% (#1-3)

all the points in the DEM at the highest resolution. Network planning methods in the ﬁeld
of mobile phone communications is based on the demand node concept, which consists in
providing coverage to a ﬁnite number of points that represents the terrain Qdiscrete . Some of
these methods search for the potential observers among all the terrain (Pcontinuous ∧ Qdiscrete ),
while others use discrete sets of locations (Pdiscrete ∧ Qdiscrete ). There are also methods that
delimit only the set of possible observers (Pdiscrete ∧Qcontinuous ). It is easy to demonstrate that
the last group of methods has the same complexity as a search in Pcontinuous ∧ Qdiscrete since
it is just a change of roles between observers and observed points. Nevertheless, the method
that uses the entire possible points in both sets: Pcontinuous and Qcontinuous is, obviously, the
unique approach that guarantee that the found locations are the best solution.

4.2

Simultaneous versus sequential inclusion of towers

Finding the best n locations for siting n observers to give the maximum coverage can be
performed simultaneously or sequentially. In the sequential approach, once the ﬁrst tower is
found and added, the remaining n−1 locations are selected in similar fashion. The methodology
presented in the previous section is based on this approach.
The simultaneous addition of multiple towers is more complex than the sequential one. The
main idea consists of selecting multiple possible locations without any consideration on the
position of one point versus the other. The reason behind this approach is that the observer
situated in the best place of a terrain (for an unique tower) is not necessarily the best choice
(if more towers will be placed).
Some papers [1] demonstrated that the simultaneous addition does not show substantial
improvement in comparison with the serial addition. We implemented an experiment to verify
this conclusion using total-viewshed maps. The experiment were designed for the example of
two towers, although it can bee extended to a higher number.In this case, three steps has been
used to determine the location of these towers.
4.2.1

Step 1. Seed set composition

The ﬁrst step of the proposed methodology consists of selecting a ﬁrst set of candidates that
determine an approximate location of the towers, i.e., seeds of towers. We generated three sets:
the ﬁrst set of candidates (A) is selected among the locations that have the highest visibility of
their surrounded points, in a radius of 500 m, in the terrain of interest. Set B is selected among
the highest points of the terrain with respect to the points around them. The third set, set (C)
are points distributed homogeneously in all the terrain with a distance of 500 m between each
two points. The size of sets A, B and C are 442, 669 and 1378 points respectively. We excluded
the points that represent the sea area.
362

Siting Multiple Observers for Maximum Coverage

Cervilla, Tabik and Romero

Figure 4: Candidates in sets A (white points, with higher visibility) and B (red points, on
relative maximum heights)

4.2.2

Step 2. Seed selection

Given the three sets of candidates, four pairs of seeds are selected via an exhaustive search
among candidates and by comparing all the possible pairs of points in sets A, B, C and D=B+C.
Notice that the exhaustive search implies the simultaneous computation of the visibility of
2539320 pairs, which would be intractable if we didn’t have full visibility data. The Table 2
shows the resulting position of the towers.
Table 2: Seed location in simultaneous addition
Pair
A
B
C
D

Pos #1
1001/992
1964/1025
1900/50
1964/1025

Pos #2
1837/1240
825/1716
800/1700
825/1716

Pair coverage
91,48%
89,87%
88,15%
89,87% (same as B)

Note that the set D does not improve the results of set B, and that set A clearly provides
better candidates.
4.2.3

Step 3. Pair optimization

Once chosen the four pairs of candidates, we have tried to improve its location using two
optimization strategies (steepest descent, implicit ﬁltering and Nelder-Mead). None of these
approaches have shown signiﬁcant improvement. (lower than 0.1% in coverage, with horizontal
displacement from the seeds on less than 100 meters). Using the Nelder-Mead method, the
improvements are somewhat higher (about 0.5%), although they could be considered a random
result, due to the extremely noise and non-smooth nature of the optimization problem.
363

Siting Multiple Observers for Maximum Coverage

Cervilla, Tabik and Romero

Moreover, the Nelder-Mead method, applied to pair A, moved the towers to exactly the
same position determined with the sequential addition of towers (table 1).

4.2.4

Performance

The results shown in this paper have been performed on a Dual Xeon E5-2698 v3, with 32
cores. This means that we can execute up to 6 sectors per core. Each one of these maps takes
approximately 90 seconds to be calculated. The number of ﬂoating point operations per sector
in our algorithm is
f lop count = n × ((4 + 4m)

√

n
2

+ 4nrs)

Variables m and nrs stands for the ratio of unmasked points and the total number of visible
segments per direction and per sector, respectively. nrs is two orders of magnitude smaller
than (n), and its mean value for the case study analyzed in this work is around 6 (in each
direction). On the other hand, m > 0.75. This results in 28Gﬂop per sector, and a peak
performance of 60Gﬂops on the Dual Xeon platform.
The most related works to our own work do not utilize speciﬁc algorithms for viewshed computation. Instead, they use the functions implemented in commercial software. For example,
GRASS and ArcGis plugins, or modules, require several seconds to calculate the viewshed at
each single point of the terrain, while our algorithm takes 0.00003 sec. As results, the use of
these software may take hours or even days of CPU time to obtain less accurate results. The
main reason behind this runtime diﬀerences is that our total-viewshed algorithm reutilizes visibility data between neighbor points and is based on an eﬃcient data structure that practically
eliminates L1 caches misses (about one line every 7048 ﬂop).

5

Conclusions

In this work, we provide a suboptimal solution for the problem of siting observers to give the
maximum coverage to a terrain represented by a DEM. The proposed algorithm is based on a
new tool, the total-viewshed algorithm, which has been recently published by the authors. By
modifying the algorithm with a single line, the areas of interest have been considered and the
calculated map takes into account the coverage of existing observers. An intuitive technique for
the location of observers is presented, and it is shown to be an optimal solution for a sequential
addition. We also provided a heuristic for simultaneous location, which is based on a previous
calculation of candidates among the places with higher visibility. Experiments show that both
sequential and simultaneous placement gives nearly identical results.

Acknowledgements
This work was supported by Ministerio de Ciencia e Innovaci´
on, Spain, under Projects TIN201016144, TIN2013-42253-P and by Junta de Andalusia under Projects TIC-8260 and P11-TIC7176.
364

Siting Multiple Observers for Maximum Coverage

Cervilla, Tabik and Romero

References
[1] Mohan R Akella, Eric Delmelle, Rajan Batta, Peter Rogerson, and Alan Blatt. Adaptive cell tower
location using geostatistics. Geographical Analysis, 42(3):227–244, 2010.
[2] TH Cormen, CE Leiserson, RL Rivest, and C Stein. Introduction to algorithms mit press. Cambridge, MA,, 2003.
[3] Lawrence Davis. Genetic algorithms and simulated annealing. G, 1987.
[4] Salles VG de Magalhaes, Marcus VA Andrade, and Chaulio Ferreira. Heuristics to site observers
in a terrain represented by a digital elevation matrix. In XI GEOINFO, 2010.
[5] Wm Randolph Franklin and Clark Ray. Higher isnt necessarily better: Visibility algorithms and
experiments. In Advances in GIS research: sixth international symposium on spatial data handling,
volume 2, pages 751–770. Taylor & Francis, Edinburgh, 1994.
[6] R Intel. Intel 64 and ia-32 architectures optimization reference manual. Intel Corporation,Sept,
2014.
[7] Melanie Mitchell. An introduction to genetic algorithms. MIT press, 1998.
[8] George Nagy. Terrain visibility. Computers and graphics, 18(6):763–773, 1994.
[9] Mauricio GC Resende. Greedy randomized adaptive search procedures (grasp). Encyclopedia of
optimization, 2:373–382, 2001.
[10] Luis F Romero, Siham Tabik, Jes´
us M V´ıas, and Emilio L Zapata. Fast clear-sky solar irradiation computation for very large digital elevation models. Computer Physics Communications,
178(11):800–808, 2008.
[11] S. Tabik, A. Cervilla, E. Zapata, and L. Romero. Eﬃcient data structure and highly scalable
algorithm for total-viewshed computation. Selected Topics in Applied Earth Observations and
Remote Sensing, IEEE Journal of, PP(99):1–7, 2014.
[12] Siham Tabik, A Villegas, Emilio L Zapata, and Luis F Romero. A fast gis-tool to compute the
maximum solar energy on very large terrains. Procedia Computer Science, 9:364–372, 2012.
[13] Siham Tabik, Emilio L Zapata, and Luis F Romero. Simultaneous computation of total viewshed on
large high resolution grids. International Journal of Geographical Information Science, 27(4):804–
814, 2013.

365

