Procedia Computer Science
Volume 51, 2015, Pages 755–764
ICCS 2015 International Conference On Computational Science

Using visual analytics to support the integration of expert
knowledge in the design of medical models and simulations
Philippe J. Giabbanelli, PhD1 and Piper J. Jackson, PhD2
1

2

School of Clinical Medicine, University of Cambridge, United Kingdom
pg438@cam.ac.uk
Interdisciplinary Research in the Mathematical and Computational Sciences (IRMACS) Centre,
Simon Fraser University, Canada
pjj@sfu.ca

Abstract
Visual analytics (VA) provides an interactive way to explore vast amounts of data and ﬁnd
interesting patterns. This has already beneﬁted the development of computational models,
as the patterns found using VA can then become essential elements of the model. Similarly,
recent advances in the use of VA for the data cleaning stage are relevant to computational
modelling given the importance of having reliable data to populate and check models. In this
paper, we demonstrate via case studies of medical models that VA can be very valuable at the
conceptual stage, to both examine the ﬁt of a conceptual model with the underlying data and
assess possible gaps in the model. The case studies were realized using diﬀerent modelling tools
(e.g., system dynamics or network modelling), which emphasizes that the relevance of VA to
medical modelling cuts across techniques. Finally, we discuss how the interdisciplinary nature
of modelling for medical applications requires an increased support for collaboration, and we
suggest several areas of research to improve the intake and experience of VA for collaborative
modelling in medicine.
Keywords: Data visualization; Knowledge management; Medical models

1

Introduction

Modelling is the process of identifying the common properties of closely related phenomena or
entities and then using these to produce a useful characterization. In the case of computational
modelling, this utility is expressed in the construction of models that can be run as a software
program on a computer. Rossiter et al. highlight an important distinction between the intended
uses of a model: theoretical, exploring or expressing a concept; or descriptive, simulating the
behaviour of a speciﬁc real-world scenario [16]. In this paper, we focus on the development of
descriptive models to support medical decision-making. Consequently, the real-world scenarios
studied here lead to models where medical data, health outcomes and health behaviours play an
Selection and peer-review under responsibility of the Scientiﬁc Programme Committee of ICCS 2015
c The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V.

doi:10.1016/j.procs.2015.05.195

755

Visual analytics in medical models & simulations

Giabbanelli and Jackson

important role. In this setting, computational modelling involves several tasks: (i) data cleaning
and data analysis, (ii) choice of modelling technique(s) and construction of the model(s), (iii)
experimentation via computer simulations, and (iv) reporting to stakeholders.
Visual analytics has been increasingly used for data analysis and reporting to stakeholders.
A growing demand to integrate visual analytics with these tasks has been met with the development of numerous oﬀ-the-shelf software packages. For example, we started by analyzing
a dataset about drinking behaviours in a Dutch sample via classical data mining methods [2].
In a second phase, we integrated the software Tableau into our analysis, and we used interactive visualizations to assess what factors had a marked diﬀerence between binge drinkers and
non-binge drinkers. The analysis (Figure 1) revealed that social factors consistently displayed
clear behavioural diﬀerences between binge drinkers and non-binge drinkers. This use of visual
analytics led us to focus on modelling social factors in drinking, which was ultimely successful
in explaining the behaviour of most of the sample [4]. The dissemination and reporting of
research results to stakeholders is also facilitated by many applications, such as Spotfire’s
DecisionSite Posters, in which interactive analysis reports can be viewed in a Web browser.
Similarly, numerous websites have supported ways to share and get feedback on visualizations,
such as Many-Eyes.com (e.g., comments can be left on the visualizations) or sense.us where
speciﬁc visualization states can be commented upon [8].
In contrast with data analysis and the dissemination of results, the integration of visual
analytics with the other tasks of computational modelling remains limited. The landmark
article by Kandel et al. [10] provided numerous examples and research directions for integration
with data cleaning and wrangling. An array of tools has been developed to facilitate the use
of visual analytics for simulation results. For example, several tools have been presented to
simulate and explore large datasets in the context of the IMAGE project [13]. This paper’s main
contribution is on the central and relatively unexplored theme of integrating visual analytics
with the design of a computational model.

1.1

Contribution of the paper

The principal contribution of the present work is to provide practical ways to integrate visual
analytics with the design of a computational model for medical decision-making. Speciﬁcally,
we draw on three case studies to show how the conceptual stage of the design process (rather
than the mathematical or implementation stages) can be improved by using visual analytics.
This is demonstrated for diﬀerent stages of conceptual modelling, and the beneﬁts of such an
integration at each stage are highlighted.

1.2

Organization of the paper

In section 2, we situate the task of conceptual modelling within the overall modelling pipeline.
In section 3, we present the case studies regarding the integration of visual analytics in the
design of conceptual models. Finally, we discuss how the interdisciplinary nature of biomedical
research requires an increased support for collaboration, and we provide speciﬁc areas for future
research in visual analytics to address this need.

2

Background

Generally the process of simulation modelling can be thought of as taking part in 4 general
phases:
(1) Data acquisition and analysis, where the relevant data for the subject is explored
(2) Modelling, where the model is speciﬁed and constructed
(3) Experimentation, where the model is used to produce results
(4) Reporting, where discoveries and knowledge are shared
756

Visual analytics in medical models & simulations

Giabbanelli and Jackson

Figure 1: A Dutch sample (n=2837) completed a questionnaire about drinking based on 4
categories (conformity, coping, enhancement, social), with 5 questions per category. The reference line (1.0) shows answers that were endorsed at the same proportion by binge drinkers
and non-binge drinkers. Answers above this line are more frequent for binge drinkers. Questions on social aspect triggered the more marked diﬀerence between binge drinkers and non
binge-drinkers, with a consistent gradient among answers from High (H) to Very Low (VL).

In descriptive models, phase 1 is the spark: the identiﬁcation of key patterns in the relevant
data may provide the intuition or inspiration for modelling. Visual analytics is increasingly
used at that phase, with a plethora of oﬀ-the-shelf software such as in-Spire or STARLIGHT
(qualitative data), GeoTime (spatio-temporal data), Gephi (network data), or Tableau (multidimensional relational databases). There are also speciﬁc tools answering to the diﬀerent types
of data found in the medical world (e.g., genomic, biomarkers). For example, the newly launched
Sequence Bundles has speciﬁcally been designed for multiple sequence alignments [11].
The modelling process in phase 2 can be further divided. Since modelling itself is a process
containing common tasks and concerns, there are several models of the modelling process. They
typically share a depiction of modelling as a highly iterative, complex process, where adjustments and decisions are made based on feedback between the diﬀerent stages of development.
However, they diﬀer in the aspects that they emphasize. For example, Sargent describes all 4
phases outline above but focuses on the veriﬁcation and validation of the model [18]. This leads
to an emphasis on the interactions between the simulated system and its real world counterpart, such as by comparing data (gathered in the real world vs. simulation experiment results),
or by generating hypotheses (based on observation of the real world or the model, and tested
on its counterpart). In this section, we follow the division of the second phase proposed by
Brantingham et al. [1] and reﬁned in [9]. This division has three stages: conceptual (a human
description of the model), mathematical (a formal description of the model), and ﬁnally the
implementation into a computer program. All three stages can beneﬁt from visual analytics: for
757

Visual analytics in medical models & simulations

Giabbanelli and Jackson

example, NDepend already provides support to integrate visual analytics at the computational
modelling stage. This paper focuses on the conceptual stage (section 3).
Phase 3 uses the computer program to generate data. While the data used to develop a
model can be analyzed via the tools aforementioned, much fewer tools are developed to analyze
the data generated by a model. The IMAGE project [13] provides an example of such a tool,
although its focus is on visual analytics for simulations in defense rather than in the medical
realm. Finally, phase 4 converts the ideas and experiences of the research team into knowledge
that can be shared with the stakeholders and/or other researchers.
This paper focuses on the use of visual analytics at the conceptual stage of the modelling
process. The conceptual stage can itself be further divided based on how advanced it is. The
next section details these divisions, and provides the beneﬁts of visual analytics for each of
them in the case of medical applications.

3

Visual analytics at the conceptual stage

In this paper, we divided the conceptual stage of the modelling process based on when visual
analytics was used. This led to three situations, each presented through a case study. In the
ﬁrst situation, visual analytics was used early on: it served to provide the foundations of the
conceptual model. This is illustrated through the design of a new simulation model for obesity,
which aimed at integrating both the physiological and psychological factors related to obesity.
The second situation is at the other extreme, where visual analytics was used late in the process:
the conceptual model was already developed and considered ﬁnal. Visual analytics thus served
to assess the ﬁt of the model with the underlying data. This is exempliﬁed through a large
international program for health behaviour change, where the conceptual model synthesized
the views of diﬀerent stakeholders. The third situation sits between the two extremes: it uses
visual analytics and conceptual modelling in an iterative way. The model is reﬁned through
exploration of the data, which in turns provides better guidance to the exploration, which
further improves the model. Due to space constraints, the main principles of this iterative
reﬁnement will be exposed and we will refer the reader to additional material.

3.1

Using visual analytics at an early stage

In 2014, we were mandated to create a simulation model of obesity, which would include psychological as well as physiological factors. We used a discussion paper published by the Provincial
Health Services Authority (PHSA) of British Columbia as a point of departure [15]. Analyzing
the relationships in this paper was deemed necessary for the development of the simulation
model for two reasons. First, it could provide an insight into the dynamics of obesity [5, 6].
Second, understanding it would strengthen the foundations to gradually develop more comprehensive models of obesity. However, the structure of conceptual models of obesity has been
typically analyzed by computing summary statistics (e.g., using Pajek [3]) rather than through
the use of visual analytics. In this case study, we used visual analytics to examine the conceptual
model created in the PHSA document and thereby create the requirements for the development
of the next conceptual model.
We manually extracted all relationships mentioned in the PHSA report in order to obtain
network data. Each of the factors involved in a relationship was assigned a category (Figure 2(a)), using categories similar to those in the Foresight Obesity Map [19]. We ﬁrst used the
visual analytics tool Gephi to analyze the map with respect to these categories. The hypothesis
was that factors within the same category should be interacting.
758

Visual analytics in medical models & simulations

Giabbanelli and Jackson

Figure 2: The map consisting of the factors and relationships mentioned in the PHSA’s discussion paper [15] was analyzed by (a) coding factors in the same way as in the Foresight
Map [19], (b) creating modules that better represented the uniqueness of this report, and (c)
the structural centrality of its diﬀerent factors. This was done in an interactive manner (a).

759

Visual analytics in medical models & simulations

Giabbanelli and Jackson

For example, one could expect factors from food production (in cyan on Figure 2(a)) to be
clustered in a similar way to factors from food consumption (in purple Figure 2(a)). Visual
analytics quickly led to the dismissal of this hypothesis, indicating that new categories had
to be developed to understand the previous conceptual model. We then used visual analytics
to explore possible ways to group factors (i.e., to create modules in the map) and obtained
a set of 7 modules whose factors were considered related by the research team. We analyzed
these modules as well as the role that they played (e.g., to assess what seems most central in
the model; Figure 2(c)) and we found several gaps. These gaps were turned into a roadmap
for the development of the new model. For example, Figure 2(b) shows that there are direct
consequences of obesity (e.g., co-morbidities) but these do not feed back to the model. In
reality, co-morbidities of obesity have several impact that should be captured: for example,
issues in the cardiovascular system may impair one’s ability to exercise and well-being. The
roadmap created by analyzing the PHSA report through visual analytics was then put to action
by teaming up with experts in ﬁelds such as adipose tissue and the cardiovascular system.
Generalizing the use of visual analytics to the early stage of the development of a conceptual
model has the following advantages. First, it helps setting up the structure of the model by
facilitating the identiﬁcation of similar entities or missing connections between entities. Second,
by grounding the development of the model on a sound structure, it contributes to eliminating
wasteful development work that may otherwise occur later on. Finally, it contributes to keeping
stakeholders engaged in the modelling process by providing an interactive outline of the domain
that is being modelled such that new questions may be generated.

3.2

Using visual analytics at the late stage

The Mind, Exercise, Nutrition, Do it (MEND) program is an intervention for children with
obesity and their families. The program consists of sessions on nutrition and behaviour change,
as well as group physical activity [17]. While MEND originates from the UK, it has also
been implemented in Australia, Canada, Denmark, New Zealand and the US. The program
is designed so that it can be implemented in the community by people who are not health
professionals. Due to the scaling-up of the program, both in its geographic reach as well as
the number of participants, it is of particular interest to understand the complexity of the
organizational structure. A conceptual model of that structure was developed by synthesizing
the viewpoints of several stakeholders into a causal loop diagram (Figure 3(a)). The version
of the diagram illustrated here is not ﬁnal. Indeed, additional work is required such that
the dynamics suggested by the diagram match the behaviour of the system expected by the
stakeholders. In order to capture the vision of the stakeholders, interviews were performed and
transcribed by the Chronic Disease Systems Modeling laboratory at Simon Fraser University,
which provided ethics approval. In this case study, we used visual analytics to assess the ﬁt
between the diagram and the visions expressed by the stakeholders.
A total of 18 stakeholder interviews were produced by the Chronic Disease Systems Modeling
laboratory. Interviews were divided at the level of answers; that is, the unit of analysis in this
case study was the set of all sentences expressed until the interviewer’s next question. For
each relationship suggested in the causal diagram, we counted the number of answers that
included both endpoints of the relationship. For example, the support for the relationship
from ‘program resource’ to ‘program implementation’ was assessed by counting the number
of answers that included both keywords. We accounted for common variations, which in this
example include ‘to implement’, ‘implementing’, ‘implementations’. The number of answers for
each relationship is summarized in Figure 3(b), where variations of the keywords are suggested
with *. Contrasting Figure 3(b) with the causal map in Figure 3(a) provides a valuable insight.
While some relationships had a large amount of support, others had surprisingly little support,
760

Visual analytics in medical models & simulations

Giabbanelli and Jackson

such as the concept of ‘program resources’ which is only weakly linked to either ‘program
development’ or ‘program implementation’.

Figure 3: Causal map proposing an early theoretical model of the MEND program from the
views expressed during meetings (a). This map is the sole intellectual property of Dr. Peter
Hovmand. It is reproduced with his permission. In our visualization, the thickness and label of
each edge is the number of times that the relationship was in an interviewee’s answer (b).
This kind of examination provides three immediate beneﬁts for the process of model building.
First, it helps to delineate concepts. If ‘program resources’ is weakly linked, it could be that
this concept doesn’t appropriately cover the experience of the stakeholders. Consequently, the
notion of ‘resources’ may have to be reﬁned, possibly by merging it with either the ‘budget’
or the ‘delivery team’, both of which had better support. Second, it can identify gaps in
data collection: providing Figure 3(b) to the stakeholder can lead to the realization that some
relationships were actually important, but that none of the interviews in the sample covered it.
Finally, generalizing this procedure to all pairs of interactions (rather than the ones suggested
in the causal map) can uncover strong support for missing relationships, which could then be
accounted for in the map, thereby making it more comprehensive.

3.3

Using visual analytics at an intermediate stage

The creation of a model for medical decision-making can be a process spanning several years,
as numerous experts have to be consulted and heterogeneous data sources may have to be
linked. During this time, more and/or better data may become available. For example, a
model may have initially been designed on the release 5 of a dataset having blood samples for
5234 patients. Three months later, release 6 of the dataset may become available with 7320
patients, where some previously measured biomarkers have now been measured using more
robust tools. Similarly, a model may be developed for a medical phenomenon that changes as
it is being modelled, such as the Ebola epidemic in Africa.
On the one hand, visual analytics allows the interactive visualization of the new data,
thereby supporting the modellers in ﬁnding the key patterns for the object of study. However,
the complexity and large size of this data can make it diﬃcult to eﬃciently navigating it,
pointing to the need for a guiding framework. On the other hand, conceptual models provide
that guiding framework but can gradually lose their relevance as either the dynamics change or
761

Visual analytics in medical models & simulations

Giabbanelli and Jackson

a better understand of these dynamics is obtained. For these reasons, we previously suggested
that conceptual models and visual analytics should be coupled. This coupling uses conceptual
models to enhance the traditional approach of visual analytics by providing a structure that
supports the analyst in navigating a large search space in a focused way. This navigation will
in turn lead to the discovery of new patterns, or discrepencies between the model and the
framework, leading to an update in the model; we refer the reader to [14] for technical details.
There are several ways to operationalize this coupling, depending on the extent to which visual analytics is guided by a model. At the simplest level, this coupling can readily be integrated
into current practices in STARLIGHT, where conceptual model can be used as a hierarchy. At
the top-level, the model provides the key themes relevant to the domain. At the intermediatelevel, the model speciﬁes how to detect these themes, for example through a list of keywords
possibly combined with a thesaurus to search for variants. Newly acquired data constitutes the
bottom-level. To make sense of that data, modellers can select the top-level themes, which will
permeate through the intermediate-level and eventually select relevant documents.

4

Discussion

In this paper, we presented how visual analytics can beneﬁt modelling for medical decisionmaking by drawing on recent studies that involved a variety of modelling approaches (e.g.,
system dynamics or network modelling). In particular, we showed that visual analytics can
help modellers during all stages concerning conceptual models, from early design to assessment.
As part of this, we highlighted that conceptual models and visual analytics could be mutually
beneﬁcial, with a model guiding the search through complex data, leading to the discoveries
of new patterns that then strengthen the model. This positive feedback loop presents a clear
potential to improve productivity during modelling.
Another avenue that has already been identiﬁed as holding potential for increased productivity within modelling and visual analytics focuses on supporting collaborations. Rather than
situating collaborations within a speciﬁc step of the modelling pipeline (Section 2), our experience suggests that collaboration applies to all parts of the pipeline. Collaboration is indeed a
fundamental component of modelling for medical decision-making. In our experience, this exercise requires interdisciplinary teams (e.g., epidemiologists, geneticists, behavioural scientists)
and also often involves practitioners, patients, or members of the public with whom ﬁndings
from models may be shared. While there are techniques such as paired analytics when the analyst and the ﬁeld specialist can be together, less options are available for large teams that work
in several places and on several time zones. Consequently, the integration of modelling and
visual analytics should also include support for Distributed and Asynchronous Collaboration
(DAC) for interdisciplinary teams. Currently, such support has been centered on oﬀering some
of the following features depending on the visual analytics software:
• Journaling and State Tracking, which are tightly coupled. State tracking is akin
to a version control system for all the artifacts in the modeling process. Journaling is
a combination of a wiki-like, free-form chronological journal and an automated log ﬁle
(e.g., including hyperlinks to contextual notes, artifacts) and serves as documentation
of the modeling process. Both Journaling and State Tracking establish provenance and
reproducibility for various states of the modeling process [7].
• Annotation allows the sharing of context for data visualizations and conceptual models.
Registering them using journaling can help to structure collaboration.
• Whiteboarding is the virtual equivalent of a whiteboard, where documents or visualizations can be shared. This feature exists in many collaborative systems, and it should
integrate well with the aforementioned: snapshots of the whiteboard can be managed
using state tracking, and annotations should be possible.
762

Visual analytics in medical models & simulations

Giabbanelli and Jackson

To support collaborations in visual analytics and modelling requires going beyond these
features. By working on a range of medical decision-making projects with interdisciplinary
teams, we concluded that an ideal collaboration framework in the medical sciences should be:
• Intuitive. The diverse backgrounds of members in an interdisciplinary team stresses the
importance of having a support that is readily usable for all members, without the need
of domain speciﬁc language or skills. For example, several websites help individuals in
managing their personal health records. Anonymised data can be pulled for visualizations,
or modelling health behaviours. A collaborative system developed only by modellers may
not organize data in ways that make sense to the practitioners in the team, but if the
system was only designed for practitioners then medical terms may be present that create
a language barrier with modellers. Therefore, setting usability requirements for a wide
audience is a challenging but essential task.
• Interactive. A typical way to support asynchronous collaborations is to share visualizations as static products that others can comment on. However, this removes the
interactivity that is key to visual analytics. Consequently, a degree of ﬂexibility must
be preserved such that visualizations provide a suggested window into the data but do
not prevent team members from considering alternatives (e.g., varying parameters of the
model and seeing their impact on the visualization).
• Integrative. Large projects may consist of sub-teams which have produced their own
visualizations, using slightly diﬀerent datasets or modelling assumptions. For example,
several regional health authorities may want to look at the ‘big picture’ regarding the
spread of a disease; their models and visualizations could be readily available in reports,
but internal regulations prevent a timely sharing of the data. Such situations point out
the need to directly integrate visualizations by identifying shared parts, and clarifying
competing hypotheses, without accessing the raw data. While this problem has received
abundant theoretical treatment in computing science (e.g., as the problem of combining
classiﬁers [12]), the problem of integrating visualizations remains an important obstacle
on the way to full collaboration.
These three aspects constitute our 3I approach. A software that is 3I-compliant would
allow users to interact with each other along the various stages of the modelling process in an
asynchronous and distributed fashion. We acknowledge that the 3I approach requires a leap
forward given that only a few software packages currently satisfy fundamental aspects such
as journaling or annotating. Nonetheless, we believe that sharing visualizations that are still
ﬂexible and supporting the direct integration of visualizations are long-term objectives that are
well-worth addressing for the research community.

5

Conclusion

Using three case studies, we have demonstrated that visual analytics can be very beneﬁcial to
modelling, regardless of the techniques or speciﬁc medical problem under study. In particular,
we showed that visual analytics can support the conceptual modelling stage and highlighted
that its beneﬁts would depend on when it is incorporated. In conclusion, we believe that the
coupling of visual analytics and modelling is underway, and that it is time to look further by
including the third dimension of collaboration. Our proposed 3I approach (intuitive, interactive,
integrative) highlights some of the needs and challenges for collaborations, thereby generating
essential questions for the development of the next generation of tools.

6

Acknowledgments

The authors wish to thank the Vancouver Institute of Visual Analytics and the Modelling of
Complex Social Systems program for providing facilities. All authors are indebted to Kyle
763

Visual analytics in medical models & simulations

Giabbanelli and Jackson

Melnick for his visualization of the MEND project, to Grace MacEwan for collecting data on
the PHSA report, to Drs Finegood and Matteson for sharing qualitative data regarding MEND,
to Andrew Tudwell and Lydia Drasic for their insight about the PHSA report, and to colleagues
at Cambridge School of Clinical Medicine for providing feedback.

References
[1] P. Brantingham, U. Gl¨
asser, P. Jackson, and M. Vajihollahi. Modeling criminal activity in urban
landscapes. In Mathematical methods in counterterrorism, pages 9–31. 2009.
[2] R. Crutzen and P. J. Giabbanelli. Using classiﬁers to identify binge drinkers based on drinking
motives. Substance use & misuse, 49(1–2):110–115, 2014.
[3] D. T. Finegood, T. Merth, and H. Rutter. Implications of the foresight obesity system map for
solutions to childhood obesity. Obesity, 18(S1):S13–S16, 2010.
[4] P. J. Giabbanelli and R. Crutzen. An agent-based social network model of binge drinking among
dutch adults. Journal of Artiﬁcial Societies & Social Simulation, 16(2), 2013.
[5] P. J. Giabbanelli, P. J. Jackson, and D. T. Finegood. Modelling the joint eﬀect of social determinants and peers on obesity among canadian adults. Theories and Simulations of Complex Social
Systems, pages 145–160, 2014.
[6] P. J. Giabbanelli, T. Torsney-Weir, and V. K. Mago. A fuzzy cognitive map of the psychosocial
determinants of obesity. Applied soft computing, 12(12):3711–3724, 2012.
[7] D. P. Groth and K. Streefkerk. Provenance and Annotation for Visual Exploration Systems. IEEE
transactions on visualization and computer graphics, 12(6):1500–1510, 2006.
[8] J. Heer and M. Agrawala. Design considerations for collaborative visual analytics. Information
Visualization, 7:49–62, 2008.
[9] P. J. Jackson. A framework for software modelling in social science research. PhD thesis, Simon
Fraser University, Burnaby, Canada, 2013.
[10] S. Kandel, J. Heer, C. Plaisant, J. Kennedy, F. van Ham, N. H. Riche, C. Weaver, B. Lee, D. Brodbeck, and P. Buono. Research directions in data wrangling: visualizations and transformations for
usable and credible data. Information Visualization, 10(4):271–288, 2011.
[11] M. Kultys, L. Nicholas, R. Schwarz, N. Goldman, and J. King. Sequence bundles: a novel method
for visualising, discovering and exploring sequence motifs. BMC Proceedings, 8(S2):S8, 2014.
[12] L. Kuncheva. Combining pattern classiﬁers: methods and algorithms. John Wiley and Sons, 2004.
[13] M. Mokhtari, E. Boivin, and D. Laurendeau. Making sense of large datasets in the context of complex situation understanding. In Virtual, Augmented and Mixed Reality. Systems and Applications,
volume 8022 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages 251–260. Springer, 2013.
[14] S. F. Pratt, P. J. Giabbanelli, and J.-S. Mercier. Detecting unfolding crises with visual analytics and conceptual maps: Emerging phenomena and big data. Proceedings of the 2013 IEEE
International Conference on Intelligence and Security Informatics (ISI), pages 200–205, 2013.
[15] Provincial Health Services Authority. From weight to well-being: time for a shift in paradigms?
January 2013.
[16] S. Rossiter, J. Noble, and K. R. Bell. Social simulations: Improving interdisciplinary understanding
of scientiﬁc positioning and validity. J. of Artiﬁcial Societies & Social Simulation, 13(1), 2010.
[17] P. Sacher and C. Swain. The MEND Programme: tackling childhood obesity. British Journal of
School Nursing, 2:4, 2007.
[18] R. G. Sargent. Veriﬁcation and validation of simulation models. In Proceedings of the 37th
conference on Winter simulation, pages 130–143. Winter Simulation Conference, 2005.
[19] I. Vandenbroeck, J. Goossens, and M. Clemens. Foresight tackling obesities: Future choices–
building the obesity system map. Government Oﬃce for Science, UK Governments Foresight
Programme, 2007.

764

