Available online at www.sciencedirect.com

Procedia Computer Science 9 (2012) 1880 – 1889

International Conference on Computational Science, ICCS 2012

An FPGA Implementation of an Investment Strategy Processor
Christoph Starke, Vasco Grossmann, Lars Wienbrandt, Manfred Schimmler
Department of Computer Science
Christian-Albrechts-University of Kiel
24098 Kiel, Germany
{chst, vgr, lwi, masch}@informatik.uni-kiel.de

Abstract
A special purpose processing element is described which can be used to optimize an investment strategy for
ﬁnancial securities. It has been used to conﬁgure the FPGAs of the massively parallel hardware platform RIVYERA.
Using this conﬁguration, the compute intensive part of the technical analysis of ﬁnancial markets can be accelerated
with a speedup of more than 17,000 compared to a high-performance PC.
Keywords: RIVYERA, FPGA, high-performance computing, parallel processing, technical investment strategy

1. Introduction
Modern technical ﬁnancial market analysis is no longer restricted to the observation and prediction of charts [1, 2].
Instead, new methods are coming up that involve computationally intensive tasks as e.g. data mining [3, 4, 5, 6]. The
quality of these new approaches can be measured in terms of an outperformance in comparison to a simple buy-andhold strategy. Due to the extreme high number of mathematical calculations that have to be performed in a limited
time interval, these methods are mostly implemented on supercomputers or on special purpose hardware [7, 8].
In this paper we present an approach of the latter category. Its idea is to perform an exhaustive search for an
optimal set of indicator weights in the space of all possible weights. The required computation steps are described in
Section 2. Since, on the one hand, the search space grows exponentially with the number of indicators, the method
is highly demanding with respect to computing power. However, on the other hand, the same calculations have to
be performed with similar data again and again such that the problem can trivially be performed in parallel. Due to
this fact, the massively parallel FPGA architecture RIVYERA is a promising hardware platform for this particular
problem. Section 3 describes the RIVYERA with its communication structure. The new processing element which
has been multiply implemented on the FPGAs of RIVYERA is explained in Section 4. Section 5 evaluates the speedup
gained by this implementation in comparison to a sequential implementation on a high-performance PC. These values
are measured and based on existing systems. A conclusion is given in Section 6.
1.1. Related work
FPGA-based systems are discussed whenever there is a need to speed up a compute intensive task consisting of
many independent identical operations. Option pricing is an example for such an application in the area of ﬁnancial
marked prediction. There are several approaches to exploit the degree of parallelism provided by an FPGA based
on ﬁnite diﬀerence or Monte-Carlo methods [7, 9, 10]. Another approach is using data mining methods for market
1877-0509 © 2012 Published by Elsevier Ltd. Open access under CC BY-NC-ND license.
doi:10.1016/j.procs.2012.04.206

