Available online at www.sciencedirect.com

ScienceDirect
Procedia Computer Science 108C (2017) 2038–2048

International Conference on Computational Science, ICCS 2017, 12-14 June 2017,
Zurich, Switzerland

Methodology of estimation of achieving regional goals
of sustainable
the basisregional
of program
Methodology
of development
estimation ofon
achieving
goals
and
goal oriented
of sustainable
development
onapproach
the basis of program
and goal oriented approach
Sergey A. Mityagin, Olga B. Tikhonova, Aleksandr I. Repkin
ITMO University

Sergey
A. Mityagin, Olga
B. Tikhonova, Aleksandr
I. Repkin
mityagin.spb@gmail.com,
tikhonova_ob@gmail.com,
airepkin@gmail.com
ITMO University
mityagin.spb@gmail.com, tikhonova_ob@gmail.com, airepkin@gmail.com

Abstract
This paper describes the methodology of estimation of sustainable development of a region on the
basis
of a system of weighted target indicators, adjusted in accordance with goals and tasks of regional
Abstract
This paper describes
the methodology
estimation
sustainable
development
a region on the
management.
The authors
analyze anofexample
of of
practical
application
of theof methodology
in
St.
Petersburg
andofdraw
the conclusions
about an
influence
of objectivewith
indicators
and tasks
subjective
value
basis
of a system
weighted
target indicators,
adjusted
in accordance
goals and
of regional
orientations
residents
on sustainable
the region.application of the methodology in
management.of The
authors
analyze andevelopment
example ofof practical
St. Petersburg and draw the conclusions about an influence of objective indicators and subjective value
© 2017 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V.
Keywords: sustainable
development,
indicative
analysis, monitoring,
regional development, regional management
orientations
of residents
on sustainable
development
ofthe
theInternational
region.
Peer-review under
responsibility
of the scientific
committee of
Conference on Computational Science
Keywords: sustainable development, indicative analysis, monitoring, regional development, regional management

1 Introduction
concept of sustainable development of cities was originally announced in 1987 by the United
1 The
Introduction

Nations World Commission on Environment and Development (Bruntland, 1987) [1] and after that
became
widely popular
among development
researchers, city
leaders
city planners
[2]. Along
with
one of
The concept
of sustainable
of cities
wasand
originally
announced
in 1987
bythat,
the United
Nations
WorldofCommission
and Development
(Bruntland,
1987)
[1] and after
that
the
key issues
the study of on
theEnvironment
cities’ sustainability
is an interpretation
of the
sustainability
concept
became
popular
among
city leaders
city planners
[2]. Along
onefor
of
in
terms widely
of measured
values
andresearchers,
their estimation
in orderand
to identify
and interpret
the with
studythat,
results
the
key issuesofofmanagement
the study of activity.
the cities’Assustainability
is an
of the sustainability
organization
a rule, studies
of interpretation
sustainable development
of cities concept
include
in termsaof
measured
values
and their estimation
in order
to identify
and interpret
thelife,
study
results
for
finding
balance
between
environmental,
economic
and social
components
of a city
while
typical
problems
of sustainable
development
include
urban
sprawl,
vegetationdevelopment
change, changes
in land-use
organization
of management
activity. As
a rule,
studies
of sustainable
of cities
include
and
environmental
deterioration
[2, 3].
finding
a balance between
environmental,
economic and social components of a city life, while typical
problems
of sustainable
development
urban sprawl,
vegetation
change,ofchanges
in land-use
Practically,
the analysis
of regionalinclude
sustainability
is performed
by means
introducing
certain
and
environmental
deteriorationeach
[2, 3].
indicators,
which characterize
of the stated life components of the territory. Presently a large
Practically,
thedevoted
analysistoofdetermining
regional sustainability
is of
performed
of introducing
certain
number
of studies
an optimal set
indicatorsbyofmeans
sustainable
development
are
indicators,For
which
characterize
each
of the
stated Xulin
life components
the [2]
territory.
large
available.
example,
Li Shen,
Jared
M. Kyllo,
Guo in theof
work
presentPresently
a concepta of
an
integrated
of sustainability
of a city
development,
upon of
systems
of other
indicators are
[4number of indicator
studies devoted
to determining
an optimal
set of built
indicators
sustainable
development
12].
However,
the existence
of a system
of Kyllo,
indicators
is not
sufficient
condition
for stability
available.
For example,
Li Shen,
Jared M.
Xulin
Guoalways
in the awork
[2] present
a concept
of an
integrated
indicator
of sustainability
development,
built upon
systems
of othercomponent
indicators is[4-a
of
the region,
especially
in the case of aitscity
intensive
development.
Another
necessary
12]. However, the existence of a system of indicators is not always a sufficient condition for stability
of the region, especially in the case of its intensive development. Another necessary component is a
1877-0509 © 2017 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V.
Peer-review under responsibility of the scientific committee of the International Conference on Computational Science
10.1016/j.procs.2017.05.060

	

Sergey A. Mityagin et al. / Procedia Computer Science 108C (2017) 2038–2048

2

methodology of estimation of compliance between the goals of regional development and the
conditions of its sustainability, taking into account mutual influence of regional processes.
The authors consider the experience of analysis of regional development and ensuring its
sustainability in conditions of program and goal oriented approach application to medium-term
planning. For this purpose the authors apply the original methodology of estimation of goals
achieving. It should be noted that the methodology may be applied not only to planning of urban
sustainable development, but to analysis of efficiency of goals achieving by developing territories, in
whole.

2 Program and goal oriented approach to regional management
The program and goal oriented approach to management began to develop after application of
system approach and system analysis to the field of decision-making, planning and budgeting. Owing
to the research of R. Ackoff, W. King, D. Cleland, H. Simon and other scientists, who were working
in the 1970s on the theoretical and practical issues of organizational structure, goal setting, planning
and control, as well as project management, the program and goal oriented approach to management
had been developed [13]. The program and goal oriented activity is a system of measures, proposed
and assigned for implementation, which are intended to provide achievement of a single goal,
determined in advance. The defined program and goal oriented activity may be applied in various
spheres; however, it was noted [14] that this approach to managements is most often used in
problematic situations, when the solution cannot occur through the natural development of the region
and the problem itself tends to aggravate. Actually, this methodology may be considered as program
and goal oriented approach or program and goal oriented method [13,15].
The establishment of mechanisms to control execution of measures and assessment of their
effectiveness is an inherent part of the program and goal oriented approach. In the case of
implementation of regional level programs such mechanism may be realized by monitoring systems,
built for the purpose of observation of values dynamics of the indicators characterizing the situation in
the region [16]. The formation of indicators hierarchies should be carried out simultaneously with the
formation of the structure of the region development goals, in order to ensure the possibility of the
goals achievement control. To solve the problem of simultaneous formation of goals and indicators in
practice, criteria of the goals achievement are being introduced. The questions of estimation of such
threshold values are beyond the scope of this article, however, the authors can point that the most
common method of estimation is the method of analogies, according to which similar values of
indicators in different regions presumably reveal the similarity of the situations in these regions. This
method transfers the problem of uncertainty, associated with the inaccuracy of the input threshold
values, to the problem of completeness of a set of indicators used for monitoring. Researchers in this
field specify the existence of two groups, which can unofficially include criteria of program goals
achievement: controllable and non- controllable [17]. Thus, a hierarchical system of indicators can be
a tool for monitoring achievement of regional goals, and each of the indicators can have the following
types of values: target value – a threshold value of an indicator, which have to be achieved to reach the
program goal; current value – a value of an indicator at the current time; plan value – a threshold
value of an indicator, which have to be achieved within the current planning period.

3 Special aspects of monitoring of indicators of regional
development
It is evident that monitoring of achievement of the regional development goals is based on
collection of background information about the situation in the region, which implies the creation of

2039

Sergey A. Mityagin et al. / Procedia Computer Science 108C (2017) 2038–2048

2040	

an information resource on the basis of reliable data from all available sources. The results of
monitoring of indicators of regional development can be presented at three levels. At the first, the
highest level, personalized information is presented to the top official decision makers. At the second
level, the activity of collegial management bodies is supported by means of presenting personalized
information to members of the working groups and expert committees. The third level supports the
activity of field experts. This ensures an integrated approach to the interpretation of the results of
monitoring of the regional development and to support of management activity for program measures
implementation.
Individuals and collegial decisionmakers
(commissions, committees, officials)

Information and analytical support of
management activities
·

Management decisions
·

analytical notes, proposals for
management decisions, plans, and
programs of research

Decision support Information system

Activities for
supporting decisionmaking by territorial
authorities

Development and maintenance of
information-analytical systems
·
·

The measures implementation by
responsible officials

collection, processing, verification,
storage and analysis of information;
analysis and forecasting of the
situation in the region

Key indicators of life activity in the
territory
First type sources:
state executive bodies and public
organizations
Second type sources:
Internet, social data

planning and development of
preventive measures in the city and
its separate areas

Life activity of the territory as a
territorial entity of the Russian
Federation
Impact on complex socio-economic
phenomena and processes

Fig. 1. The cycle of management of the territory and social activity
A management cycle of any process, including socioeconomic one, is always a closed cycle (see
the Figure 1), which involves: definition of management goals; comprehensive analysis and evaluation
of socioeconomic conditions; elaboration of possible scenarios of the territory development or solution
of other life problems of the territory; decision making; organization of implementation of the decision
through all kinds of management activities; monitoring of the decision implementation and its
adjustment if necessary. The basic requirements for management decisions are validity and timeliness.
Compliance with these and other requirements may be achieved through a complex of measures
ensuring the full implementation of the assigned tasks [18]. The strategic level includes definition of
problems in various spheres of regional life, analysis and forecasting of its development in the longterm horizon, and long-term programs and plans of measures. The operational level includes
monitoring and analysis of the current state of life in the region, operational management and
adjustment of the implementation of the plans.

4 Methodology of estimation of achieving management goals
The level of achievement of the target value is a quantitative expression of the effectiveness of the
implemented measures. Blocks of indicators characterize trends in the territory development and can

	

Sergey A. Mityagin et al. / Procedia Computer Science 108C (2017) 2038–2048

4

be used to assess the quality of this work in accordance with the methodology of calculation of
integral assessments of achievement of target values in indicator groups. The evaluation of the level of
achievement of the target value for the indicator should be carried out sequentially in several stages:
 evaluation of actual (current) level of achievement of target value for each indicator;
 evaluation of actual (current) level of achievement of target value for each theme block of
indicators;
 complex evaluation of achievement of target value for a set of theme blocks, ensuring achievement
of a certain goal.
From the perspective of the applied methods, all the indicators may be divided into two groups:
 increased indicators – growth of the indicator’s value characterizes the improvement of the state of
the monitored process;
 decreased indicators – growth of the indicator’s value characterizes the degradation of the state of
the monitored process.

I tmax and I tmin - the maximum

and minimum possible values (the
range of changing) of the indicator.
practical
calculations,
In
considering the actual accuracy of
determination of the current indicator
values, as a rule, it is sufficient to
take   0,0001.
In the case of negative values of
target or current values of the
increased indicators, the following
options are possible:
1) I N  0 .
Having these values of the
indicator the level of achievement of
the target value can be determined by
the formula:

I

2  t
 N (It )   I N
 0
2) I N  0 .

, I t  2I N

(4)

, I t  2I N

Having these values of the
indicator the level of achievement of
the target value can be determined by
the formula:

 It

 N (It )   I N
 0

, It  0
, It  0

Fig. 2. The algorithm for calculating the levels of achievement of the target values

(5)

2041

Sergey A. Mityagin et al. / Procedia Computer Science 108C (2017) 2038–2048

2042	

The level of achievement of the target value for a group of indicators can be calculated through the
levels of achievement of the target values by individual indicators, which in turn depend on the current
and target value of the indicator. For the increased indicators, the level of achievement of the target
(plan) value is

 N (I t ) 
where

IN

– a specified target value of the indicator;

It
,
IN

It

(1)

– a current value of the indicator.

For the decreased indicators, if the current value of the indicator exceeds the target value more
than twice (if I t  2 I N ), the level of achievement of the target value is assumed to be zero:
otherwise, it is

 N ( I t  2I N )  0 ,
 N (I t  2I N )  2 

It
.
IN

(2)
(3)

When the target value of an indicator is close to zero or equals zero, the problem of dividing by
zero occurs during the computation process. To resolve this problem, the target value, which is close
or equal to 0, is replaced with the value   

| I tmax  I tmin | 0 .

The general algorithm for calculating the levels of achievement for the increased and decreased
indicators having various possible (positive, negative or close to zero) numerical current and target
values of the indicator is presented in the Figure 2.Assessment of the level of achievement of the target
values for a group of indicators is based on the use of elements of vector analysis. Input information
for the solution of the stated problem is acquired from the levels of achievement of the target values
for each indicator included in the corresponding group. The general result for a group of indicators is a
vector   ( N1 ( I t ),...,  Nn ( I t ) , where n - the number of indicators in the group. The  components

are the levels of achievement of the target values by each indicator.
A target vector is a unit vector obtained by the normalization of the target value of the indicator with
respect to its value. The level of achievement of the target values for a group of indicators is
determined by comparison of the current vector, which has the current levels of achievement of the
target values by each indicator as its components, and the target (unit) vector. Along with that, the
numeric value of the level of achievement for the group of indicators can be calculated as the ratio of
the projection of the current vector to the target vector to the length (norm, modulus) of the target
vector. The aggregate level of achievement of the target values of the group of indicators can be
defined by the pair:  N

the length of the projection of the vector of current values to a unit vector

(or simply the length of the vector  ) and the cosine of the angle between the vectors of the target and
current values. Thus, assessment of the level of achievement of the target values for a group of
indicators consists in the definition of the relative position of the vector of current values and the
vector of target values.

5 The study of sustainability indicators using the example of
St. Petersburg
The described methodology was introduced in St. Petersburg as a part of the organization of
information-analytical support of local public authorities’ activity dedicated to achieving the goals of

	

6

Sergey A. Mityagin et al. / Procedia Computer Science 108C (2017) 2038–2048

regional policy, which were identified in a number of Decrees of the President of the Russian
Federation from May 7, 2012:
 № 596 «On a long-term state economic policy»;
 № 597 «On measures of state social policy implementation»;
 № 598 «On improving state policy in the healthcare sphere»;
 № 599 «On measures of state policy implementation in the education and science spheres»;
 № 600 «On measures on providing affordable and comfortable housing and improved quality of
housing utilities to the citizens of the Russian Federation»;
 № 606 «On measures of demographic policy implementation in the Russian Federation».
These Decrees were selected to illustrate the application of the methodology of estimation of
achieving management goals. From each of the Decrees the authors selected indicators, which clearly
highlight the overall state of the goal achievement. In the fields «Economy» (Decree № 596) and
«Science and education» (Decree № 599) the indicators «The total number of new and upgraded highperformance workplaces (units) » and «The share of domestic expenditures on research and
development in GRP (gross regional product) in the period of the report (%) », respectively, were
chosen. The dynamics of the indicators in the period of monitoring is shown in the Figure 3.
1200000

5

1000000

4

800000

3

600000

2

400000

1

200000
0

2012
Plan

2013

2014
Current

2015
2016
Target

0

2012

2013
Current

2014
Plan

2015

2016
Target

a)
b)
Fig. 3. The dynamics of indicators in the fields: a) «Economy» ) and b) «Science and
education»
According to the Figure 3-a, there is some economic growth associated with the creation of new
workplaces. Along with that, in St. Petersburg the value of this indicator is traditionally higher than
the plan value, but does not reach the target value. It should be noted that a significant excess of the
target value of the indicator in the field of science and education is a distinctive phenomenon in Saint
Petersburg. It is primarily connected with a high concentration of educational and scientific centers in
the city. The dynamics of the economic indicator virtually coincides with the dynamics of the science
and education indicator, which also was increasing until 2014. This may indicate the presence of
common external economic factors determining the dynamics of the stated indicators. However, these
factors are not monitored while monitoring the achievement of the goals of the Decrees.
In the field «Social services» (Decree № 597) the indicator «Real wage growth in relation to the
2011 level (%)» was chosen. As values of this indicator are measured in relative units, the state of the
field will be illustrated by the indicators «The cost of a minimum set of food products (rubles per
month)» and «Annual average index of consumer prices (%)», which are monitored by centralized
statistics service of the Russian Federation [19].
According to the Figure 4, the indicators characterizing the social sphere have a negative trend in
the part of personal incomes of citizens. According to the Figure 4-b, the index of consumer prices,

2043

Sergey A. Mityagin et al. / Procedia Computer Science 108C (2017) 2038–2048

2044	

which had been declining prior to this, since 2012 goes to increase and reaches a maximum value of
the whole period of observation.
160

5000

120

140

4000

115

120

3000

110

2000

105

1000

100

100
80
60

0

40

95

20
0

2012

2013
Current

2014
Plan

2015

The cost of a minimum set of food products
(rubles per month)

2016
Target

Annual average index of consumer prices (%)

a)
b)
Fig. 4. The dynamics of indicators in the field «Social services»: a) «Real wage growth in relation to
the 2011 level (%)» and b) related indicators
It is particularly noticeable against the background of increasing cost of the minimum set of food
products. Thus, despite the high target values, the citizens of the city have become poorer. In the field
«Healthcare» (Decree № 598) the indicators «Mortality from diseases of the circulatory system (per
100 thousand population), units» and «Mortality from neoplasms (including malignant) (per 100
thousand population), units» were selected as socially important for St. Petersburg. The dynamics of
the indicators in the period of monitoring is shown in the Figure 5.
760

300

740

250

720

200

700

150

680

100

660

50

640
620

0
2012

2013
Current

2014
Plan

2015

2016
Target

-50

2012

2013

Current

2014

Plan

2015

2016

Target

a)
b)
Fig. 5. The dynamics of indicators in the field «Healthcare»: a) Mortality from diseases of the
circulatory system (per 100 thousand population) and b) Mortality from neoplasms (including
malignant) (per 100 thousand population)
According to the Figure 5, the indicators, characterizing the healthcare field as a whole, achieve
the plan and target values. A deviation from the normative values is sufficiently small. It should be
noted that these indicators are the indicators of the «decreased» type. This means that an increase of
the indicator’s value characterizes the degradation of the situation. Thus, the Figure 5-a shows that the
value of the indicator in 2016 according to plan and in fact reached the target value.
In the field «Housing and housing utilities» (Decree № 600) the indicators «The housing
affordability ratio» and «The ratio of the number of families who have purchased or received

	

8

Sergey A. Mityagin et al. / Procedia Computer Science 108C (2017) 2038–2048

affordable and comfortable housing during the period of the report to the number of families wishing
to improve their housing conditions (%)» were selected. The dynamics of the indicators in the period
of monitoring is shown in the Figure 6.
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0

70
60
50
40
30
20
10
2012

2013

2014

Current

2015

Plan

2016

0

2012

2013

2014

Current

Target

2015

Plan

2016

Target

a)
b)
Fig. 6. The dynamics of indicators in the field «Housing and housing utilities»: a) The housing
affordability ratio and b) The ratio of the number of families who have purchased or received
affordable and comfortable housing during the period of the report to the number of families wishing
to improve their housing conditions
According to the Figure 6, the indicators characterizing the field of housing, in general, have a
positive trend. In 2015 there has been a significant decline in the housing affordability ratio, which
means an increased opportunity for housing purchase by citizens. This effect against the background
of the decreasing purchasing power of the population is achieved primarily due to the introduction of a
large number of economy-class housing. The Decree № 600, in addition to other indicators, provides
such an indicator as «The volume of commissioning of economy-class housing», which sets a policy
of intensive construction of this type of housing and providing low prices for it.
76

family
health
material welfare
job
children
moral values
friendship
love
life
confidence in future
mutual understanding
happiness
kindness

75,5
75
74,5
74
73,5
73
72,5
72
71,5

0
2012 2013 2014 2015 2016
Current

Plan

Target

5

10

15

20

25

30

Hierarchy of values (the proportion of respondents, who have
indicated the main value of their life in an open question), % of the
number of replies

a)
b)
Fig. 7. The dynamics of indicators in the field «Demographics and values»: a) Life expectancy at
birth (years) and b) Hierarchy of values

2045

Sergey A. Mityagin et al. / Procedia Computer Science 108C (2017) 2038–2048

2046	

On the other hand, in St. Petersburg there is dilapidation of housing, which is shown by the Figure
6-b and is determined by the increase in the number of families waiting for housing improvement. In
the field «Demographics and values» (Decree № 606) the indicator «Life expectancy at birth (years)»
was selected. The dynamics of the indicator in the period of monitoring is shown in the Figure 7-a. As
noted above, the study of sustainability must be based not only on the values of indicators of general
statistics, but also on a subjective factor of opinions of the city citizens. For this reason, in addition to
the indicators from the Decrees, we consider the structure of values (moral, cultural, personal) of St.
Petersburg citizens [20]. According to the Figure 7-a, the life expectancy at birth in St. Petersburg
exceeds the target value, corresponding to the average value for the Russian Federation [19].
However, despite the increasing plan values, the actual observed values do not reach the plan and, in
general, do not change over the entire period of implementation of the Decrees. This fact means that
implementation of the Decrees does not have a significant impact on the improvement of the quality of
life of the population, although it helps to solve a number of specific problems of the field. Partially
this situation can be explained through examining the structure of values of St. Petersburg citizens,
which is shown in the Figure 7-b. It is important to note that almost 50% of the value structure is
related to the categories of «family», «material welfare» and «health». Thus, in the context of personal
values, the indicators of the groups «Housing and housing utilities», «Healthcare» and «Social
services» are the most important for the population. It may be noted that in general the set of
indicators from the Decrees corresponds to the structure of values, which was relevant at the time of
the Decrees adoption. The most negative trend may be observed among the indicators, which are
directly connected to the value «material welfare».

Demographics

Economy
2,5
2
1,5
1
0,5
0

Housing and
housing…

1,05
1
Social services

0,9
Healthcare

Plan

0,85

0,8

Science and
education

Current

0,95

Target

2012

2013

Current - Plan

2014

2015

2016

Current - Target

a)
b)
Fig. 8. The results of integral assessment of achievement of the Decrees goals: a) Assessment of the
level of achievement (expressed in numerical values) and b) Cosine of the deviation angle
The Figure 8 shows a shift of the levels of achievement of the Decrees goals to the field of science
and education and housing. At the same time there is a lack of the goal achievement in the fields of
economy and social services. It is also important to highlight an almost complete coincidence of the
actual values with the plan values, which may indicate the influence of regional policy and regional
characteristics on the achievement of common goals. As regards the cosine of the angle of deviation
from the target vector, presented on the Figure 8-b, such deviation is practically absent between actual
and plan values, but it is more significant between actual and target values. Along with that, the
distance from the target vector increases from 2014, which also may be explained by the regional
characteristics and the emergence of new problematic situations, which require correction of the
original goals.

	

Sergey A. Mityagin et al. / Procedia Computer Science 108C (2017) 2038–2048

10

6 Acknowledgments
This paper is financially supported by The Russian Scientific Foundation, Agreement #14-21-00137.

7 Discussion
From the perspective of the environment, the concept of development of sustainability is naturally
related to the notion of quality of life. However, as noted in the study [2], despite the subjective nature
of the notion of quality of life, classic approaches to estimation of sustainability do not study the
perceived quality of the urban environment. Along with that, as noted in several studies [21], the
perceived quality of life depends on the needs of the population of the territory, which are formed not
only through perceiving the surrounding environment, but also through cultural and historical features
of the territory development. It should be noted that the processes of formation of needs with
consideration of the values of the population currently are not amenable to direct planning, as they are
more defined by the expectations of the population than by the influence of some external factors.
Therefore, the proposed methodology is not applicable to indicators of subjective perception of life
quality, and this is an area for further investigations of the authors.

References
1.

Bruntland, G. Our Common Future: The World Commission on Environment and Development;
Oxford University Press: New York, NY, USA, 1987.
2. Li Shen, Jared M. Kyllo, Xulin Guo. An Integrated Model Based on a Hierarchical Indices
System for Monitoring and Evaluating Urban Sustainability // Sustainability 2013, 5, 524-559
(ISSN 2071-1050)
3. Sustainable Seattle. Sustainable Seattle Indicators of Sustainable Community: A Report to
Citizens on Long Term Trends in Their Community; Sustainable Seattle: Seattle, WA, USA,
1993.
4. Local Government Management Board. Sustainability Indicators Research Project: Report of
Phase 1, June 1994; Local Government Management Board: Luton, UK, 1994.
5. Environment Canada. Environmental Indicator Selection Criteria; State of the Environment
Directorate, Environment Canada: Ottawa, Canada, 1994.
6. Regional Municipatiliy of Hamilton-Wentworth. Signposts on the Trail to Vision 2020:
Sustainability Indicators for the Hamilton-Wentworth Region -Participants Workbook; Regional
Municipality of Hamilton-Wentworth: Hamilton, Canada, 1995.
7. Lee, Y.; Huang, C. Sustainability index for Taipei. Environ. Impact Assess Rev. 2007, 27, 505–
521.
8. London Sustainable Development Commission (LSDC). A sustainable development framework
for London. Available online: http://www.london.gov.uk/mayor/sustainable-development/
susdevcomm_framework.jsp (accessed on 10 May 2012).
9. British Columbia Commission on Resources and Environment, British Columbia Round Table
on the Environment and the Economy, Fraser Basin Management Board (Canada), National
Round Table on the Environment and the Economy (Canada). State of Sustainability: Urban
Sustainability and Containment; British Columbia Round Table on the Environment and the
Economy: Victory, British Columbia, Canada, 1994.
10. Maclaren, V.W. Developing Indicators of Urban Sustainability: A Focus on the Canadian
Experience; ICURR Press: Toronto, Canada, 1996.

2047

2048	

Sergey A. Mityagin et al. / Procedia Computer Science 108C (2017) 2038–2048

11. Leicester City Council. Indicators of Sustainable Development in Leicester: Progress and Trends;
Leicester City Council: Leicester, UK, 1995.
12. Diener, E.; Suh, E. Measuring QOL: Economic, Social, and Subjective Indicators. Soc. Indicat.
Res. 1997, 40, 189–216.
13. Simon H.A. On the Concept of Organizational Goal // Administrative Science Quaterly. 1964.
June.
14. Magdanov P.V. Integration of structural-functional and program-targeted management
approaches // Ars Administrandi. 2010. № 2
15. Mintzberg H. The Rise and Fall of Strategic Planning. Free Press and Prentice Hall International.
New York, 1994.
16. Zakharov Y.N. The methodology to evaluate the development of ICT and e-government in St.
Petersburg and the task of monitoring the implementation of activities of plan Strategy of
information society development / / Internet and Modern Society: Proceedings of the XIII AllRussian united conference. Saint Petersburg, 19 - 22 October 2010 - St., 2010. P. 192 - 194.
[Electronic resource] http://conf.infosoc.ru/2010/thesis/PDF/192-194_Zakharov.pdf
17. L.A. Valitova, V.L. Tambovtcev. Regional policy priorities in Russia: empirical evidence //
Russian-European
Centre
for
Economic
Policy
(RECEP)
URL:
http://www.recep.ru/files/documents/policy_priorities_ru.pdf
18. Kurlov A.B., Petrov V.K. The foundations of information analytics. M. Lawyer, 2009. - 350 p.
19. The Russian Federation. Federal state statistics service. URL: http://www.gks.ru.
20. St. Petersburg Information and Analytical Cetre. URL: http://www.iac.spb.ru.
21. Schwartz S.H. Universals in the content and structure of values: Theoretical advances and
empirical tests in 20 countries // M.Zanna (ed.). Advances in experimental social psychology.
Vol. 25. New York: Academic Press, 1992. P. 1-65.

