Available online at www.sciencedirect.com

Procedia Computer Science 9 (2012) 606 – 614

International Conference on Computational Science, ICCS 2012

Multiscale Modeling Framework for Lung Airways Inflammation
Ramana M. Pidaparti1, 2,*, Kittisak Koombua1, and Kevin R. Ward2, 3
1
2

Department of Mechanical Engineering, Virginia Commonwealth University, Richmond, Virginia, USA
Reanimation Engineering Science Center, Virginia Commonwealth University, Richmond, Virginia, USA
3
Department of Emergency Medicine, Virginia Commonwealth University, Richmond, Virginia, USA

Abstract

Better understanding of the acute/chronic inflammation in airways is very important in to order avoid lung
injuries for patients undergoing mechanical ventilation. Inflammation is a complex and dynamic process triggered
by many mechanisms within the lung and involves multiple scales starting from organ level to cellular level. In this
study, a multiscale modeling framework is being developed to address the cellular inflammation due to mechanical
ventilation at the organ level. The developed multiscale modeling framework is illustrated through a case study to
investigate inflammatory responses at the alveolar sac during mechanical ventilation. The simulation results showed
that high tidal volume (1400 cc) during mechanical ventilation can cause tissue injury due to high concentration of
activated immune cells. These results can be further extended to investigate the effects of mechanical ventilation
parameters.
Keywords: Inflammation; Multiscale Modeling; Simulations; Acute Lung Injury; Ventilation

1. Introduction
Inflammation has been recognized as a major integral component for most of the acute and chronic
diseases. Inflammation can be initiated within the body as an innate process or by external factors such as infections
and trauma. Inflammation is a complex and dynamic process, and involves nonlinearity and stochasticity. Without
the inflammation, the harmful stimuli cannot be removed and the healing process cannot occur. However, an overexpression or under-expression of inflammatory responses can lead to severe consequences, such as Multiple Organ
Dysfunction Syndrome (MODS), which is characterized by sequential organ failure. Acute lung injury (ALI) is
typically one of the first manifestation of MODS. It can be triggered by external stimuli such as pathogens or from
_____________
* Corresponding author. Tel.:+1-804-827-3742; fax:+1-804-827-7030.
E-mail address:rmpidaparti@vcu.edu.

1877-0509 © 2012 Published by Elsevier Ltd. Open access under CC BY-NC-ND license.
doi:10.1016/j.procs.2012.04.065

Ramana M. Pidaparti et al. / Procedia Computer Science 9 (2012) 606 – 614

607

inflammatory mediators produced from various other processes ranging from other damaged organs or to blood
transfusions to even the biomechanical forces of mechanical ventilation itself.
Inflammatory responses in the airway induced by mechanical ventilation are complex processes dealing with a
length scale that ranges from ~ 1 nm for cytokine proteins to ~ 1 cm for the airway. Responses in one length scale
highly depend on responses in another length scale. Airway displacements from the organ level affect the
distributions of stresses and strains in the tissue level. These stresses and strains in the tissue level affect the level of
proinflammatory cytokines [1] at the cellular level. The inflammatory responses at the cellular level, in turn, alter
the mechanical properties of airway tissue in the tissue level; e.g., stiff smooth muscle layer in the asthma airway
[2]. The alteration of material properties of airway tissue leads to a change in material properties of the airway in the
organ level. It is clear that no single model can cover a factor of 107 in a spatial scale. A practical approach is to
develop many models that cover a limited range of the spatial scale and to develop a technique that links these
models together to investigate airway inflammation induced by mechanical ventilation.
Due to the complexity of biomechanics problems, several investigators are developing multi-scale models, see for
example, Refs. [3, 5]. Fredberg and Kamm [5] reviewed the stress transmission in the lung from cell to organ level.
There is no multiscale modeling of lung inflammation due to mechanical ventilation in the existing literature. In this
study, a multiscale modeling framework is being developed to address the cellular inflammation due to mechanical
ventilation at the organ level. The developed multiscale modeling framework is demonstrated through a case study
to investigate inflammatory responses at the alveolar sac during mechanical ventilation.

2. Multiscale Inflammation Modeling
The multiscale modeling framework being developed in this study uses the organ-level model to drive
inflammatory responses at the cellular level. The inflammatory responses from the cellular-level model, in turn,
modulate changes in material properties at tissue and organ levels. During each specific time step, the airway
displacements at each location in the organ-level model are first determined by performing a finite element analysis
with the fluid-solid interaction (FSI) algorithm. The results of the airway displacements at each node of the organlevel model are then used to define the applied boundary conditions for the tissue-level model. Strains in each tissue
layer are calculated employing the finite element analysis. These strains in each layer are then transferred to the
cellular-level model. Change in the recruiting rate of the activated immune cells is associated with the transferred
strains from the tissue-level model.
The number of healthy and damaged cells from the cellular-level model, in turn, affects the material properties of
the airway tissue at the tissue-level model. The changes in material properties at the tissue-level model are then
transferred to the organ-level model. The airway displacements at each location in the organ-level model are then
determined using these new material properties. These procedures are repeated until the specific time period is
reached. Each of the modeling techniques at organ, tissue and cellular levels are briefly described below.
Organ Level: The organ level models focuses on the organ, say either whole lung or airways or part of the lung –
alveolar sacs and investigates the response due to mechanical ventilation. The response is calculated through fluidsolid interactions algorithm of the organ level model, and by continuum models of fluid and solid mechanics
approaches. The governing equations for airflow are Navier-Stokes equations on a moving mesh with
incompressible flow and use the principles of mass and momentum conservation. The governing equations for
movement of airways due to mechanical ventilation are the time-dependent structural equations. The numerical
solutions of the interaction between airflow and airway walls during mechanical ventilation was implemented using
two software packages, ANSYS and ANSYS CFX [6].
ANSYS is a general-purpose finite element (FE) software for structural modeling, and ANSYS CFX is generalpurpose computational fluid dynamics (CFD) software for modeling fluid flows. The governing equations for
transient airflow are Navier-Stokes equations on a moving mesh with the assumption of incompressible flow was
used. These equations govern the principles of mass and momentum conservation and are given as,

608

Ramana M. Pidaparti et al. / Procedia Computer Science 9 (2012) 606 – 614

Conservation of mass

ρg ∂
g ∂t

( )

∂
g + ρg
∂x j

x ·
∂~
§
¨u j − j ¸ = 0
¨
∂t ¸¹
©

(1)

Conservation of momentum

ρg ∂

(
g ∂t

)

g ui + ρ g

∂
∂x j

ª§
∂~
xj · º
∂p
∂ 2 ui
¨
¸
μ
u
−
u
=
−
+
«¨ j
i»
2
∂t ¸¹ ¼
∂xi
∂xj
¬©

(2)

~
xi represents the moving mesh location,

g is the metric tensor determinate of the
transformation, i.e., the local computational control-volume size, ρ g is fluid density, p is fluid pressure, μ is
fluid viscosity, and u is fluid velocity.
In these equations,

The governing relations for movement of the airway wall during mechanical ventilation are the time-dependent
structural equations and are described below as,
Equation of motion

∂σ ij
∂x j

+ Fi = ρ

∂ 2 ui
∂t 2

(3)

Constitutive relations

σ ij = C ijkl ε kl
In the equation above,

σ

is the stress in each direction, F is the body force,

C is the elasticity tensor, and ε is the strain in each direction.

(4)

ρ is density, u is the displacement,

The fluid-structure interaction (FSI) procedures began by solving the flow equations to obtain fluid pressure.
Structural equations are then solved for the displacement using the fluid pressure as an external force. The flow
equations are solved again to obtain the fluid pressure after the structural displacement changes the fluid boundaries.
This loop continues until both fluid pressure and airway displacement converge for each time period. Additional
details can be found in a study by Koombua et al. [7].
Tissue Level Model: The tissue level model focuses on the airway tissue morphology and material properties, and
investigates the stress/strain response due to airway displacements from the organ level model. The standard finite
element method (FEM) approach was used in order to solve equations for stress analysis. More details about the
tissue level model can be found in a recent study by Pidaparti and Koombua [8]. The strain levels obtained from the
tissue level model are used in the cellular level model.
Cellular Level Model: The cellular level model focuses on the biochemical processes at the cellular/subcellular
levels, and is based on discrete modeling using cellular-automata (CA) modeling. The CA model was composed of
two species: epithelial cell and immune cell. The CA model was constructed on two-dimensional square lattice
where each lattice site represented one epithelial cell. The immune cell was mobile and can move from one lattice to
another. Therefore, the square lattice was like the tissue of immobile epithelial cells which was patrolled by the
mobile immune cells. The CA was updated synchronously based on specific rules. The ratio of the number of
damaged cells to healthy cells was obtained through the cellular-level model. The details of the CA model are given
in Ref. [9].

Ramana M. Pidaparti et al. / Procedia Computer Science 9 (2012) 606 – 614

609

3. A Case Study
In order to demonstrate the multiscale modeling framework described in the earlier section, a simplified
model of the alveolar sac from the literature [10] was chosen for the computational simulation. The alveolar sac has
a diameter of 500 μm. The alveolar duct diameter was 200 μm and the entrance length was 100 μm [10]. The
alveolar sac was assumed to be homogeneous and isotropic material with the Young’s modulus of 80 kPa and
Poisson’s ratio of 0.45 as it is composed mainly of a single layer of an alveolar epithelium. The boundary conditions
at the tissue-level model were airway displacements at each location from the organ-level model. The strain levels in
the epithelial layer from the tissue-level model are then used to study inflammatory responses at the cellular level.
The cellular automata (CA) model for inflammatory responses due to strain levels was implemented using
MATLAB. The simulation was performed on a lattice of 44 × 44 sites which represented a tissue area of 0.88 ×
0.88 mm2, a total surface area of the simplified alveolar sac model. The initial population of immune cells was 40
cells. The periodic boundary conditions were used for the simulation. The initial conditions for the CA model were
randomly placed immune cells. Only one immune cell can occupy one lattice site. Each epithelial cell was randomly
assigned its lifespan. The simulations were carried out with the following physiological assumptions: 1) only healthy
epithelial cells are able to divide and 2) strain levels do not affect inactivated immune cells.
The ratio of the number of damaged cells to healthy cells was obtained through the CA model of cellular
inflammatory responses. This ratio, in turn, affected the change in the Young’s modulus of elasticity of the alveolar
sac tissue. The stiffness for the injured tissue was about 25% less than that of the normal tissue [11]. The decrease in
the stiffness of the injured tissue was assumed to be proportional to the ratio of the number of damaged cells to
healthy cells. The time steps for the organ- and cellular-level models were 0.5 s and 4 h, respectively. The coupling
time between the organ-level, tissue-level, and cellular-level models was 4 h. Figure 1 shows the computational
domains and exchanging information between the organ-, tissue-, and cellular-level models for an investigation of
inflammatory responses at the alveolar sac during mechanical ventilation.
The simulations were carried out to investigate inflammatory responses at the alveolar sac during mechanical
ventilation. The simulations were performed until 100 iterations of coupling time, about 400-h real time. The flow
waveform from mechanical ventilation was a constant flow waveform with flow rate of 60 l/min. A mechanical
ventilation setting of 1400-cc tidal volume was chosen for the analyses. All the simulations were carried out on a
desktop Dell computer with dual processors with no load balancing between different types of analysis. The transfer
of data between organ and tissue levels is carried out manually rather than automatically exchanged between
softwares, which will be considered in the future.

610

Ramana M. Pidaparti et al. / Procedia Computer Science 9 (2012) 606 – 614

Organ level model

Change in
material
properties

Airway
displacement
Tissue level model
Alveolar
epithelium

Strain levels
Cellular level model
Change in
material
properties

Degree of
inflammation

Number of
damage and
healthy cells

Figure 1. A schematic diagram of the multiscale model of inflammatory responses at the alveolar sac during
mechanical ventilation based on the multiscale modeling framework

Ramana M. Pidaparti et al. / Procedia Computer Science 9 (2012) 606 – 614

611

4. Results and Discussion
The strain distributions in the alveolar sac are shown in Figure 2. The lowest strain was observed at the
beginning on the sac. The average strain in the sac was about 26-33%. The pressure in the sac expanded the sac
during the inhalation. Figure 3 shows inflammatory responses at the alveolar sac during mechanical ventilation. The
number of immune cells increased with increasing time step due to the strain levels from mechanical ventilation.
This increase in activated immune cells damaged healthy cells. These damaged cells in turn induced more activated
immune cells and these activated immune cells caused more damage cells. The number of healthy, damaged, dead,
immune cells, and strain levels as a function of time step is shown in Figure 3. As can be seen from this figure, the
number of immune cells increased with increasing time step. This increase in immune cells caused damage cells to
dramatically increase. This increase in damage cells increased the strain levels in the alveolar sac because the tissue
was less stiff during the injury. The high strain levels, in turn, induced more activated immune cells. Overall, the
simulation results support the clinical practice observation that high tidal volume can cause ventilator-associated
lung injury (VALI) at the alveolar sac due to high level of activated immune cells.
Table 1 summarizes the results obtained from organ, tissue and cellular level models. It can be seen from Table 1
that at the organ level, a maximum of 55% von-Mises strain is seen and this is comparable to those obtained
experimentally by Sinclair et al. [12], who showed that the strain ranges of 15%-65% occur in the airway diameters
of 200-2500 μm. From the tissue level model, the maximum strain occurs in the epithelial layer. Using these strains
in the cellular model, a ratio of 0.6-1.8% of damaged to healthy cells was obtained. A summary remark of major
findings from each of the results at various levels is given in Table 1.
Deformed alveolar sac

Original alveolar sac

Sac strain

Figure 2. Airway strain in the alveolar sac at the end of inhalation for airflow rates of 60 L/min with a constant flow
waveform

Ramana M. Pidaparti et al. / Procedia Computer Science 9 (2012) 606 – 614

Healthy cell

612

2000
1900
1800
1700
0

25

50

75

100

Damage cell

Timestep
40
20
0
0

25

50

75

100

75

100

75

100

75

100

Dead cell

Timestep
150
100
50
0
0

25

50

Immune cell

Timestep
400
200
0
0

25

50

Strain level (%)

Timestep
150
100
50
0
0

25

50
Timestep

Figure 3. The number of healthy, damage, dead, immune cells, and strain levels as a function of time step

613

Ramana M. Pidaparti et al. / Procedia Computer Science 9 (2012) 606 – 614

Table 1. Summary of the simulation results from the multiscale model of the airway inflammation induced by
mechanical ventilation

Level
Organ

Level
Tissue

Cellular

Output
55% maximum von Mises strain, 21%
maximum 1st principal strain, and 20%
change in sac diameter;
Previous studies by Sinclair et al [12] in
the airway diameter of 200-2500 μm
showed that maximum circumferential
strains were in the ranges of 15-65%

Significance
Might cause tissue
injury due to high
strain levels (see
cellular level)

Remarks
Finding is specific
to this geometry.
This might be
different when the
whole alveoli is
considered (need
further studies)

Input
Airway
displacement from
the organ level and
material properties
of each layer from
previous
experiments
Strain levels from
the tissue level and
CA rules based on
previous
experiments

Output
55%
maximum
von Mises strain in
the epithelial layer

Significance
Might cause tissue
injury/damage (see
cellular level)

Remarks
Further studies on
the
effect
of
geometry
and
viscoelasticity
property
are
needed

Ratio of damaged
to healthy cells
was about 0.61.8%

Might cause tissue
injury due to high
concentration
of
activate immune
cells

Need to correlate
the strain level
with degree of
inflammation and
tissue properties

5. Concluding Remarks
The framework for developing a multiscale model of the lung airway inflammation was described. The multiscale
model of the airway consists of the organ-level, tissue-level, and cellular-level models. This multiscale model of the
airway was employed to study inflammatory responses at the alveolar sac during mechanical ventilation. The
simplified model of the alveolar sac was chosen for the analysis. The airway displacements from the organ-level
model were transferred to the tissue-level model for distributions of strain levels. The strain levels in the epithelial
layer from the tissue-level model were then transferred to the cellular-level model for inflammatory responses due to
strain levels. The injury at the cellular level, in turn, modulated change in material properties of the tissue at the
tissue and organ levels. The simulation results showed that high tidal volume (1400 cc) during mechanical
ventilation can cause tissue injury due to high concentration of activated immune cells. At low tidal volume during
mechanical ventilation (700 cc) can prevent tissue injury during mechanical ventilation and can mitigate tissue
injury from the high tidal volume ventilation. The information obtained from this multiscale model could provide
useful information on VALI and the new ventilation strategies could be developed to prevent VALI.

Acknowledgements
The authors thank the U. S. National Science Foundation for sponsoring the research through a grant CMMI0969062.

614

Ramana M. Pidaparti et al. / Procedia Computer Science 9 (2012) 606 – 614

References
1.

Pugin J and Oudin S, 2006. In: Dreyfuss D, Saumon G, and Hubmayr R D (eds), Ventilator-induced lung injury. Taylor & Francis
Group, New York, NY.

2.

Ma X, Cheng Z, Kong H, Wang Y, Unruh H, Stephens N L, and Laviolette M, 2002. Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol 283,
L1181-L1189.

3.

Tawhai, M., Bischoff, J., Einstein, D., Erdemir, A., Guess, T. and Reinbolt, J., IEEE Engineering in Medicine and Biology Magazine,
May/June 2009, pp. 41-49.

4.

Wall, W. A., Wiechert, L., Comerford, A., and Rausch, S., International Journal for Numerical Methods in Biomedical Engineering,
Vol. 26, pp. 807-827, 2010.

5.

Fredberg, J.J. and Kamm, R. D. Annu. Rev. Physiol., Vol. 68, pp. 507-541, 2006.

6.

ANSYS. Ansys 10.0 user guide. Canonsburg: ANSYS Inc.; 2005.

7.

Koombua, K., Pidaparti, R.M., Worth Longest, P. and Ward, K. Molecular and Cellular Biomechanics Journal, Vol. 6, No. 4, pp. 203216, 2009.

8.

Pidaparti, R., and Koombua, K., 2011, Molecular & Cellular Biomechanics (MCB), 8(2), pp. 149-68.

9.

Koombua, K., 2009, “Ph.D. Thesis, Virginia Commonwealth University, Richmond, VA.

10. Dailey H L and Ghadiali S N, 2007. Journal of Aerosol Science 38, 269 – 288.
11. Makhsous M, Venkatasubramanian G, Chawla A, Pathak Y, Priebe M, Rymer W Z, and Lin F, 2006. The Journal of Spinal Cord
Medicine 31, 88-96.
12. Sinclair S E, Molthen R C, Haworth S T, Dawson C A, and Waters C M, 2007. American Journal of Respiratory and Critical Care
Medicine 176, 786-794.

