Procedia Computer Science
Volume 51, 2015, Pages 2864–2868
ICCS 2015 International Conference On Computational Science

Pairwise genome comparison workﬂow in the Cloud using
Galaxy
Oscar Torreno1∗, Michael T. Krieger1†, Paul Heinzlreiter1‡, and Oswaldo Trelles2§
1

RISC Software GmbH, Hagenberg, Austria
oscar.torreno@risc-software.at,michael.krieger@risc-software.at,paul.heinzlreiter@risc-software.at
2
Department of Computer Architecture, Malaga, Spain
ortrelles@uma.es

Abstract
Workﬂows are becoming the new paradigm in bioinformatics. In general, bioinformatics problems are solved by interconnecting several small software pieces to perform complex analyses.
This demands certain expertise to create, enact and monitor such tools compositions. In addition bioinformatics is immersed in the big-data territory, facing huge problems to analyse
such amount of data. We have addressed these problems by integrating a tools management
platform (Galaxy) and a Cloud infrastructure, which prevents moving the big datasets between
diﬀerent locations and allows the dynamic scaling of the computing resources depending on the
user needs. The result is a user-friendly platform that facilitates the work of the end-users while
performing their experiments, installed in a Cloud environment that includes authentication,
security and big-data transfer mechanisms. To demonstrate the suitability of our approach we
have integrated in the infrastructure an existing pairwise and multiple genome comparison tool
which comprises the management of huge datasets and high computational demands.
Keywords:

1

Introduction

Nowadays, the cost of obtaining genome-scale molecular and biomedical data continues to drop
rapidly. Managing and analysing such ever-growing datasets is becoming a crucial issue, since
most academic labs do not have the required computing and storage facilities.
Cloud Computing appears as a good solution due to its ﬂexibility in providing computational
resources at an attractive price. The price is aﬀordable because users can adapt the resources
∗ Implemented

and ported the workﬂow to Galaxy, and main contributor in the manuscript preparation.
and conﬁgured Galaxy in the cloud.
‡ Contributed in the manuscript preparation (cloud description).
§ Work supervision and fruitful comments/contributions to the workﬂow’s design as well as manuscript writing/reviewing.
† Installed

2864

Selection and peer-review under responsibility of the Scientiﬁc Programme Committee of ICCS 2015
c The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V.
doi:10.1016/j.procs.2015.05.449

Pairwise genome comparison workﬂow in the Cloud using Galaxy

Torreno, and Trelles

to their demand (elasticity), paying for what they actually need, and with no need to maintain
a large infrastructure.
To analyse the mentioned generated data, researchers need to link, combine, and query the
data using several diﬀerent tools, what is commonly referred as workﬂows or pipelines. Particularly, Comparative Genomics workﬂows have been one of the main focuses in bioinformatics
in the recent years. The sequencing of new genomes makes fundamental to study their relation
with the already studied ones. Current sequences comparison software does not always address
handling big datasets, because data to be processed is retained in RAM during analysis (for
example Gepard [4], MUMmer [5] and LASTZ [3]). We present a case study of a pairwise and
multiple sequences comparison workﬂow tackling this problem.
Furthermore, at the moment running tools in the Cloud requires speciﬁc knowledge of
the computational infrastructure and the command line invoking style. We believe that it is
essential to facilitate the end-users with no computer experience to take proﬁt of the advantages
oﬀered by the Cloud Computing model. Therefore, we are using Galaxy as a user-friendly tool
to execute workﬂows.
This paper presents our developments to examine the potential and feasibility of integrating
Galaxy in a Cloud environment, making the exploitation of the available resources simpler and
more eﬃcient, and allowing users to execute tasks requiring a signiﬁcant amount of resources.
Additional distinguishing characteristics of the presented work are the user authentication and
transfer of big datasets through grid computing technologies.

2

Related work

There exist some workﬂow management systems in bioinformatics such as Taverna [7] but they
have limitations as they only provide a subset of features including workﬂows creation, publication and execution; also, they consist in desktop applications using pretty old technologies
being replaced at the moment; and their performance seriously degrades when the number of
processes grows up. The Galaxy [2] workﬂow and data management Web platform, appears as
a very good option possesing all the mentioned features, and tackling the mentioned issues. In
[1] they study the integration of Taverna and Galaxy each one complementing the other.

3
3.1

Methods
Cloud Computing Infrastructure

The Cloud Computing infrastructure used is a small community Cloud installation running
OpenStack, which is composed by 3 nodes interconnected through an Ethernet 10Gbps network. Its core functionality has been extended with some functionality provided by the Grid
community.

3.2

Data storage and transfer

Ceph is the base distributed ﬁle system of our cloud setup, because it implements the interfaces
deﬁned by the OpenStack Swift storage services. As the majority of Cloud infrastructures,
OpenStack oﬀers object containers and persistent volumes. In our installation the object containers are securely accessible through GridFTP and the persistent volumes are mounted as
external disks to the instances.
2865

Pairwise genome comparison workﬂow in the Cloud using Galaxy

3.3

Torreno, and Trelles

User Authentication

User credentials are stored using the Lightweight Directory Access Protocol (LDAP) thus allowing for an easy and central management. The OpenStack users are organized in groups, which
contain users from diﬀerent organizations, who are for example working on a shared project.
The access rights are assigned on groups level and represented within the central LDAP tree
of the installation, which is subsequently queried during authentication.

3.4

Galaxy

Galaxy is a platform which enables publishing of scientiﬁc workﬂows. Although it was initially
developed for genomics research it is largely domain agnostic and is now used as a general
bioinformatics and biomedicine workﬂow management system.
Galaxy enables users with no programming experience to graphically construct their workﬂows by interconnecting basic tools. These workﬂows can subsequently be stored for reuse or
shared with other researchers, addressing the issue of having reproducible experiments.
In this work we are using a customised Galaxy Cloud installation, which aims to facilitate
the work of the researchers. We are working to achieve a better integration (more details in the
Section 7).
3.4.1

Data transfer

Due to data size, Galaxy separates the data transfer (either upload or download) from workﬂow
execution. Users request data transfers by selecting the “Get Data → Upload File” menu entry.
Galaxy provides a Web upload, where the actual content could be pasted, or a ﬁle could be
selected; transfer via a URL endpoint, from where Galaxy will retrieve the content internally;
and FTP upload, where Galaxy checks the user FTP folder. The transfer status and progress
are displayed to the end-user in a following dialog.
Galaxy automatically determines the data type of the uploaded ﬁle for some speciﬁc types
and also allow to select it when is not automatically deducted. Such metadata is useful to ﬁlter
the ﬁles matching the available services.
3.4.2

Deﬁning a workﬂow

Galaxy incorporates a section to graphically deﬁne an analysis workﬂow by interconnecting the
involved tools. Once deﬁned, the user can determine if it will be private or public.
To include tools, the users need to generate XML tool wrappers, where the parameters and
the actual command invocation line are deﬁned. Then, the administrator installs these wrappers
to make them available to the general public. In order to decouple the tool installation from
the administrator, these tools are stored in a central tool repository called Galaxy ToolShed
from where users can directly install them.
3.4.3

Invoking an existing workﬂow

At this point, the users search for the speciﬁc workﬂow to be executed and then ﬁll the required
input parameters. Once Galaxy receives the job submission its internal scheduler launches all
the tasks which do not have unsatisﬁed dependencies.
At the end of the job submission, Galaxy shows the list of generated tasks (including their
statuses). An important point to emphasise here is that the users only need to download the
results they are interested in, what contrasts with the former Web Services strategies.
2866

Pairwise genome comparison workﬂow in the Cloud using Galaxy

4

Torreno, and Trelles

Case study: Pairwise sequences comparison workﬂow

The pairwise sequences comparison workﬂow reported in [6] has a modular organisation (see
Figure 1) removing repetitive actions when processing collections of data sets.

Figure 1: Workﬂow overview. This is a graphical representation of the steps to be described in
the next paragraphs.
The workﬂow creates two dictionaries, one for each sequence. The dictionaries are composed
by a sorted set of words of length K (K-mers) together with their occurrence positions along the
sequence. Using the dictionaries, exact K-mers matches determine the starting points (hits) of
the ﬁnal alignments. These hits are sorted by diagonal (deﬁned as position in query sequence
minus position in reference sequence) and oﬀset, optionally ﬁltered by proximity and ﬁnally
used to produce the alignments (High-scoring Segment Pairs, HSPs).

5

Results

The previous workﬂow has been executed in the Galaxy Cloud installation explained in this
document. It is important to note that in the current deployment conﬁguration the Galaxy
web server and the tasks execution share the same machine (instance with 4 VCPU and 4 GB
of RAM). The workﬂow was tested using 4 Mycoplasmas sequences of around 1Mbp each and
two mammalian chromosomes of around 150Mbp each. The rationale of the experiments was
not a speed-up study but the corroboration of the correct execution of the analyses.
The dictionary together with the seed points sorting are the most time-consuming steps.
As improvements, in an all-versus-all comparison of a set of sequences, we calculate in parallel
the sequence dictionaries since there are no dependencies; we avoid the re-calculation of the
sequences dictionaries because they remain stored on disk; and we also perform several pairwise
comparisons in parallel since each one is independent from the others.
To execute the test, we followed the data uploading and execution processes as described
in Sections 3.4.1 and 3.4.3 respectively. The data uploading took about 2 seconds for the
4 Mycoplasma genomes and 6 minutes for the 2 mammalian chromosomes. The data was
moved from the University of Malaga, Spain facilities to the Cloud Computing infrastructure
in RISC-Hagenberg, Austria. The execution for all Mycoplasma comparisons (i.e. 6 pairwise
comparisons) was of less than 2 minutes and less than 2 hours for the mammalian chromosomes
pairwise comparison.

6

Conclusions

The reported use case workﬂow can be used to analyse sequences of diﬀerent sizes. However, its
distinguishing characteristics are noticed for larger sequences, specially for mammalian genomes
in the range of Gbp but also for bacteria in the Mbp range. The state of the art methods
mentioned in the introduction have two problems with them, the ﬁrst problem is the memory
consumption, and the second problem is the high execution time. The presented workﬂow works
2867

Pairwise genome comparison workﬂow in the Cloud using Galaxy

Torreno, and Trelles

also quite well with small sequences (e.g. genes whose average size is of 10-15Kbp in human
genome), experiencing execution times comparable to the other methods.
We believe that Cloud infrastructures are the most suitable and ﬂexible solutions for the
computational needs of small bioinformatics research groups because of two main reasons, ﬁrst
because they require minimal computational know-how from the end-user in terms of installation, administration and scripting, and second because the resources can be scaled according
to the user’s needs what is good for all-against-all comparisons performed by the presented
workﬂow.
Galaxy makes easy the way users execute their analysis workﬂows, because it provides an
user-friendly web interface ubiquitously accessible over the internet, which abstracts the user
from the speciﬁcs of the Cloud infrastructures. Obviously Galaxy introduces some overhead
(around 1 minute compared to the command line execution of the use case workﬂow), but we
think it will be negligible when we change the conﬁguration to run tasks in a separate cluster.

7

Future work

We are currently working to integrate the LDAP authentication and GridFTP data transfer
with Galaxy. In addition, we plan to separate the Galaxy web server from the execution cluster
itself by using Galaxy DRMAA-based scheduler interface1 .

Acknowledgements
This publication is supported by the European Union’s Seventh Framework Programme for
research, technological development and demonstration through the IAPP project Mr. SymBioMath, grant agreement number 324554.

References
[1] Mohamed Abouelhoda, Shadi A Issa, and Moustafa Ghanem. Tavaxy: Integrating taverna and
galaxy workﬂows with cloud computing support. BMC bioinformatics, 13(1):77, 2012.
[2] Jeremy Goecks, Anton Nekrutenko, and James Taylor. Galaxy: a comprehensive approach for
supporting accessible, reproducible, and transparent computational research in the life sciences.
Genome Biology, 11(8), August 2010.
[3] RS Harris. Improved pairwise alignment of genomic dna. 2007. PhD diss., The Pennsylvania State
University, 2007.
[4] Jan Krumsiek, Roland Arnold, and Thomas Rattei. Gepard: a rapid and sensitive tool for creating
dotplots on genome scale. Bioinformatics, 23(8):1026–1028, 2007.
[5] Stefan Kurtz, Adam Phillipy, Arthur L Delcher, Michael Smoot, Martin Shumway, Corina Antonescu, and Steven L Salzberg. Versatile and open software for comparing large genomes. Genome
Biology, 5(2), 2004.
´
[6] Andr´es Rodr´ıguez Moreno, Oscar
Torre˜
no Tirado, and Oswaldo Trelles Salazar. Out of core computation of hsps for large biological sequences. In Advances in Computational Intelligence, pages
189–199. Springer, 2013.
[7] Tom Oinn, Mark Greenwood, Matthew Addis, M Nedim Alpdemir, Justin Ferris, Kevin Glover,
Carole Goble, Antoon Goderis, Duncan Hull, Darren Marvin, et al. Taverna: lessons in creating a
workﬂow environment for the life sciences. Concurrency and Computation: Practice and Experience,
18(10):1067–1100, 2006.
1 https://wiki.galaxyproject.org/Admin/Conﬁg/Performance/Cluster#Runner

2868

Conﬁguration

