Procedia Computer Science
Volume 51, 2015, Pages 2107–2116
ICCS 2015 International Conference On Computational Science

Cellular Automata-based Anthropogenic Heat Simulation

∗

Michael Wagner1 , Vaisagh Viswanathan1 , Dominik Pelzer1 , Matthias Berger2 ,
and Heiko Aydt1
1

TUM CREATE, 1 CREATE Way, #10-02 CREATE Tower, Singapore 138602
2
Future Cities Lab, SEC, Singapore.

Abstract
Cellular automata (CA) models have been for several years, employed to describe urban
phenomena like growth of human settlements, changes in land use and, more recently, dispersion
of air pollutants. We propose to adapt CA to study the dispersion of anthropogenic heat
emissions on the micro scale. Three dimensional cubic CA with a constant cell size of 0.15 m
have been implemented. Simulations suggest an improvement in processing speed compared
to conventional computational ﬂuid dynamics (CFD) models, which are limited in scale and
yet incapable of solving simulations on local or larger scale. Instead of solving the NavierStokes equations, as in CFD, only temperature and heat diﬀerences for the CA are modeled.
Radiation, convection and turbulence have been parameterized according to scale. This CAbased approach can be combined with an agent-based traﬃc simulation to analyse the eﬀect of
driving behavior and other microscopic factors on urban heat.
Keywords: CA, Traﬃc Simulation, Heat Simulation, Urban Heat

1

Introduction

A signiﬁcant amount of energy consumed in large cities can be attributed to traﬃc. For example, more than one ﬁfth of the total energy consumption in Singapore can be attributed
to transportation [1]. Despite the advent of electric vehicles in recent years, the majority of
vehicles in use today are still conventional Internal Combustion Engine Vehicles (ICEV) which
are known for their low energy eﬃciency. Approximately only 17-21% of energy [2] stored in
gasoline is converted into power at the wheels. Heat emitted by traﬃc is thus a contributor to
the Urban Heat Island (UHI) eﬀect [3].
Although there are studies that investigate the impact of traﬃc on CO2 emissions [4], there
is relatively little work on heat emission by traﬃc and the contribution to the UHI eﬀect.
Heat emissions have been studied in the context of underground car parks [5] as well as on
a city-scale using relatively crude macroscopic models [6]. However, microscopic models that
∗ This work was ﬁnancially supported by the Singapore National Research Foundation under its Campus for
Research Excellence And Technological Enterprise (CREATE) programme.

Selection and peer-review under responsibility of the Scientiﬁc Programme Committee of ICCS 2015
c The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V.

doi:10.1016/j.procs.2015.05.480

2107

CA-based Anthropogenic Heat Simulation

Wagner, Viswanathan, Pelzer, Berger and Aydt

describe the underlying processes of heat emissions do not exist yet. Existing methods, based on
Computational Fluid Dynamic (CFD) models [7], while detailed, are computationally expensive
and cannot be used on a large scale at the required resolution (centimeter range) and thus are
not suitable for large-scale microscopic analysis. Current eﬀorts to gain a better understanding
of the complex process of traﬃc heat emissions are hampered by the limitations of existing
methods in analysing the larger scale eﬀects of local changes. For example, it is impossible to
study the eﬀect on urban heat of a large-scale (or even a small-scale) conversion of ICEVs to
electric or autonomous vehicles.
In order to study traﬃc heat emissions, a suitable model is needed. Cellular Automata (CA)
may oﬀer a solution to this problem. CAs are space and time discrete ﬁnite state machines
(FSM) that operate on a set of cells. Some kind of spatial relationship is introduced to deﬁne a
neighborhood between the cells. Every time a cell is updated, its new state is determined by the
neighborhood state of all cells. Such a decentralized mechanic allows to model even non-linear
systems.
Stephen Wolfram famously argued that many complex phenomena such as ﬂuid dynamics
are beyond the description of traditional mathematics and should be simulated by simple computer programs like one-dimensional CA [8]. Due to their ability to produce a fair amount of
complexity, CAs are also used to describe a variety of physical processes which cannot be easily
described with traditional models. CA-based solutions have been applied to a broad range of
topics, including, but not limited to, simulation of ﬁre spreading in buildings [9, 10], ﬂooding
in cities [11], dispersion of pollutants [12] and traﬃc [13].
In this paper, we introduce a novel computational approach to microscopically model the
heat eﬀect of traﬃc using a CA-based approach, coupled with an agent-based simulation of the
traﬃc. The agent-based model is used to simulate how individual agents (vehicles) accelerate
and decelerate. In addition to classical agent-based traﬃc simulations, we not only simulate the
driving behaviour (acceleration, deceleration) but also all vehicle components (such as the drivetrain and engine) that are relevant for heat emissions. Dispersion of heat emitted by a vehicle
is simulated by the CA model which distinguishes between diﬀerent kinds of heat transfer. We
also demonstrate the unique advantages that the proposed model oﬀers by analysing the impact
of driving style on traﬃc heat emmissions.

2

Related Work

The Urban Heat Island eﬀect [3] describes how heavy urbanization of cities can signiﬁcantly
inﬂuence local temperature levels. Asphalted streets and concrete buildings store large amounts
of heat by absorbing solar radiation. At night time stored energy is released into the environment, keeping the temperature at a higher level than in more rural areas. For example, in the
case of Singapore, temperature diﬀerences between urban and rural areas can amount up to
7◦ C [1]. While the built environment is generally the most prominent contributor to the UHI,
streets and road going traﬃc have a measurable impact as well.
There have been numerous studies on energy balance models to provide a way of modeling
energy ﬂuxes in urban places [14]. These models vary in the scale of the area covered. Oke [15]
for instance modeled thermal emissions at a macroscopic level to compare man-made and natural energy ﬂow on a city scale. This work is based on the fundamental law of conservation of
energy, which states that energy cannot be lost or gained.
Ksaibati et al. [16] consider the spatial distribution of heat in the pavement as a result of
meteorological factors like solar radiation. A network-based model of heat dissipation inside
pavement layers using a ﬁnite diﬀerence mesh is proposed. Similar to a CA, the pavement layer
2108

CA-based Anthropogenic Heat Simulation

Wagner, Viswanathan, Pelzer, Berger and Aydt

is modeled in the form of a grid where the thermal energy is propagated between neighboring
nodes.
The work done by Prusa et al. [17] makes an attempt to model the eﬀect vehicles have on
the environment in a comprehensive way. It features the most important energy ﬂows between a
vehicle and the environment, which consists of an asphalt layer and a dissipative air mass above
it. They propose a numerical model, which is used to gather information about the quantity
of energy ﬂuxes between vehicle and environment, rather than about the spatial or temporal
distribution of energy. Likewise, work done by Fujimoto [18] has a similar premise, but chooses
to focus entirely on the road surface heating and does not regard the air layer. Both models
are intended to examine the inﬂuence of vehicles on road conditions in a winter climate.

3

Computational Model

We are interested in modeling the heat emissions generated by vehicles. Furthermore, we are
interested in modeling how the heat emissions aﬀect the environment, i.e., how heat emitted by
a vehicle is dispersed in the environment. For this purpose, we need two kinds of models: (1) a
traﬃc model that includes all relevant vehicle components (i.e., those components that generate
heat) as well as driving behaviour components that describes the acceleration and deceleration
behaviour as this will inﬂuence the energy consumption and thus the heat emissions of individual
vehicles; (2) a model of the environment that includes the various physical processes relevant
for describing heat dispersion. In this paper, we focus on the computational modeling part.
A detailed discussion on the physics behind it is not within the scope of this paper and will
appear elsewhere.

3.1

Vehicle Model

Acceleration and deceleration behaviour is very important in the context of simulating how
much heat is generated by a moving vehicle. There are a number of standard driving behaviour
models (referred to as car-following models) described in the literature that are typically used
to simulate acceleration and braking of individual vehicles. These models ensure that realistic
patterns of acceleration and braking are captured by the simulation. They typically directly
or indirectly calculate the acceleration that needs to be applied by a vehicle for moving at the
driver’s preferred speed while considering other vehicles in the proximity; in particular, the
vehicle directly ahead. Examples of such models are the intelligent driver model [19] and the
Gipps’ driver model [20].
For the work presented in this paper, we use the Gipps’ driver model. The Gipps’ model
works on the idea that a vehicle accelerates towards its preferred speed at a rate not exceeding
its maximum acceleration. In a normal scenario (free ﬂow) it approaches this velocity asymptotically. As the distance to the vehicle in front decreases (congested scenario), it decelerates
to ensure that a minimum safety distance is maintained. The reaction time of the driver is also
a parameter of the model and is assumed to be a constant for all vehicles.
Given the acceleration/deceleration behaviour generated by the Gipps’ model, the energy
generated by the vehicle and dissipated to the environment can be calculated. Ideally, the total
energy generated by a vehicle in one time-step of the simulation would be the sum of the change
in kinetic energy of the vehicle during this time-step and the energy lost due to friction and air
resistance. However, due to the ineﬃciency of ICEV engines that are the subject of this study,
a signiﬁcant portion of this energy is lost through radiation and convection from the engine,
exhaust and cooling system. The engine is generally maintained at a constant temperature by
2109

CA-based Anthropogenic Heat Simulation

Wagner, Viswanathan, Pelzer, Berger and Aydt

Figure 1: Physical processes in the cellular automata, viewed from the side. Cell and car overlays
demonstrate origin and direction of energy input into the system. Additionally examples are
given for direction of environmental energy propagation: convection, conduction, free convection
and sun radiation
the cooling and exhaust system that redirects this extra heat to the environment in the form of
radiation and convection. In cases where the vehicle is decelerating, the kinetic energy lost by
heating vehicle’s brake disc and is dissipated to the environment in the form of brake radiation
and convection. We assume that the heating eﬀect of brake radiation 1 , and cooling system
radiation on the environment is negligible. This is because they are distributed over too many
cells to have a signiﬁcant eﬀect on cell temperatures compared to the other components. The
relatively low average temperatures of the cooling system and brake discs leads to potentially
very low radiation energy. It can be computed, but is physically irrelevant as it usually amounts
to changes of not more than a fraction of a degree per cell. Additionally, radiation of these
components is not, or only to a small part, directed onto the pavement, where it is measurable
in our simulation. The remaining part leaves the boundaries of the simulated space through the
air, which again only takes up a minor part of radiation heat. In summary, there are six ways in
which the vehicle contributes to urban heating: air drag, rolling friction, braking, engine heat,
exhaust heat and convective cooling. These are shown ﬁguratively in Figure 1.

3.2

Environment Model

Besides the vehicle based components there are also certain environment based factors that
aﬀect urban heat (as are also shown in Figure 1). Energy is constantly added to the system even
in the absence of vehicles, in the form of solar radiation which causes the heating up of asphalt
cells. Conduction causes heated asphalt cells to dissipate energy to their cooler neighbours. Air
cells are aﬀected by three processes: diﬀusion, free convection and turbulent mixing. Diﬀusion
is modeled using a Finite Diﬀerence Model [21]. Free convection is the process by which hotter,
less dense air rises up and cooler, denser air moves downwards. This process is modeled in the
simulation by considering each vertical column of air separately. The average temperature of
this column is used to determine the rate at which it rises based on the temperature diﬀerence
with the boundary cells. Thus, hotter columns of air may move up by several cells in a single
step while less hot columns may take several seconds to rise by a few cells. The ﬁnal process,
1 Brake

2110

radiation, however, does result in the lowering of brake disc temperature and is thus modeled.

CA-based Anthropogenic Heat Simulation

Wagner, Viswanathan, Pelzer, Berger and Aydt

450

15

Vehicle Underside

Legend
environment

135

vehicle
engine

15
75

30

240

30

75

450
15

exhaust
tires

Street Surface

brakes
135

cooling system

15
75

15

260

15

75

Figure 2: Raster representation of a vehicle: surface under the vehicle with parts of varying
temperatures (top) and raster of a vehicle at surface level where only the tires have direct
contact to the asphalt (bottom). Distances shown are in centimeters.
turbulent mixing, takes place due to air being pushed by vehicles moving in the environment.
This process causes a homogenous mixing of air at a rate much faster than natural diﬀusion
and is modeled by increasing the diﬀusion constant of the aﬀected cells in proportion to the
amount of turbulence. Figure 1 summarizes all the vehicle and environment based factors that
are considered in the proposed model.

3.3

Cellular Automata Implementation

A CA model is one in which space and time are discrete. In each time step, the values of all cells
are updated synchronously based on a set of rules and the values of cells in their neighborhood.
In order to project the energy released by a vehicle into the environment, we use a rasterized
representation of the vehicle. All components necessary for the heat simulation are represented
in form of CA cells and are used as an overlay for the CA model (see Figure 2). At any point
in the simulation, the cells of the CA which are occupied by the vehicle can be determined
by combining the vehicle raster model with the vehicle location obtained from the agent-based
traﬃc model. The vehicle-related rules are used to determine the power transferred by the
vehicle to the diﬀerent cells of the vehicle raster model at a time step of the simulation using
the current velocity and acceleration of the vehicle. Cooling and exhaust convection are diﬀerent
from the other rules in that they also aﬀect cells outside the immediate area occupied by the
2111

CA-based Anthropogenic Heat Simulation

Wagner, Viswanathan, Pelzer, Berger and Aydt

vehicle itself. Cooling convection is simulated to aﬀect one layer of cells in front of the vehicle.
Exhaust convection aﬀects a region in proportion with the speed of the vehicle.
Table 1: Implemented Rules of the CA Model.
Vehicle-related Rules
Environment-related Rules
rolling friction
solar radiation
brake convection
heat conduction between asphalt cells
engine radiation
conversion of cell energy into temperature
engine convection
homogenous mixing due to turbulence
exhaust radiation
free convection of hot air
exhaust convection
cooling convection
The CA is updated in each step of the simulation by the application of the vehicle and
environment related rules in the following order: (1) Solar radiation rules that add a certain
power to all the asphalt cells based on the temperature and size of the asphalt cells; (2) Vehicle
based rules add a certain power to the cells (air and asphalt) occupied by the vehicle based on
the rasterization shown in Figure 2; (3) Conductive heat exchange between asphalt cells adds
(or subtracts) the heat based on temperature of neighbouring asphalt cells; (4) Diﬀusive heat
exchange between air cells adds (or subtracts) the heat based on temperature of neighbouring
air cells; (5) Change temperature of each cell of the CA-based on the total power received
(calculated in steps (1) to (4)) over a time step of the simulation and the heat capacity and
size of the cell; (6) For the air cells, turbulence due to vehicle movement results in an increase
of the diﬀusion coeﬃcient for all the aﬀected air cells; (7) Free convection which causes hotter
vertical columns of air to move up based on their average temperatures.
The accuracy and performance of the model is substantially inﬂuenced by two factors: the
spatial and temporal resolution. Depending on the focus of the experiments, the CA has to
have cell sizes between 0.1 m and 1 m. Cells larger than that lack the accuracy to simulate
temperature diﬀerences between tire tracks and the rest of the road. If they are too small, then
the computational cost increases more rapidly than the quality of the results. In this study, we
use a resolution of 15 cm.
Temporal resolution is a more critical factor. Despite the low timestep size of 100 ms, for
a CA with 15 cm spatial resolution, vehicles may “jump” between timesteps. For instance, a
vehicle moving at 15 m/s would cover 1.5 m or 10 cells in a single time step. In order to ensure
that the simulation does not collapse due to this jumping, vehicle position interpolation is done.
So, if the vehicle moves from position x1 to x2 , the energy is divided evenly across all the cells
between x1 and x2 .

4

Experiments

The purpose of the simulation experiments performed in this study is to ﬁrst validate the
proposed CA-based model and, subsequently, demonstrate the unique capabilities of the model
in analysing the eﬀect of microscopic factors like driver behavior. For this, we make use of
the simple setup shown in Figure 3, modeling traﬃc on a 100 m segment of road. The ﬁrst
experiment considers only a single vehicle whereas the following experiments examine a number
of vehicles moving in sequence. Each simulation conﬁguration is run a single time because we
2112

CA-based Anthropogenic Heat Simulation

spawn area

Wagner, Viswanathan, Pelzer, Berger and Aydt

One-lane Road

driving direction

Warm-up Distance: 100m

Distance covered by Cellular Automaton: 100m

Figure 3: The setup of the vehicle experiments. (Illustration not to scale)

Energy Balance

600

120

Energy in kW seconds

Friction Power in kW

140

100
80
60
40
20
0
1000

energy in the CA
energy in vehicles
energy outow

1100

1200

1300

1400

1500

Simulation Time in Seconds

(a) Energy Balance

1600

Power Output per Vehicle Component

500
400
300
200
100
0

air drag rolling engine engine exhaust exhaust cooling
friction radiation conv. radation conv.
conv.

(b) Power Output per Vehicle Component

Figure 4: Left: The energy inﬂow and outﬂow of a simple single vehicle scenario. All the energy
dissipated by the vehicle is accounted for in the CA. Right: The total power output of each
component of the vehicle’s heat output, accumulated over the experiment run.
aim to demonstrate the model. Experiments to learn about the system itself are out of the
scope of this paper and subject to further research.

4.1

Validation of the Model

According to the law of conservation of energy, the change in energy in an isolated system
should equal the diﬀerence between the energy added to the system and the work done by it.
In order to quantitatively validate the proposed model, we ﬁrst consider a scenario where a
single vehicle moves across the area of study at 20 m/s. 2 . Figure 4a compares the total energy
generated by the vehicle, i.e., sum of kinetic energy, frictional energy, air resistance and engine
eﬃciency losses, with the heat energy added to the environment through radiation, convection
and conduction. The overlapping lines indicate that they are equal until the point where the
vehicle exits the environment. The mismatch towards the end of the simulation is because the
vehicle is only partially in the area of study. In the Gipps Model, a vehicle only asymptotically
approaches its preferred acceleration. This is reﬂected in the slope of the energy curve: as the
vehicle reaches its maximum velocity, the acceleration decreases thus gradually lowering power
demand. The engine temperature of a normal ICEV is maintained at a constant value by
the cooling and exhaust system that prevents engine overheating. Thus it is expected that the
exhaust and cooling system have the most signiﬁcant impact on environment heating. Figure 4b
2 The

results of this scenario can be seen in our video at http://youtu.be/72frFC5Ozu4

2113

CA-based Anthropogenic Heat Simulation

(a) Eﬀect on air temperature

Wagner, Viswanathan, Pelzer, Berger and Aydt

(b) Eﬀect on ashalt temperature

Figure 5: This graph shows the eﬀect on air and asphalt temperature of aggressive driving
behavior. It is observed that there is a greater increase in temperature due to more aggressive
driving behavior.
shows that this is indeed the case in the model, where 63% and 8% of the total energy exits
the vehicle there, respectively. It is also in compliance with experiment results given in [17].
Thermal energy from the brake discs is negligibly small in this scenario as a solitary vehicle does
not need to perform any braking maneuvers. However, we expect that electric vehicles will yield
diﬀerent outcomes, as their construction and energy balances vary greatly from conventional
combustion engine cars.

4.2

Analysing the Impact of Driving Behaviors

In this experiment, we use the proposed model to study the impact that aggressive driving can
have on the environment. Table 2 shows the diﬀerent conﬁgurations that are used to simulate
aggressive and defensive driving behavior. The major diﬀerence is that aggressive behavior
allows for a larger magnitude in both acceleration and velocity. Additionally, the minimum
safety distance between vehicles is lowered in the aggressive scenario. In this experiment, a
series of cars is generated randomly at a rate determined by the Poisson Distribution P ois(λ)
with a mean inter-arrival time of 100 ms. This leads to a steady ﬂow of vehicles passing over
the street segment.
Figure 5 shows the temperature of the air and asphalt over time for the defensive and
aggressive scenarios. The experiment suggests that there may be an increase of more than 1◦ C
in both air and asphalt temperature because of a change in driver aggressiveness. Figure 6,
showing the averaged contributions of diﬀerent components over the duration of each scenario,
conﬁrms that the average vehicle in the aggressive scenario contributes more to urban heating.

Table 2: Model parameter values for aggressive and defensive driving behavior
parameter
defensive scenario aggressive scenario
min. speed of vehicles (m/s)
16
16
max. speed of vehicles (m/s)
18
22
2114

CA-based Anthropogenic Heat Simulation

Power Output per Vehicle Component

300

250

250

200

200

Power in kW

150
100
50

Power Output per Vehicle Component

150
100
50

(a) Defensive Scenario

co
con oling
vec
tion

ex
con haust
vec
tion

exh
rad aust
iatio
n

e
con ngine
vec
tion

en
rad gine
iatio
n

roll
fric ing
tion

co
con oling
vec
tion

0

ex
con haust
vec
tion

exh
rad aust
iatio
n

e
con ngine
vec
tion

en
rad gine
iatio
n

roll
fric ing
tion

air
dra
g

0

air
dra
g

Power in kW

300

Wagner, Viswanathan, Pelzer, Berger and Aydt

(b) Aggressive Scenario

Figure 6: This graph shows the average power output of each vehicle component, accumulated
over the experiment duration.
It also shows that the largest contributor to this diﬀerence is the exhaust and cooling convection.

5

Conclusion and Future Work

In this paper we have introduced a CA-based approach to model the eﬀect of traﬃc on urban
heat. The proposed model was shown to produce realistic results. Moreover, the approach
has the added beneﬁt that the eﬀect of driver behavior on traﬃc and urban heat could be
observed and analyzed. This raises interesting questions about the environmental impact of
driver ineﬃciency, diﬀerent engine technologies and the advent of autonomous vehicles. The
modeling of individual components of the vehicle like its engine, exhaust, wheel friction and
cooling system, enables the investigation of each of their eﬀects in more detail. A more detailed
model of the vehicle than the one proposed is currently being developed. This can be used for
analysing which parts need to be optimized for creating vehicles that have lesser impact on the
environment. Rather more interestingly, the eﬀect of large scale changes in urban mobility like
the advent of electro mobility where electric vehicles make up the majority of vehicles on the
road, can be investigated using this kind of microscopic model. From an urban development
perspective, the proposed model can also be used for simulating the eﬀect of trees and buildings
on urban heat by simply adding these components to the environment and adding the related
rules that need to be applied to the CA.

References
[1] Anne K. L. Quah and Matthias Roth. Diurnal and weekly variation of anthropogenic heat emissions
in a tropical city, singapore. Atmospheric Environment, 46:92–103, January 2012.
[2] M.L. Baglione and University of Michigan. Development of System Analysis Methodologies and
Tools for Modeling and Optimizing Vehicle System Eﬃciency. University of Michigan, 2007.
[3] Hongsuk H Kim. Urban heat island. International Journal of Remote Sensing, 13(12):2319–2336,
1992.

2115

CA-based Anthropogenic Heat Simulation

Wagner, Viswanathan, Pelzer, Berger and Aydt

[4] Eiko Nemitz, Kenneth J Hargreaves, Alan G McDonald, James R Dorsey, and David Fowler.
Micrometeorological measurements of the urban heat budget and co2 emissions on a city scale.
Environmental Science & Technology, 36(14):3139–3146, 2002.
[5] H. Xue and JC Ho. Modeling of heat and carbon monoxide emitted from moving cars in an
underground car park. Tunnelling and Underground Space Technology, 15(1):101–115, 2000.
[6] David J Sailor and Lu Lu. A top–down methodology for developing diurnal and seasonal anthropogenic heating proﬁles for urban areas. Atmospheric Environment, 38(17):2737–2748, 2004.
[7] Edinilson Alves Costa. Cfd approach on underhood thermal management of passenger cars and
trucks. Technical report, SAE Technical Paper, 2003.
[8] A New Kind of Science. Wolfram Media Inc., Champaign, Ilinois, US, United States, 2002.
[9] Heiko Aydt, Michael Lees, Stephen John Turner, and Wentong Cai. Toward simulation-based
egress optimization in smart buildings using symbiotic simulation. In Proceedings of the 6th International Conference on Pedestrian Evacuation Dynamic, 2012.
[10] Daniel Ioan Curiac, Ovidiu Banias, Constantin Volosencu, and Dan Pescaru. Cellular automata
based simulation for smoke and ﬁre spreading in large buildings. In International Conference on
Development, Energy, Environment, Economics (DEEE’10), Puerto De La Cruz, Tenerife, 2010.
[11] AS Mordvintsev, VV Krzhizhanovskaya, MH Lees, and PMA Sloot. Simulation of city evacuation
coupled to ﬂood dynamics. In Pedestrian and Evacuation Dynamics 2012, pages 485–499. 2014.
[12] M Marin, V Rauch, A Rojas-Molina, C.S Lopez-Cajun, A Herrera, and V.M Castano. Cellular
automata simulation of dispersion of pollutants. Computational Materials Science, 18(2):132 –
140, 2000.
[13] Marcus Rickert, Kai Nagel, Michael Schreckenberg, and Andreas Latour. Two lane traﬃc simulations using cellular automata. Physica A: Statistical Mechanics and its Applications, 231(4):534–
550, 1996.
[14] CSB Grimmond, M Blackett, MJ Best, J Barlow, JJ Baik, SE Belcher, SI Bohnenstengel, I Calmet,
F Chen, A Dandou, et al. The international urban energy balance models comparison project:
ﬁrst results from phase 1. Journal of applied meteorology and climatology, 49(6):1268–1292, 2010.
[15] T.R. Oke. Boundary Layer Climates. University Paperbacks. Methuen, 1987.
[16] K. Ksaibati, University of Wyoming. Department of Civil, Architectural Engineering, C. Yavuzturk, Mountain Plains Consortium, and University Transportation Research Centers Program
(U.S.). Assessment of Temperature Fluctuations in Asphalt Pavements Due to Thermal Environmental Conditions Using a Two-dimensional Transient Finite Diﬀerence Approach. MPC report.
Department of Civil and Architectural Engineering, University of Wyoming, 2002.
[17] J. M. Prusa, M. Segal, B. R. Temeyer, W. A. Gallus, Jr., and E. S. Takle. Conceptual and
scaling evaluation of vehicle traﬃc thermal eﬀects on snow/ice-covered roads. Journal of Applied
Meteorology, 41:1225–1240, 2002.
[18] Akihiro Fujimoto, Akira Saida, and Teruyuki Fukuhara. A new approach to modeling vehicleinduced heat and its thermal eﬀects on road surface temperature. volume 51, 2012.
[19] Martin Treiber, Ansgar Hennecke, and Dirk Helbing. Congested traﬃc states in empirical observations and microscopic simulations. Physical Review E, 62(2):1805, 2000.
[20] Peter G Gipps. A behavioural car-following model for computer simulation. Transportation Research Part B: Methodological, 15(2):105–111, 1981.
[21] Brian Vick. Multi-physics modeling using cellular automata. Complex Systems, 17:65–78, 2007.

2116

