Available online at www.sciencedirect.com

Procedia Computer Science 9 (2012) 1345 – 1353

International Conference on Computational Science, ICCS 2012

Free-riding Analysis Via Dynamic Game with Incomplete
Information∗
Guo-yong Cai, Guo-bin Liu, Gui-min Huang
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Guilin University of Electronic Technology, Guilin, China

Abstract
P2P networks are distributed, acentric and self-organized systems. Due to the incomplete information of network
environment, the uncertainty of trust relationship among peers and the selfishness of the peers in P2P networks, which give
rise to many free-riders that seriously impact the stability and scalability of P2P networks. In this paper, by analyzing the
incomplete information of network environment, the uncertainty of trust relationship among nodes, the phenomenon of the
free-riding is studied based on game theory. The IIDGTrust (Incomplete Information Dynamic Game Trust)mechanism is
presented through the case “Supplying the Public Resources”. Updating the trust relationship among the nodes according to
the Bayesian law, which make nodes choose better strategies in time. The experimental results demonstrate that the IIDGTrust
mechanism can effectively reduce the proportion of the free-riders in the P2P networks and maintain the stability of networks
better.

Keyword: Free-riding, Incomplete Information Dynamic Game, Bayesian law, Perfect Bayesian-Nash Equilibrium;

1. Introduction
In recent years, with the successful application of Gnutella, KaZaA, Napster etc., the application of the P2P
systems has made progress rapidly. However with the development of the P2P systems, the problems of
robustness, safety, scalability and etc. of the networks are also becoming more and more important. Since
literature[1] found the free-riding phenomenon in P2P systems, the phenomenon have been studied by some
researchers. A measurement result [1-2] of Gnutella system shows that peers who provide no files account for
proximately 70% in 2000, and that top 1% of the peers provide approximately 37% of the total responses queried.
But in 2005, the number of free-riders increased to proximately 85% in Gnutella. In 2006, a measurement of eDonkey file sharing network in literature [3] found that there were about 80% free-riders. The existence of so
many free-riders, severely affect the stability of the whole system. Besides [4-5] found that the problems of
collusion, false reports, zero-cost identities, traitors, whitewashing etc. in the system have brought lots of hidden
troubles to the robustness and safety of the P2P networks. Paper[6] analyzed the game among the strangers with

∗

Corresponding author: Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Guilin University of Electronic Technology, Guilin, China

E-mail address: lgbabcdefg@163.com;

1877-0509 © 2012 Published by Elsevier Ltd. Open access under CC BY-NC-ND license.
doi:10.1016/j.procs.2012.04.148

1346

Guo-yong Cai et al. / Procedia Computer Science 9 (2012) 1345 – 1353

the case ‘eBay auction website’ and illustrated the necessity of Trust mechanism with experimental data. In the
absence of incentive mechanism, a study of[7] also shows that users’ enthusiasm of providing evaluation
information is not very high. Therefore, in order to ensure the stability and the safety of the networks, it is
necessary to establish a sustainable mechanism to promote the stable running of the P2P network.
The research achievements of trust mechanisms and models are summarized by literature [8-10] in different
periods. At present, the research of trust mechanisms can be mainly classified into three aspects: trust
mechanisms based on fuzzy theory, trust mechanisms based on probability, and trust mechanisms based on game
theory. During the interaction in the networks, peers’ behaviours are mainly involved, and peers make decisions
and weight the payoff depending on how much they trust the opponents. Thus, comparing with trusts based on
fuzzy theory and probability, trust mechanism based on game theory seems more applicable.
There already have some researches on the trust mechanism based on game theory. Feldman M elaborates the
free-riding problem and the serious consequences caused by the problem in paper [11] and points out some reasons
of free-riding caused and provides some methods of solving the problem. In [12] Golle P analysis free-riding
problem based on the game theory, presents the incentive mechanism based on the micro-payment, and proves
the effectiveness of the mechanism restraining free-riding problem in network. In order to solve the free-riding
problem, literature [13] established an incentive compatibility mechanism based on the mechanism design theory,
which essentially is asymmetrical information game theory. However literatures mentioned above studied trust
mechanisms on the basis of the static game or complete information dynamic game theory. Obviously, the
uncertainty of the trust and the incompleteness of the information are not considered in these literatures. In the
condition of incomplete information, paper [14] analyzes the process of implementing the cooperative equilibrium
based on repeated game on the platform of taobao. But the dynamic of trust is not considered in the analyzing
process.
Combining the incompleteness of information and the uncertainty of trust among peers in networks, this paper
provides a new method of studying free-riding phenomenon based on the incomplete information dynamic game
theory. Namely, under the circumstance of incomplete information, according to the different types and its
distributions of the opponents, peers establish the initial trust. During interactions, in order to choose a
responding strategy, peers update trust value using Bayesian law on the basis of the actions observed from the
opponent peers. In order to better study the phenomenon of free-riding in P2P networks, this paper models
‘Supplying the Public Resource’ from viewpoint of game theory. According the payoff matrix of the game
playing among the peers, concrete analysis process of the trust mechanism IIDGRust is presented. The algorithm
of interactions among peers is also described. At last, some simulation results are shown.
2. A Model of the ‘Supplying the Public Resource’
In economics, game theory is a theory of studying strategy selection and payoff equilibrium during
interactions among the peers. For purposes of analysis of free-riding phenomenon in networks, we formulate the
free-riding behavior as the game G =< N, ai θi , Θi , pi , ui > . N denotes the set of peers in the
networks. The behaviors strategies set dependent on type is denoted by ai (θ i ) . The type of i is θ i ∈ Θi , and
θi is private information. In the condition of peer i ' s type θi , the prior probability is pi = pi (θ − i | θi ) , which
peer i thinks other n-1 peers’s types is θ − i = (θ1 , , θi −1 , θ i +1 , , θ n ) .The posterior probability is
pi (θ − i | a− i ) that peer i thought the other n-1 peers’ type is θ − i after observing their action
a−i = a1, , ai−1, ai+1, an . ui ai , a−i ,θi is the payoff function of peer i. According to the game G ,
some assumptions are set as follows:

( )( )( )( )

(

)

(

)

In the interaction, peers just have two strategies: provide or not provide, so there are just provider and free-rider
in the analysis.
All peers hope the network can be long-term stable performance.
The functions of the peers are full symmetry, and the resources provided are available.
During the interaction, it is random matching to play game among the peers, who decide whether to provide the

Guo-yong Cai et al. / Procedia Computer Science 9 (2012) 1345 – 1353

1347

resources at same time.
In order to better analyze the process, we take every stage game as the imperfect information static game. The
payoff matrix of peers is shown in table 1.
Table 1 payoff matrix of peers
Peer j

Peer i

Provide

Provide

Not-provide

1 − ci ,1 − c j

1 − ci , 1

1, 1 − c

0 , 0

Not-provide

j

If peer i does not provide the resources, then he will gain 1 units payoff. If provide ci units resources, then he
will get 1 − ci units of payoff. If both peer i and peer j do not provide resource, then both of them will get
nothing. The c units of resources provided are private information of peers. ci and c j are also the types of the
peer i and j respectively, and they are independent and identical distribution. All the peers know that the units of
resources provided by opponents obey a strict increasing and continuous function F on the [0, c ] ( c >1).
In P2P networks, the pure strategies of player i denoted by ai(ci) are the mapping [0, c ] → {0,1} . Let ai(ci)
0 denotes the player i does provide nothing, ai(ci) 1 denotes the player i does provide resources. Consider the
table 1, the utility function of the player i can be written as follows:

ui ( ai , a j , ci ) =

0,

ai = 0, a j = 0

1,
1 − ci

ai = 0, a j = 1, j ≠ i
ai = 1, a j = 1

(

)

, then ui ai , a j , ci = max( ai , a j ) − ci ai .

3. The IIDGTrust Mechanism
3.1. One-stage game
Consider the game mentioned above and the related definition of the equilibrium [15], the Bayesian-Nash
∗
∗
equilibrium of the peers can be denoted by a strategy profile ai (ci ), a j (c j ) . So, we have the inequalities:
∗
∗
∗
∗
E c j ui (ai , a j (c j ), ci ) ≤ E c j ui (ai (ci ), a j (c j ), ci ) and E ci u j (ai (ci ), a j , c j ) ≤ E ci u j (ai∗ (ci ), a∗j (c j ), c j ) .
E is the expected value.

(

)

In P2P networks, in the condition of equilibrium, the probability of anyone player j providing the resource is
∗
denoted by p j Pr ( a j (c j ) = 1) . So the following formula holds.

E c j ui (ai , a∗j (c j ), ci ) = E c j max(ai , a∗j (c j )) − ci ai
= p j [ max(ai (ci ),1) − ci ai ] + (1 − p j ) [ max(ai (ci ), 0) − ci ai ]
= p j + (1 − p j ) max(ai (ci ), 0) − ci ai
The formula above implies: a). If player i provides resources, then ai (ci ) = 1 , the formula result is 1 − c i .
b). If player i provides nothing, then a i ( c i ) = 0 , the formula result is p j .
So, if the inequality 1 − ci > p j holds, it implies player i will get more payoffs when he provides resources.
We have the following expression (0) in view of maximizing the expected payoff of player i . Similarly,

1348

Guo-yong Cai et al. / Procedia Computer Science 9 (2012) 1345 – 1353

expression (1) holds to player j .

ai∗ (ci ) = 1, ci ≤ 1 − p j

(0)

ai∗ (ci ) = 0, ci > 1 − p j
a∗j (c j ) = 1, c j ≤ 1 − pi

(1)

a∗j (c j ) = 0, c j > 1 − pi

The expressions (0) above implies that player i has a critical point ci∗ about whether or not to provide
resources ci . The ci obeys the strict continuous distribution which is an increasing function. So, player i will
∗
provide the resources ci if and only if the inequality 0 ≤ ci ≤ ci holds.
∗

∗

∗

( )
∗

∗

∗

∗

When ci ∈ [0, ci ] , pi Pr ( ai (ci ) = 1) Pr (0 ≤ ci ≤ ci ) F ci , then ci = 1 − pi = 1 − F (ci ) . So, ci
∗
∗
∗
satisfy the formula ci = 1 − F (1 − F (ci )) . The equation c = 1 − F (1 − F (c)) will have a unique solution c .
Then the formula (2) must hold.

ci∗ = c∗j = c∗ = 1 − F (c∗ )

(2)
∗

In conclusion, when the unique value c exists, the only Bayesian-Nash equilibrium must be exists. So, when
∗
the type of the player i ci ≤ c , player i provides resources, otherwise nothing.
3.2. The utilities of the two-stage game
The interactions among peers can be seen as the process of repeated games. We assume that the probabilities
of two kinds of peers encountered by a player i are equal to the proportion of that type of peers in networks. In
order to analyze the process of the dynamic game, two-stage game of the interaction among players is analyzed
and each stage game can be considered as imperfect information static game. To get the total utilities of a
player i in two-stage game, some parameters are set as follows.
Let pi denotes the probability of player i providing resources in the first stage of a game. Probability of player
i deciding to provide the resources in the second stage game is denoted by pixy . x and y denote the strategies
of players i , j respectively about whether or not to provide resources in the first stage game. x = 0 denotes
player i provides nothing and x = 1 denotes player i does provide resources. We denote the discount factor
of the expected payoff of the two stages game by δ ( 0 < δ < 1 ), which can be considered as players’ patience to

the succeeding stages game. The smaller the value, the payoff of the current stage will be valued more seriously;
otherwise, more attention will be shifted to succeeding stages game. The concrete parameters value will depend
on the environment of the networks.

According the parameters mentioned above, the total expected utilities of the players i in a two stages game
can be obtained and denoted by

Ui =

2

δ l −1ui (l )

l =1

ui (l ) is the expected utilities of the players i in the lth stage game. If players i provide nothing in the first
stage game, that is ai (ci ) = 0 ,then according to table 1, the concrete total expected utilities of players i in the

two stages game can be obtained with formula (3).

01
U i = [ p j + 0(1 − p j )] + δ [(1 − ci )( pi00 + pi01 ) + ( p 00
j + p j )]
01
= p j + δ [(1 − ci )( pi00 + pi01 ) + ( p 00
j + p j )]

(3)

Guo-yong Cai et al. / Procedia Computer Science 9 (2012) 1345 – 1353

1349

If player i provides resources in the first stage game, that is ai (ci ) = 1 . The concrete total expected utilities of
the players i in the two stages game can be obtained with formula (4).

U i = (1 − ci ) + δ [(1 − ci )( pi10 + pi11 ) + ( p10j + p11j )]

(4)

Therefore, the necessary and sufficient condition of player
inequality (3) ≤ (4), i.e.

i deciding to provide resources satisfies the

01
10
11
ci [1 + δ ( pi10 + pi11 − pi00 − pi01 )] ≤ [1 + δ ( pi10 + pi11 − pi00 − pi01 )] − [ p j + δ ( p 00
j + p j − p j − p j )] .

So there exists a value ci . Player i decides to provide resource in the first stage game, if and only if ci ≤ ci
holds.The following section 3.3, the utility of a second stage game will be analyzed through the trust changing
based on the Bayesian law among the peers in networks.
3.3. The dynamic change of trust among the peers
According to the definition of the Bayesian-Nash equilibrium which is a fixed point, the optimal strategy of
the current stage game can be chosen if given the prior probability of the trust of the players. The posterior
probability of players’ trust can also be obtained by computing the Bayesian law on the basis of the equilibrium
strategies and the opponent’s actions observed.
Considering the equilibrium of the one-stage game and formula (2) mentioned above, we know that there
'
'
'
'
exists c which make the refine Bayesian-Nash equilibrium satisfies ci = c j = c . By combining the analysis of
the first stage game in section 3.1, the equilibrium of the second stage game is discussed by dividing it into three
cases on the basis of analyzing the strategies choice and the dynamic change of peers’ trust.
Case 1: Both player i and j do provide nothing in the first stage game. That
is ai (ci ) = 0, a j (c j ) = 0, i ≠ j .In such case, by observing the history of player j , player i knows the
strategies of player j in the last stage and will obtain a new trust value by updating the prior trust (prior
probability) of player j through the Bayesian law. The new trust value (posterior probability) can be denoted by
a conditional probability

ci < c '

0,
Pr ( ci | ai ( ci ) = 0, a j ( c j ) = 0) =

F ( ci ) − F ( c ' )
,
1 − F (c ' )

ci ≥ c '

(5)

As the second stage game also is a one-stage game. Based on the analysis of one-stage game mentioned above,
∗
'
there must exist c ∈ [c , c ] . Hence, player i will provide resources in the second stage game if and only if
'
∗
c ≤ ci ≤ c hold. Where c∗ satisfies the formula holds.

F (c ∗ ) − F (c ' )
1 − F (c ∗ )
∗
c = 1 − F (c ) = 1 −
, that is c =
1 − F (c ' )
1 − F (c ' )
∗

∗

'

∗

(6)

'

Because c < c < 1 , when the type of player i is c , he provides nothing in the first stage game. Player
i will provide resources in the second stage because of the inequality ci = c ' ≥ c ' . So the payoff of player i in
'
the second stage game is 1 − c .
Case 2: Both player i , j decide to provide resources in the first stage. That is ai (ci ) = 1, a j (c j ) = 1, i ≠ j .
For case 2, the new conditional probability can be denoted by

0,
Pr (ci | ai (ci ) =1, aj (cj ) =1) = F(ci )
,
F(c' )

ci > c'
ci ≤ c'

.

1350

Guo-yong Cai et al. / Procedia Computer Science 9 (2012) 1345 – 1353
∗∗

Then, there must exists c , and player i will provide resources in the second stage if and only if
0 < ci < c∗∗ ≤ c ' holds. According to the formula (2), we know c∗∗ satisfies the equality

F (c' ) − F (c∗∗ )
c =
F (c' )
∗∗

∗∗

'

So when 0 < c ≤ c , the utility of player
'
type is c provide nothing.

(7)

i in the second stage is F (c∗∗ ) / F (c ' ) . Then, the player whose

Case 3: Player i provides resources, and Player j ( ≠ i) provides nothing in the first stage game. That is
ai (ci ) =1, aj (cj ) = 0,i ≠ j . According to the analysis of one-stage game mentioned above, we have ci < c ' < c j .
'
'
In the second stage, the payoff of the player whose type is c can be written as: 1 − c , if he provides resources in
the first stage ; or 1 if he provides nothing in the first stage.
On the basis of analysis of equilibrium in the second stage game, here, the equilibrium conditions between two
stages will be analyzed. According to the analysis of total expected utilities of players in two-stage game and the
'
payoff results of players in second stage. We know that the c , the separation point about whether or not to
provide resources satisfies the following formula

F(c∗∗ )
(1− c ) + δ[F(c )
+ (1− F(c' ))(1− c' )] = F(c' ) + δ[F(c' ) + (1− F(c' ))(1− c' )]
'
F(c )
'

'

(8)

The left of formula (8) is the total expected discount utility of two-stage game in the condition of player
providing nothing in the first stage. The right is the total expected discount utility of two-stage game in the
condition of the player providing resources in the first stage. By combining the formula (7) and (8), the equality
'
(9) can be obtained. So the equality (9) is the equation c must satisfy.

1 − F (c ' ) = c ' + δ F (c ' )c∗∗

(9)

According to expressions (2) and (9), we have c + F (c ) = 1 and c + F (c )(1 + δ c ) = 1 . Because of the
∗∗
'
*
'
*
strict increasing function F(c) about c and δ > 0, c > 0 , there exists F (c ) > F (c ) if c > c .Then
'
'
∗∗
*
*
'
*
c + F (c )(1 + δ c ) > c + F (c ) , that is 1 > 1 , so we have c < c .
*

*

'

'

∗∗

According to the analysis mentioned above, the perfect Bayesian-Nash equilibrium can be concluded. If the
'
*
type of player c ∈ (c , c ) , then player should provide resources in the first stage and it is not necessary to
provide resources in the second stage; if c ≥ c * , then player need not to provide resources in the two stages; or if
c ≤ c * , then player should provide resources in the two stages. In the interactions among the peers, the expected
utilities of the players will be optimal if they obey the process mentioned above.
4. The IIDGTrust Algorithm
According to the analysis mentioned above, the interaction among the peers can be briefly divided into the
following seven steps.
(i). If l = 1 , namely, player i enter the network for the first time. Let initial trust of the player i be random
number between 0 and 1, and the initial strategy be ai (ci ) = 0 . Or access step (ii).
(ii). Player i interact with any player j , and i gets the type of c and observe the action of player
inquire the value of a j (c j ) whether equals 1.

j and

Guo-yong Cai et al. / Procedia Computer Science 9 (2012) 1345 – 1353

1351

(iii). There are three cases that player i updates the prior trust to the player j on the basis of the Bayesian law.
If two players don’t provide anything in the last stage, that is ai (ci ) = 0, a j (c j ) = 0, i ≠ j . Then the
players get the new trust value based on formula (5).
If both players do provide resources in the last stage, that is ai (ci ) = 1, a j (c j ) = 1, i ≠ j . Then the
player gets the new trust value based on formula (7).
j provides nothing in the last stage, that
If player i provides resources and
is ai (ci ) = 1, a j (c j ) = 0, i ≠ j . Then they will decide whether to provide resource on the basis of the
analysis in case 3 of 3.3 and the last two cases.
(iv). According to the result of step (iii) and the analysis of formula (8), we can get the game’s refine
'
*
Bayesian-Nash equilibrium, which is the region with the separation of c and c .
(v). Player i will choose the better strategy on the basis of the refine Bayesian-Nash equilibrium.
If the type c ≤ c * of player i hold, he will provide resources in every stage.
'
*
If c ∈ (c , c ) holds, player i will provide resources in current stage, but provide nothing in the second
stage.
*
If c ≥ c holds, player i will provide nothing in every stage.
(vi). End the current interaction, if the game over, access (vii), or enter the next stage game and access (ii).
(vii). End the algorithm.
The interaction among the peers is briefly described by the algorithm. Algorithm also reflects the problem of
updating the trust of the players by applying the Bayesian law and describes the strategies choice based on the
new trust. All of these illustrate the uncertainty and dynamic of trust relationship among peers in networks.
5. The Experimental Result and Analysis
We here simulate the effectiveness of the IIDGTrust avoiding too many free-riders in network. The simulation
is based on the software NetLogo 4.1. The peers are indicated by turtles, and the green patches stand for
resources. Let the total peers in the P2P network is 1000, and there exists three types of players as follows:
(1). Contributors (CP) who always provide resources no matter what happens. Their percentage is q.
(2). Free-riders (FP) who never provide resources. Their percentage is (1-q)t, 0<t<1. A certain amount of freeriders will meets the actual demand in the P2P systems.
(3). Rational Players (RP) who whether or not to provide resources will depend on the situation of the network.
If there are rich resources in network, they will provide nothing, at that time, or they provide some resource. At
some time point, RP is taken as CP or FP according to their providing resources or not. Their percentage is (1q)(1-t).
On the basis of the analysis mentioned above, the following parameters are given as q=0.2 t=0.7, c 2, and
type c obeys a uniform distribution [0 , 2] , and the distribution function is F ( c ) = c / 2 . By formula (2), we can
∗
'
get c = 2 / 3 , and by formula (6), we get c = 0 .
The result of simulation without IIDGTrust mechanism, peers interactive randomly. The phenomenon can be
illustrated in figure 1. Time is represented by the horizontal coordinates and the change of the all kinds total peers
and total available resources over time is represented by the vertical coordinates. When the simulation begins,
there are rich in resources in the initial system. The RP do not need to provide anything. So, the RP will be taken
as FP under such circumstance. Because CP always provide resources no matter what happens, which make the
FP survive. With the system running in Fig. 1, we know that the resources in the system are provided by the CP

1352

Guo-yong Cai et al. / Procedia Computer Science 9 (2012) 1345 – 1353

whose percentage is 20%, which will led to a shortage of resource in network long time, and will prevent the
development of the scale of the system.
The result of the simulation after using the IIDGTrust mechanism is illustrated in Figure 2. When the
simulation begins, there are rich in resources in the initial system. In the meantime, the total number of FP
increases quickly, and the resources in the system decreases sharply. Comparing to the simulation result without
using the IIDGTrust mechanism, there is no obvious difference before this time. But in the following periods,
because of the IIDGTrust mechanism, when the initial resources decrease sharply, the RP have to provide
resources to the system to increase their utilities, so that the number of the CP increases and remains a steady
level. The number of the FP also decreases to a steady level. So, the system also maintains a relatively stable state.
From the Fig. 2, we know that the percentage of the CP keeps about 59.9%(599/1000 in Fig. 2), which has
improved dramatically comparing to about 24%(242/1000) in Fig.1.
Comparing the Fig.2 and Fig.1, we know that the mechanism can decrease the total free-riders (758 in Fig.1
and 401 in Fig.2) effectively in network and establish a good foundation to the stable development of the system.

Fig. 1. The result of simulation without the IIDGTrust

Fig. 2

The result of simulation with the IIDGTrust

6. The Conclusion
There are many free-riders in the P2P networks. At present, to the limitations of study on problem, by
analyzing the incompleteness and the dynamics of the trust among the peers in the networks, the paper study the
trust mechanism based on the Incomplete Information Dynamic Game. Firstly, we provide the “what if” analysis
of the game playing among the players. Secondly, on the basis of the case “Supplying the Public Resources”, the
analysis and the deduction of the trust relationship of the game playing among the players are given. The results
of the simulation demonstrate that the IIDGTrust mechanism can make the percentage of the peers keep
reasonable proportional relationships, which provide a better stability of the network.
Because the trust mechanism is based on the hypothesis, the other attacks such as the collusion, false reports,
etc in the P2P networks are not considered in the analysis process. Besides, if the same resources are owed by
some player, which player should we choose? The problem also has not been considered. We will research these
problems in the future work.
Acknowledgments
This work is supported in part by Chinese National Science Foundation (Grant No. 61063039) and 2011
graduate student scientific research innovation projects in Guangxi(Project Numbers: 2011105950812M20) . We

Guo-yong Cai et al. / Procedia Computer Science 9 (2012) 1345 – 1353

1353

extend our gratitude to the anonymous reviewers for their insightful comments.
References
1

E. Adar ,B. Huberman. Free riding on Gnuella. Tech. Rep. Xerox PARC, 2000.

2

D. Hughes , G. Coulson, J. Walkerdine. Free riding on Gnutella revisited: The bell tolls[J]. IEEE Distributed Systems Online, 2005,
6(6):1~18.

3

S. Handurukande,A. Kermarrec, F. Le Fessant etc, Peer sharing

behaviour in the e-Donkey network, and implications for the design

of server-less file sharing systems, Proceedings of the 2006 EuroSys conference, ACM Press New York, USA,2006,40(4):359~371.
4

M. Feldman, K. Lai, I. Stoica, and J. Chuang. Robust Incentive Techniques for Peer-to-Peer Networks. In ACM Conference on
Electronic Commerce (EC’04), May 2004, 102~111.

5

M. Feldman, C. Papadimitriou, J. Chuang, and I. Stoica. Free-Riding and Whitewashing in Peer-to-Peer Systems. In ACM Conference
on Electronic Commerce,SIGCOMM’04 Workshop.2004.

6

Paul Resnick, R. Zeckhauser. Trust Among Strangers in Internet Transactions: Empirical Analysis of eBay’s Reputation System. The
Economics of the Internet and E-Commerce. Advances in Applied Microeconomics, Volume 11, 2002.

7

Deng Ju-Long The Grey System Theory Course[M]. Wu Han, China

8

J. Sabater, C. Sierra, Review on Computational Trust and Reputation Models, Artificial Intelligence Review, 24(1),2005: 33~60.

9

Xin-xin Ma, Geng Ji Survey of trust and reputation mechanism on P2P network[J]. Computer Application. 27(8). 2007.8.

10. Yong-Jun Li, Ya-Fei Dai

Huazhong University of Science and Technology Press.1990.

Research on Trust Mechanism for Peer-to-Peer Network. CHINESE JOURNAL OF COMPUTERS

33(3).2010.3.
11

C. Buragohan. A game theoretic framework for incentives in p2p systems[EB/OL].[2007.02.01]. http://www.cs ucsh.edu/~suri/p sdir
/incentives.pdf.

12

Liu Ye, Yang Peng Study of Mechanism of Trust Management to P2P Networks Based the Repeated Game Theory[J]. Journal of
Computer Research and Development. 43(4), 2006: 586~593.

13

S. Sanghavi, B. Hajek, A new mechanism for the free-rider problem, ACM Press New York: Applications, Technologies,
Architectures, and Protocols for Computer Communication, NY, USA, August 2005, 122~127.

14

Qian Bing. Reputation, Repeated Game Theory and Equilibrium of Two-sided Markets[J]. Journal of UESTC(Social Sciences
Edition).12(4).2010.8.

15

Ding-pi Hou. Introduction to Game Theory[M]. China science and technology university press. 2004

