Procedia Computer Science
Volume 51, 2015, Pages 934–943
ICCS 2015 International Conference On Computational Science

Coupling Navier-Stokes and Cahn-Hilliard equations in a
two-dimensional annular ﬂow conﬁguration
Philippe Vignal1 , Adel Sarmiento2 , Adriano M.A. Cˆortes3 , Lisandro Dalcin4 ,
and Victor.M. Calo5
1

4

Center for Numerical Porous Media (NumPor),
Materials Science and Engineering (MSE),
King Abdullah University of Science and Technology, Thuwal, Saudi Arabia
philippe.vignal@kaust.edu.sa
2
Center for Numerical Porous Media (NumPor),
Applied Mathematics and Computational Science (AMCS),
King Abdullah University of Science and Technology, Thuwal, Saudi Arabia
adel.sarmientorodriguez@kaust.edu.sa
3
Center for Numerical Porous Media (NumPor),
King Abdullah University of Science and Technology, Thuwal, Saudi Arabia
adriano.cortes@kaust.edu.sa
Consejo Nacional de Investigaciones Cient´ıﬁcas y T´ecnicas, Santa Fe, Argentina
Center for Numerical Porous Media (NumPor),
King Abdullah University of Science and Technology, Thuwal, Saudi Arabia
dalcinl@gmail.com
5
Center for Numerical Porous Media (NumPor),
Applied Mathematics and Computational Science (AMCS),
Earth Sciences and Engineering (ErSE),
King Abdullah University of Science and Technology, Thuwal, Saudi Arabia
victor.calo@kaust.edu.sa

Abstract
In this work, we present a novel isogeometric analysis discretization for the Navier-StokesCahn-Hilliard equation, which uses divergence-conforming spaces. Basis functions generated
with this method can have higher-order continuity, and allow to directly discretize the higherorder operators present in the equation. The discretization is implemented in PetIGA-MF,
a high-performance framework for discrete diﬀerential forms. We present solutions in a twodimensional annulus, and model spinodal decomposition under shear ﬂow.
Keywords: Phase-ﬁeld modeling, Navier-Stokes equation, high-order partial diﬀerential equation, isogeometric analysis, divergence-conforming spaces

934

Selection and peer-review under responsibility of the Scientiﬁc Programme Committee of ICCS 2015
c The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V.

doi:10.1016/j.procs.2015.05.228

Navier-Stokes-Cahn-Hilliard

1

Vignal et al.

Introduction

When a homogeneous mixture is quenched into a metastable or spinodal regime, interesting and
complex patterns can emerge during the phase-separation of the ﬂuids involved [16]. Understanding the morphology and the kinetics ruling the phase-transition process requires answering
thermodynamical and hydrodynamical questions, making research on this topic relevant from a
fundamental point of view. Making matters even more relevant, is the fact that these patterns
can be inﬂuenced by the presence of external ﬁelds. These ﬁelds can be of either dissipative
or non-dissipative nature [32], and can add to the system new characteristic length and time
scales [37]. These problems are interesting because the steady state after quenching is in nonequilibrium, driven by the external ﬁelds as opposed to that of normal spinodal decomposition.
In the case of a binary ﬂuid mixture under shear ﬂow [29], it has been observed experimentally [23] that the shear rate introduces a new time scale. The competition between the phase
separation process, due to the thermodynamical instability [6, 30], and the breakup mechanism by shear, reaches a steady state that gives rise to anisotropic domain structures [25]. At
steady state, the ﬂuid mixture separates into two distinct phases and forms a banded structure
stretched along the ﬂow domain [16, 23, 28].
To describe the spinodal decomposition of a binary ﬂuid, the Cahn-Hilliard equation was
proposed [6, 7]. In it, the free energy of the system is expressed in terms of a phase-ﬁeld variable,
whose physical meaning is related to concentration, as well as its derivatives with respect to the
phase-ﬁeld, which account for interfacial energy or surface tension. The Cahn-Hilliard equation
is a stiﬀ, nonlinear, fourth-order partial diﬀerential equation, that describes the dissipation
process of this free energy, often referred to as the Ginzburg-Landau free energy [21]. The
process is driven by a competition between the minimization of a chemical free energy, usually
represented by either a polynomial or a logarithmic function [21], and the minimization of the
interfacial energy. The minimization of the chemical free energy, described as a double well
potential, leads the phase-ﬁeld to binodal points, whereas the minimization of the interfacial
energy resists the growth of the interfacial area. Including the ﬂow ﬁeld within this setting can
be done by coupling the Cahn-Hilliard equation with the Navier-Stokes system.
Numerical experiments to simulate spinodal decomposition under uniform shear ﬂow have
been performed [20, 28, 35] but research into this topic is still ongoing. The complicated
nature of the equation warrants consideration of advanced numerical techniques, used on highperformance platforms, to get steady-state solutions while overcoming the limitations of more
traditional numerical methods [27]. This is the motivation and the focus of this work, where
a novel discretization of the equation is proposed, which is compatible with the mathematical
structure of the equation being solved. The discretization is based on isogeometric analysis [14],
with which globally C k -continuous basis functions, where k 0, can be produced while avoiding
the use of mixed forms [15, 33]. This is advantageous when dealing with higher-order partial
diﬀerential equations, as shown in [21, 22, 34]. Borrowing the theory of isogeometric diﬀerential
forms, it is possible to satisfy the inf-sup stability condition of the discrete velocity-pressure
pair. Using the corresponding divergence-conforming and integral-conforming spaces for the
velocity and pressure ﬁelds, respectively, guarantees the physical incompressibility condition
exactly at the discrete level [4]. The implementation was done using PetIGA-MF, a multi-ﬁeld
high-performance implementation of divergence-conforming B-splines [31] which is built on top
of PetIGA [8, 13].
The work is organized as follows. In section 2 we review the Navier-Stokes-Cahn-Hilliard
model. Section 3 covers the discretization used for the equation, while in section 4 we discuss
preliminary results obtained. We conclude in section 5 and future work is covered in section 6.
935

Navier-Stokes-Cahn-Hilliard

2

Vignal et al.

Navier-Stokes-Cahn-Hilliard system

Let ΩT ∈ Rd be an arbitrary open domain, where d = 2 or 3. The boundary of ΩT is denoted Γ,
while the outward directed unit vector normal to Γ is denoted as n. A binary mixture is contained in ΩT , with the phase-ﬁeld denoted by φ, which eﬀectively represents the concentration
of one of the components present in the system. Given the focus of this work, we forego the
derivation of the Cahn-Hilliard equation that can be found in [21, 30]. The Ginzburg-Landau
free energy used in this paper, denoted by F[φ], is given by [21]
F[φ] =

ΩT

f (φ, ∇φ) dΩT ,
Ψ(φ) +

=
ΩT

γ
|∇φ|2 dΩT ,
2

(1)

where Ψ(φ) = 1/(2θ) φ log φ + (1 − φ) log(1 − φ) + φ(1 − φ), is the bulk free energy density that
includes entropic eﬀects, and γ/2|∇φ|2 is the internal energy contribution to the free energy.
As previously mentioned, the latter term is used to model interfacial eﬀects. The parameter γ
is a positive constant related to the interface thickness. This term is a strictly positive quantity,
which means that if it increases, so will the free energy. This is the reason behind the standard
steady state solutions for the Cahn-Hilliard equation found in the literature (i.e., bubbles,
spheres, or cylinders [21, 36]) when simulating spinodal decomposition of a binary mixture with
periodic boundary conditions, as these surfaces minimise the interfacial area. The variational
derivative of equation (1) with respect to φ, is the Euler-Lagrange equation [30]
δf
δF
δf
=
−∇·
δφ
δφ
δ∇φ

(2)

which, when considering this term as a ﬂux as well as the fact that there is conservation of
mass, leads to the Cahn-Hilliard equation
φt = ∇ · (M (φ)∇ (Ψ (φ) − γΔφ)) ,

(3)

∂φ
, the mobility function M is deﬁned as M (φ) = φ(1 − φ), and Ψ (φ) represents
where φt =
∂t
the chemical potential given by
Ψ (φ) =

1
log
2θ

φ
1−φ

+ 1 − 2φ.

The parameter θ represents the ratio between the critical and the absolute temperature, and is
assigned a value of 3/2 so as to lie inside the spinodal regime. The Navier-Stokes-Cahn-Hilliard
equation is then obtained by coupling the Cahn-Hilliard equation (3) with the conservation of
linear momentum equation [2], such that [20]
ut + ∇ · (u ⊗ u) − ∇ · σ(u, p) + ∇p + λ∇ · (∇φ ⊗ ∇φ) = f in ΩT ,
φt + ∇ · (φu) − ∇ · (Mc ∇ (Ψ (φ) − γΔφ)) = 0 in ΩT ,
∇ · u = 0 in ΩT

(4)
(5)
(6)

for two immiscible and incompressible ﬂuids with comparable densities and kinematic viscosities
ν (assumed to be all equal to one), where u(x, t) ∈ Rd and the scalar p(x, t) ∈ R denote the
936

Navier-Stokes-Cahn-Hilliard

Vignal et al.

velocity and the pressure of the ﬂuid mixture at the space time point (x, t), respectively. The
phase-ﬁeld φ assumes distinct values in the bulk phases away from the interfacial region, over
which φ varies smoothly. The constants λ = 0.1 and γ = 9.54 · 10−6 represent the surface
tension coeﬃcient, and the capillary width (i.e., width of the interfacial layer), respectively.
The vector f deﬁnes a constant external forcing.
The momentum conservation equation (4) includes the advective term ∇ · (u ⊗ u), which
represents the transport of momentum, as well as the dissipative terms coming from the Cauchy
stress tensor, given by
σ(u, p) = − pI + 2ν∇s u,

(7)

where ∇s u is the symmetric gradient of the velocity, I is the identity matrix, and the surface
stress tensor (∇φ ⊗ ∇φ), also known as capillary tensor [1]. This tensor can be seen as a
generator of momentum related to the interface of the phase-ﬁeld. In the case of incompressible
ﬂuids, equation (6) expresses mass conservation in the system. The model is subject to the
following initial and boundary conditions
u (., 0) = u0 (.)
φ (., 0) = φ0 (.)
u·n=0
∂φ
∂
=
(Ψ (φ) + γΔφ) = 0
∂n
∂n

3

in

ΩT ,

(8)

in ΩT ,
on ∂ΩT := ∂Ω × (0, T [,

(10)

(9)

on ∂ΩT := ∂ΩT × (0, T [.

(11)

Discretization

The model is implemented in PetIGA-MF [31], a framework for high performance computing
based on PetIGA [8], that provides structure-preserving discretizations based on discrete differential forms [4], using isogeometric analysis [14]. This method has been shown to possess
advantages over standard ﬁnite element methods [24], and allows for an easier discretization
of high-order partial diﬀerential equations, as shown in [8, 14, 17, 21, 31]. This nonetheless
comes at a cost, as the linear systems are harder to solve [9, 10, 11], which justiﬁes the use
and development of libraries such as PetIGA [8, 13] and PetIGA-MF [31], which allow the use
of diﬀerent discretization spaces for each variable. In this work, given the properties of the
Navier-Stokes-Cahn-Hilliard system, we use divergence-, integral-, and H1 -conforming spaces
to discretize the velocity, pressure, and phase-ﬁeld, respectively.
The structure-preserving spaces used in PetIGA-MF are based on the discrete de Rham
commuting diagram, deﬁned in the parametric domain as an exact sequence of diﬀerential
operators [4]. When a pair of discrete spaces satisfy a step of the sequence, they are said to
be conformal to the corresponding diﬀerential operator, such as gradient-, curl-, divergence-,
and integral-conforming spaces. The curl-conforming pair of spaces was ﬁrst used to satisfy the
stability condition of the Maxwell equations [5], and later the divergence-conforming pair was
successfully used to model incompressible viscous ﬂow models such as in Stokes and NavierStokes equations [3, 12, 18, 19].
The pair of divergence- and integral-conforming spaces, used for velocity and pressure,
satisfy the inf-sup stability condition by construction, and guarantee point-wise divergence-free
solutions [4], allowing us to model the phase-ﬁeld conservation equation in an accurate manner.
For the sake of simplicity, the phase-ﬁeld variable is discretized using an H1 -conforming space
with the same polynomial order and inter-element continuity as the pressure, whose space is
937

Navier-Stokes-Cahn-Hilliard

Vignal et al.

more regular than minimally needed. The spaces are deﬁned in the 2D parametric domain as
Velocity

Divergence-conforming

2,3
3,2
S2,1
,
× S1,2

Pressure

Integral-conforming

2,2
,
S1,1

H1 -conforming

2,2
S1,1
,

Phase-ﬁeld
α ,α

where Sβxx,βyy is a two-dimensional B-spline function, generated by a tensor product between
α
two one-dimensional B-splines, Sβαxx and Sβyy . Here, αi represents the polynomial order, and βi
stands for the inter-element continuity of the function along the ith axis.
To preserve the divergence-, integral-, and H1 -conforming structure built in the parametric
domain, when mapping to the physical domain, each of these spaces has a diﬀerent structurepreserving mapping to satisfy the exact sequence of the de Rham diagram, which are deﬁned
as
−1

Divergence-conforming

u = det (DF) (DF)

Integral-conforming

p = det (DF) (p ◦ F) ,

p ∈ L2 (ΩT )

H1 -conforming

φ = φ ◦ F,

φ ∈ H1 (ΩT )

(u ◦ F) ,

u ∈ H(div; ΩT )

where the geometric mapping F maps the reference domain Ω into the physical domain Ω (Figure 1), and DF represents the gradient of the geometric mapping. This choice of discretization
satisﬁes the mass conservation equation exactly, providing a point-wise discrete divergence-free
velocity ﬁeld. The conservation of mass in the phase-ﬁeld equation is given by the divergence of
the particle and internal energy ﬂux [30], and by the coupling with the divergence-free velocity
in the advective term.

F

Ω

Ω

Figure 1: Geometric mapping F used to map the unitary square into the physical domain.

3.1

Model problem

The formulation is tested on a sixth of an annular section with an inner radius of rin = 1 and
an outer radius of rout = 2. This domain is taken from [28], where it is used together with the
advective Cahn-Hilliard equation. The initial condition for the velocity corresponds to that of
the steady annular Couette ﬂow, and is shown in Figure 2a. It is deﬁned as
u0 =

938

(Ar +
(Ar +

B
r ) sin(θ)
B
r ) cos(θ)

,

Navier-Stokes-Cahn-Hilliard

Vignal et al.

(a) Velocity

(b) Phase-ﬁeld

Figure 2: Initial condition for the velocity ﬁeld as annular Couette ﬂow, and random initial
condition for the phase-ﬁeld.

where r and θ correspond to the polar coordinates, and
A=−

U δ2
,
rin (1 − δ 2 )

B=

U rin
,
(1 − δ 2 )

δ=

rin
,
rout

with U = 1 the imposed tangential velocity at rin , and the tangential velocity equal to zero at
rout . The phase-ﬁeld variable φ varies between 0 and 1, and its initial condition φ0 is given by
a random function δφ with normal distribution
φ0 = φ + δφ ,

(12)

where φ = 0.5 is the average value of φ, and δφ ∈ [−0.05, 0.05]. The initial condition is shown in
Figure 2b. Periodic boundary conditions were imposed on the angular axis of the annulus for
all the variables. With regards to the temporal discretization, we use the implicit, second-order
accurate generalized-α method [26].

4

Numerical examples

We present the solution for the phase-ﬁeld (Figures 3 to 5) obtained using three meshes having
642 , 1282 , and 2562 elements, respectively. Results are shown at several time steps to illustrate
the eﬀect of the shear ﬂow over the phase-ﬁeld distribution, and the eﬀect of the surface tension
induced by the phase-ﬁeld over the velocity ﬁeld.
Diﬀerent phenomena are present on the results found, each of them occurring at a diﬀerent
time scale. Phase separation initially takes place at a very high speed, with the simulation
requiring a time size on the the order of 10−10 . During this process, the ﬁrst step involves
the formation of several small bubbles that start growing and merging. The eﬀect of advection
over the phase-ﬁeld is not noticeable given the small time scale. Once the total time of the
simulation is on the order of 10−5 , the phases start to coarsen and the eﬀects of advection are
noticeable. The ﬂow stretches the bubbles, which then merge together. These eﬀects are mostly
seen close to the inner radius, where the velocity is highest. This causes a coarsening of the
phase-ﬁeld, initially toward the inner wall, and gradually reaching the outer wall. This eﬀect
939

Navier-Stokes-Cahn-Hilliard

642

t

Vignal et al.

1282

2562

1e−8

1e−7

1e−6

Figure 3: Phase-ﬁeld separation. Evolution from the initial random distribution is shown at
four time steps, for the three diﬀerent meshes considered.

is also noticeable on the radial component of the velocity, where the highest values appears
towards the outer wall. The high values close to the inner wall are dissipated.
The eﬀect of the surface tension on the velocity ﬁeld depends on the surface tension coefﬁcient λ and the surface stress tensor. This tensor measures the curvature changes along the
interface, and acts as a generation term in the momentum equation, producing a velocity in
the opposite direction of the interface curvature changes. This eﬀect coupled with the minimization of surface energy in the Cahn-Hilliard equation, results in a system that minimizes
the interfacial energy faster than an advective Cahn-Hilliard system.

5

Conclusion

A novel discretization to solve the Navier-Stokes-Cahn-Hilliard equation was developed. It
is implemented in PetIGA-MF, a multi-ﬁeld high-performance implementation of divergenceconforming B-splines built on top of PetIGA. The discretization guarantees mass conservation
for the problem through the use of these spaces. Spinodal decomposition under shear ﬂow
presents several time scales ruled by diﬀerent phenomena. Our results show three main stages.
The ﬁrst one mainly shows phase separation, the second one seems to be governed by the
940

Navier-Stokes-Cahn-Hilliard

642

t

Vignal et al.

1282

2562

1e−5

3e−5

Figure 4: Phase-ﬁeld evolution due to the velocity ﬁeld at two diﬀerent time steps. Results for
the three diﬀerent meshes considered are shown.
t = 2.8e−4

t = 3.6e−4

Figure 5: Formation of bands in the phase-ﬁeld due to the velocity ﬁeld in the mesh with
2562 -quadratic elements.
transport of the phases, while the last one is controlled by the characteristics of the ﬂow.
Including the surface stress term in the model is equivalent to including a source term in the
momentum equation. This produces a new phenomenon that is not observed in the advective
Cahn-Hilliard equation, which has an intrinsic time scale related to the interface morphology.
From an energy-minimisation point-of-view, this term improves the dissipation properties of
the system, and therefore can lead the system to reach the steady state faster.

6

Future work

The energy dissipation eﬀect of the shear velocity and surface stress variations should be studied.
This would improve the understanding behind the diﬀerent phenomena taking place. The
minimum resolution needed to solve the problem is also not clear: results diﬀer for the three
941

Navier-Stokes-Cahn-Hilliard

Vignal et al.

diﬀerent grids presented in this work. Even though results on minimum resolution needed
to properly solve the Cahn-Hilliard equation as a function of the interfacial parameter γ are
available [21], we intend to study convergence of the system by monitoring its total energy,
which includes the kinetic energy coming form the Navier-Stokes equation and the free energy
from the Cahn-Hilliard equation. Given the robustness PetIGA and PetIGA-MF have shown,
it would seem that larger-scale simulations as well as three-dimensional results can be obtained.

References
[1] D. M. Anderson, G. B. McFadden, and A. A. Wheeler. Diﬀuse-interface methods in ﬂuid mechanics. Annual Review of Fluid Mechanics, 30(1):139–165, 1998.
[2] G. K. Batchelor. An Introduction to Fluid Dynamics. Cambridge University Press, 2000.
[3] A. Buﬀa, C. de Falco, and G. Sangalli. IsoGeometric Analysis: Stable elements for the 2D Stokes
equation. International Journal for Numerical Methods in Fluids, 65(11-12):1407–1422, 2011.
[4] A. Buﬀa, J. Rivas, G. Sangalli, and R. V´
azquez. Isogeometric Discrete Diﬀerential Forms in Three
Dimensions. SIAM Journal on Numerical Analysis, 49(2):818–844, 2011.
[5] A. Buﬀa, G. Sangalli, and R. V´
azquez. Isogeometric analysis in electromagnetics: B-splines
approximation. Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering, 199(1720):1143 – 1152,
2010.
[6] J. W. Cahn and J. E. Hilliard. Free energy of a nonuniform system. i. Interfacial free energy. J.
Chem. Phys, 28(258), 1958.
[7] J. W. Cahn and J. E. Hilliard. Free Energy of a Nonuniform System. iii. Nucleation in a TwoComponent Incompressible Fluid. J. Chem. Phys., 31(3):688–699, 1959.
[8] N. Collier, L. Dalcin, and V. M. Calo. PetIGA: High-performance isogeometric analysis. arxiv,
(1305.4452), 2013. http://arxiv.org/abs/1305.4452.
[9] N. Collier, L. Dalcin, and V. M. Calo. On the computational eﬃciency of isogeometric methods.
International Journal for Numerical Methods in Engineering, 100(8):620–632, 2014.
[10] N. Collier, L. Dalcin, D. Pardo, and V. M. Calo. The cost of continuity: performance of iterative
solvers on isogeometric ﬁnite elements. SIAM Journal on Scientiﬁc Computing, 35(2):A767–A784,
2013.
[11] N. Collier, D. Pardo, L. Dalcin, M. Paszynski, and V. M. Calo. The cost of continuity: A study of
the performance of isogeometric ﬁnite elements using direct solvers. Computer Methods in Applied
Mechanics and Engineering, 213-216(0):353 – 361, 2012.
[12] A. M. A. Cˆ
ortes, A. L. G. A. Coutinho, L. Dalcin, and V. M. Calo. Performance evaluation of
block-diagonal preconditioners for the divergence-conforming B-spline discretization of the Stokes
system. Journal of Computational Science, (0):–, in press, 2015.
[13] A. M. A. Cˆ
ortes, P. Vignal, A. Sarmiento, D. Garc´ıa, N. Collier, L. Dalcin, and V. M. Calo.
Solving nonlinear, high-order partial diﬀerential equations using a high-performance isogeometric
analysis framework. In CARLA, CCIS 485, pages 236–247, 2014.
[14] J. A. Cottrell, T. J. R. Hughes, and Y. Bazilevs. Isogeometric Analysis: Toward Uniﬁcation of
CAD and FEA. John Wiley and Sons, 2009.
[15] L. Demkowicz. Computing with hp-Adaptive Finite Elements, Vol. 1: One and Two Dimensional
Elliptic and Maxwell Problems. Chapman & Hall/CRC, 1st edition, 2006.
[16] D. Derks, D. G. A. L. Aarts, D. Bonn, and A. Imhof. Phase separating colloid polymer mixtures
in shear ﬂow. Journal of Physics: Condensed Matter, 20(40):404208, 2008.
[17] J. A. Evans, Y. Bazilevs, I. Babuˇska, and T. J. R. Hughes. n-widths, sup-infs, and optimality
ratios for the k-version of the isogeometric ﬁnite element method. Computer Methods in Applied
Mechanics and Engineering, 198(21-26):1726–1741, 2009.

942

Navier-Stokes-Cahn-Hilliard

Vignal et al.

[18] J. A. Evans and T. J. R. Hughes. Isogeometric divergence-conforming B-splines for the steady
Navier-Stokes equations. Mathematical Models and Methods in Applied Sciences, 23(08):1421–
1478, 2013.
[19] J. A. Evans and T. J. R. Hughes. Isogeometric divergence-conforming B-splines for the unsteady
Navier-Stokes equations. Journal of Computational Physics, 241(0):141 – 167, 2013.
[20] X. Feng. Fully discrete ﬁnite element approximations of the Navier-Stokes-Cahn-Hilliard diﬀuse
interface model for two-phase ﬂuid f lows. SIAM Journal on Numerical Analysis, 44(3):pp. 1049–
1072, 2006.
[21] H. G´
omez, V. M. Calo, Y. Bazilevs, and T. J. R. Hughes. Isogeometric analysis of the Cahn-Hilliard
phase-ﬁeld model. Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering, 197(49-50):4333–
4352, 2008.
[22] H. G´
omez and X. Nogueira. An unconditionally energy-stable method for the phase ﬁeld crystal
equation. Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering, 249-252(0):52–61, 2012.
[23] T. Hashimoto, K. Matsuzaka, E. Moses, and A. Onuki. String phase in phase-separating ﬂuids
under shear ﬂow. Phys. Rev. Lett., 74:126–129, Jan 1995.
[24] T. J. R. Hughes. The Finite Element Method: Linear Static and Dynamic Finite Element Analysis.
Dover, New York, 2000.
[25] T. Imaeda, A. Onuki, and K. Kawasaki. Anisotropic spinodal decomposition under shear ﬂow.
Progress of Theoretical Physics, 71(1):16–26, 1984.
[26] K. E. Jansen, C. H. Whiting, and G. M. Hulbert. A generalized-α method for integrating the
ﬁltered Navier-Stokes equations with a stabilized ﬁnite element method. Computer Methods in
Applied Mechanics and Engineering, 190(3-4):305 – 319, 2000.
[27] R. LeVeque. Finite Diﬀerence Methods for Ordinary and Partial Diﬀerential Equations: SteadyState and Time-Dependent Problems (Classics in Applied Mathematics Classics in Applied Mathemat). Society for Industrial and Applied Mathematics, Philadelphia, PA, USA, 2007.
[28] J. Liu, L. Ded`e, J. A. Evans, M. J. Borden, and T. J. R. Hughes. Isogeometric analysis of the advective Cahn-Hilliard equation: Spinodal decomposition under shear ﬂow. Journal of Computational
Physics, 242(0):321 – 350, 2013.
[29] A. Onuki. Phase transitions of ﬂuids in shear ﬂow. Journal of Physics: Condensed Matter,
9(29):6119, 1997.
[30] N. Provatas and K. Elder. Phase-Field Methods in Materials Science and Engineering. Wiley-VCH,
1st edition, 2010.
[31] A. Sarmiento, A. M. A. Cortes, D. Garcia, L. Dalcin, N. Collier, and V. M. Calo. PetIGA-MF: a
multi-ﬁeld high-performance implementation of divergence-conforming B-splines. Submitted, 2014.
[32] O. Soriano-Vargas, E. O. Avila-Davila, V. M. Lopez-Hirata, N. Cayetano-Castro, and J. L.
Gonzalez-Velazquez. Eﬀect of spinodal decomposition on the mechanical behavior of Fe-Cr alloys. Materials Science and Engineering: A, 527(12):2910 – 2914, 2010.
[33] P. Vignal, L. Dalcin, D. L. Brown, N. Collier, and V. M. Calo. An energy-stable convex splitting
for the phase-ﬁeld crystal equation. submitted, 2014.
[34] P. A. Vignal, N. O. Collier, and V. M. Calo. Phase ﬁeld modeling using PetIGA. In Procedia
Computer Science, volume 18, pages 1614–1623, 2013.
[35] A. J. Wagner and J. M. Yeomans. Phase separation under shear in two-dimensional binary ﬂuids.
Phys. Rev. E, 59:4366–4373, Apr 1999.
[36] O. Wodo and B. Ganapathysubramanian. Computationally eﬃcient solution to the Cahn-Hilliard
equation: Adaptive implicit time schemes, mesh sensitivity analysis and the 3d isoperimetric
problem. Journal of Computational Physics, 230(15):6037 – 6060, 2011.
[37] Y. Wu, H. Skrdla, T. Lookman, and S. Chen. Spinodal decomposition in binary ﬂuids under shear
ﬂow. Physica A: Statistical Mechanics and its Applications, 239(13):428 – 436, 1997.

943

