Procedia Computer Science
Volume 80, 2016, Pages 1382–1391
ICCS 2016. The International Conference on Computational
Science

Numerical aspects related to the dynamic update of
anisotropic permeability ﬁeld during the transport of
nanoparticles in the subsurface
Meng-Huo Chen1 , Amgad Slama2 , and Mohamed El-Amin3
1
2

King Abdullah University of Technology and Science, Thuwal, K.S.A
menghuo.chen@kaust.edu.sa
Reservoir Engineering Research Institute, Palo Alto, California, U.S.A.
asas.tx@@gmail.com
3
Eﬀat University, Jeddah, K.S.A
mohamed.elamin.kaust@gmail.com

Abstract
Nanoparticles are particles that are between 1 and 100 nanometers in size. They present
possible dangers to the environment due to the high surface to volume ratio, which can make
the particles very reactive or catalytic. Furthermore, rapid increase in the implementation of
nanotechnologies has released large amount of the nanowaste into the environment. In the last
two decades, transport of nanoparticles in the subsurface and the potential hazard they impose
to the environment have attracted the attention of researchers. In this work, we use numerical
simulation to investigate the problem regarding the transport phenomena of nanoparticles in
anisotropic porous media. We consider the case in which the permeability in the principal
direction components will vary with respect to time. The interesting thing in this case is the
fact that the anisotropy could disappear with time. We investigate the eﬀect of the degenerating
anisotropy on various ﬁelds such as pressure, porosity, concentration and velocities.
Keywords: Nanoparticle transport, multipoint ﬂux approximation, anisotropic porous media, algebraic
multigrid.

1

Introduction

Nanoparticles are particles that are between 1 and 100 nanometers in size. Due to their high
surface to volume ratio, nanoparticles become highly reactive or catalytic and may impose a
negative impact on the environment. In particular, large quantities of these materials might
have already leached into our subsurface groundwater reservoirs and started to transport. On
the other hand, nanomaterials have been extensively used in petroleum-related industries. They
have been applied to various activities such as reservoir exploration, drilling and completion,
1382

Selection and peer-review under responsibility of the Scientiﬁc Programme Committee of ICCS 2016
c The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V.

doi:10.1016/j.procs.2016.05.440

Nanoparticle transport in rotated anisotropic permeability ﬁeld

Chen, Salama, and El-Amin

production and improved oil recovery as well as reﬁnery. All these raise the concern about the
fate of these material in their local environment and motivate the research on the transport of
nanoparticle in the environment.

2

Transport models of nanopartilces

To model the transport of nanoparticles we use Eulerian speciﬁcation to characterize the ﬂow
ﬁelds. In this approach the nanoparticles are not tracked and one looks at ﬂuid motion that
focuses on speciﬁc locations in the space through which the ﬂuid ﬂows as time passes. Besides
the ﬂuid equations, a balance equation for the mass of the particles is derived. Furthermore,
a ﬁltration term is added to the advection-dispersion equation to account for nanoparticle
transport and deposition process.

2.1

Filtration theory

Several authors have developed several ﬁltration models to study transport of nanoparticles
([1]-[3]). Goldberg et al. [4] have reviewed a number of these models. They categorized them
according to the mechanisms involved in the transport processes, including deposition(fast
and slow), remobilization, and blocking. The complexity of these model vary according to the
assumption considered. In addition to the conventional advection-dispersion process, the mechanisms aﬀecting the transport of nanoparticles include retardation, detachment, site blocking
and a combination of them. The general equation for advection-dispersion process in porous
media may be written as:
∂c
φ + ∇ · (uc − D∇c) = R + qc
(1)
∂t
where c is the concentration of nanoparticles, u is Darcy velocity, φ is the porosity, D is the
dispersion tensor, R accounts for mass insertion or depletion due to chemical reaction, and qc is
a source/sink term. In ﬁltration theory, the migration of the very ﬁne particles is accompanied
by deposition. This phenomena is incorporated into the governing balance equation by adding
the rate at which the mass is deposited to the mass accumulation term [5], such that:
∂c ρb ∂s
+
= −∇ · (uc − D∇c) + R + qc
∂t
φ ∂t

(2)

where ρb represents the solid bulk density and s is the concentration at the surface. The deposition rate is proportional to the concentration of nanoparticles. Denote the particle deposition
coeﬃcient as kdep , we have
ρb ∂s
= kdep c
(3)
φ ∂t
The process of deposition of nanoparticles is assumed to be irreversible and s can grow indeﬁnitely. Depending on diﬀerence assumptions, there have been several approaches proposed by
authors in order to describe various ﬁltration scenarios. To account or possible retardation of
nanoparticles, He et al. [6] proposed a model of the form:
1+

ρb kd ∂c
= −∇ · (uc − D∇c) − kdep c
φ
∂t

(4)

where kd is the particle deposition coeﬃcient [1/T] which depends on the ﬂow velocity. To
account for detachment of particles, Bradford et al. [3] suggested
−

∂ρb s
= φkatt c + ρb kdet
∂t

(5)
1383

Nanoparticle transport in rotated anisotropic permeability ﬁeld

Chen, Salama, and El-Amin

where katt [1/T] is the is the ﬁrst order colloid attachment coeﬃcient, kdet is the ﬁrst-order
colloid detachment coeﬃcient. If one considers site blocking, Cullen et al. [7] suggested that
the rate of nanoparticles deposition takes the form:
ρb ∂s
s
c
= kdep 1 −
φ ∂t
smax

2.2

(6)

Transport phenomena in anisotropic porous media

In this work we simulate the nanpparticle transport phenomena in anisotropic porous media in
which case the direction of the anisotropy does not align with the grid lines. Anisotropy can be
observed in almost all subsurface formation due to the several physiochemical and mechanical
processes that took place over the longer geologic time scale. Cullen et al. [7] investigated
the transport of carbon nanoparticles in a two dimensional heterogeneous anisotropic porous
medium rectangular domain. The principle direction of the anisotropy is aligned with the
coordinate axes. In this case, two points ﬂux approximation is suﬃcient to solve the system.
However, when the anisotropy direction is not aligned with the coordinate system, the two points
ﬂux approximation may fails to account for the fact that pressure gradient in one direction can
cause ﬂow in other directions. In the case of the presence of full permeability tensor, the more
involved multipoint ﬂux approximation (MPFA) methods (as will be explained later) are need
in order to obtain the correct discretization. Although similar work have been done by Salama
et al. [13], they considered the update of permeability tensor the same in all direction. In this
work, we consider the update of permeability diﬀerent in the diﬀerent directions which is more
realistic. Starting with the governing equation, the mass conservation equation is
∇·u=0
Darcy’s law:
u=−

(7)

K
∇p − ρg
μ

(8)

where K is the permeability tensor, μ is the ﬂuid viscosity, ρ is the ﬂuid density and g is the
gravity. The transport of nanoparticles in size interval i is governed by ([8], [9])
φ

∂ci
+ ∇ · uci + φτ D∇ci = Rt + Qci
∂t

(9)

Here ci is the concentration of nanoparticles in interval i, D = Ddisp + DiBr , where Ddisp
and DiBr are second order tensor that accounts for hydrodynamic dispersion and Brownian
diﬀusion, respectively. They are obtained by the following formula:
Ddisp = dt,w |u|I + dl,w − dc,w
and
DiBr =

kB T
.
3πμdp,i

uu
|u|

(10)

(11)

Ri in equation (9) is the net rate of loss of nanoparticles in interval i. In this work we use the
model in Gruesbeck and Collin [10]:
Ri =
1384

∂s2i
∂s1i
+
.
∂t
∂t

(12)

Nanoparticle transport in rotated anisotropic permeability ﬁeld

where

∂s1i
=
∂t

γdi |u|ci ,
γdi |u|ci − γei (|u| − uci )s1i ,

Chen, Salama, and El-Amin

|u| ≤ uc
.
|u| > uc

(13)

and

∂s2i
= γpt,i |uc.
(14)
∂t
In Eq. (13) γdi and γei are rate coeﬃcients for surface retention and entrainment of nanoparticles
in interval i, respectively. With equations (13) and (14), the porosity and permeability are
updated:
φ = φ0 −
δφi = φ0 − (s1i + s2i )
(15)
φ l
(16)
φ0
where K0 and φ0 are initial permeability and porosity, f is called ﬂow eﬃciency factor and is
calculated as
f = 1 − γ f s2
(17)
K = K0 (1 − f )kf + f

3
3.1

Numerical algorithm
Multipoint ﬂux approximation

The simulation code was written in FORTRAN 95. For spatial discretization, we use multipoint
ﬂux approximation (MPFA) method to deal with the porous media whose direction of anisotropy
is not aligned with the coordinate system, in which case the permeability tensor is full. In the
2-D problem, the MPFA method builds the interaction region (dashed line, see Fig. 1) that
is centered on the four adjacent cells and there are four ﬂuxes need to be calculated in each
interaction region. in which each ﬂux is approximated by
f≈

ti Φ i

(18)

i∈Ω

where ti and Φi are the transmissibility coeﬃcient and the potential gradient (for instance, the
pressure gradient) at the center of the cell-i, respectively. The set Ω depends on the dimension
of the considered problem. The ﬂuxes are conserved locally by assuming the inﬂow and outﬂow
ﬂuxes are equal. From Figure 1 the half ﬂux fij is give by
fij

≈
≈

xy
−txx
i (pij − pi ) − ti (pik − pi )
xy
−txx
j (pj − pij ) − tj (pjl − pi ).

(19)

The half ﬂuxes fik , fjk and fkl are obtained in a similar fashion. Each ﬂux involves two
adjacent cells to be considered as expressed in Equation (18). From each interaction region, we
would obtain four systems of equations that need to be solved locally. Each full ﬂux involves
two interaction regions and hence six pressure variable in neighboring cells. It is clear that
the construction of MPFA stencil is quite complicated. The remedy we use here is to adapt
the experimenting ﬁeld approach developed by Sun et al. [11], which solves a set of local
problems and construct the global system automatically (Salama et al.,[12]). In experimenting
ﬁeld approach, the matrix coeﬃcients are obtained by solving several local problems. The
predeﬁned experimenting pressure ﬁelds are designed and operated over the local problems
such that the global matrix coeﬃcients are obtained.
1385

Nanoparticle transport in rotated anisotropic permeability ﬁeld

Chen, Salama, and El-Amin

Figure 1

3.2

Aggregation-based algebraic multigrid

After the global matrix for solving pressure ﬁeld is constructed, the linear system is solved by
aggregation-based algebraic multigrid method [14]. Due to their O(N ) complexity under certain
circumstances, multigrid methods have been proved to be one of the most eﬃcient algorithms
to solve the elliptic type partial diﬀerential equations numerically. As one of the multigrid
methods, aggregation-based algebraic multigrid (AGMG) can be very eﬃcient because of its
relatively low setup time. However, it may suﬀer slow convergence in some diﬃcult cases.
Speciﬁcally, the diﬀusion equations whose diﬀusion coeﬃcients contain rotated anisotropy appear to be a challenge problems for aggregation-based algebraic multigrid methods. For this
type of the problem, Chen et. al. [15] proposed an improved aggregation strategy to reduce
the number of iterations. The new automatic aggregation algorithm determines appropriate
aggregates based on eigenvectors associated with small eigenvalues of a block splitting matrix.
The improved algorithm was employed in the simulation code.

4

Numerical example

In this work we consider a set of 2D numerical experiments to investigate the eﬀects of anisotropy
on the transport of nanoparticles. The domain studied is rectangular and consists of three
zones, where the middle zone is anisotropic. In addition, the angles between the direction of
anisotropy and the x-axis considered in the simulations are 0◦ , 30◦ , 45◦ and 60◦ . At the center
of the domain, nanoparticles are emitted at the intensity 10−6 1/s. The ﬂuid ﬂows advect these
particles and certain amount of them deposit in the media. The deposition of nanoparticles
changes the heterogeneity of media in a way that the anisotropy ratio decreases with time. All
the numerical simulations stop when the anisotropy ratio reduces to 1, i.e., when the media
becomes isotropic. For the boundary conditions, we impose the velocity boundary condition
of 5 × 10−6 m/s on the left edge of the domain. On the right hand boundary the pressure is
1 atmosphere (1.01325 bar). No ﬂow boundary condition is imposed on the top and bottom
of the domain. The parameters used in the numerical simulations are listed in Table 1. The
nanoparticles are assumed not aﬀecting the ﬂow ﬁeld. This assumption allows the decoupling
of ﬂow and transport equations.

5

Results and disscusion

In this work the primary concern is the eﬀect of the anisotropy of the media on various ﬁelds,
such as pressure, porosity, ﬂow and concentration distribution of nanoparticles. The anisotropy
is deﬁned by two parameters. The ﬁrst parameter is the angle the principle direction of
1386

Nanoparticle transport in rotated anisotropic permeability ﬁeld

Chen, Salama, and El-Amin

Table 1: Parameters for single nano-size particle transport simulations.

Parameters

Values
9.869
0

K0
0
× 10−14 m2
9.869

30◦

7.649
3.846

3.846
× 10−14 m2
3.208

45◦

5.428
4.441

4.441
× 10−14 m2
5.428

60◦

3.208
3.846

3.846
× 10−14 m2
7.649

Initial permeability
Isotropic layer
Anisotropic layer

Parameters

Values

Lx × Ly
nx × n y
φ0
DBr
μ
γd
γpt
γf
kf
c0
cs1
cs2
qc
tsimulation
Δt

5m×5m
30 × 30
0.3
2 × 10−9 m2 s−1
10−3 Pa s
5 m−1
1 m−1
0.001 m−1
0.6
0
0
0
10−6 s−1
129600 s
3.55 s

anisotropy is making with the x-axis. The other is the anisotropy ratio, which is the ratio
between the anisotropy components in the principle directions. We study the scenarios when
the deposition of nanoparticles changes the anisotropy ratio of porous media. The deposition
also decreases the volume of the void space available for ﬂow and therefore, the permeability
also decreases. Since the velocity is set constant at the left boundaries, the average pressure
changes as a consequence of the decrease of both anisotropy ratio and permeability with time.
In this section we highlight these eﬀects on the diﬀerent scenarios.
The results of numerical experiments are shown in Figure 2 - 9. Figures 2 - 5 show an
update of the various ﬁelds after the anisotropy ratio reduced to 1. In these ﬁgures the scalar
ﬁelds and the corresponding velocity ﬁelds are presented simultaneously. From Figure 2 we
see that the pressure and velocity ﬁelds distort with direction of anisotropy. In Figure 3a the
pressure and velocity ﬁelds slightly deform. As the anisotropy angle increases, the gradient of
the pressure proﬁles along the x-direction increases. Figure 6a shows the evolution of the average pressure at the inlet for the diﬀerent anisotropy angles with time. One ﬁrst observes that
the average pressure at the inlet at the start of simulations is larger the larger the anisotropy
angle. This can be attributed to the decrease of eﬀective permeability due to the accumulation
of nanoparticles. In order to maintain the constant ﬂux condition at the inlet boundary, the
average inlet pressure increases with time because of the decrease of permeability. The large
anisotropy angle of the media hinders the ﬂow more severely than the smaller angles do and
enhance the deposition process of the nanoparticles. Another interesting eﬀect caused by the
ﬂow direction change due to the anisotropy of media is the high concentration of nanoparticles
at the top end of the interface between two regions (recall that the whole domain is divided
into three regions, with the middle layer contains rotated anisotropy), as seen from Figure 4.
With no ﬂow boundary condition, the top boundary acts as a wall so that the ﬂow direction
changes rapidly and the accumulation of the nanoparticles becomes sever.
Figure 6b shows the evolution of minimum porosity with time for the diﬀerent anisotropy
1387

Nanoparticle transport in rotated anisotropic permeability ﬁeld

(a) Isotropic

(b) 30◦

(c) 45◦

Chen, Salama, and El-Amin

(d) 60◦

Figure 2: Pressure ﬁelds

(a) Isotropic

(b) 30◦

(c) 45◦

(d) 60◦

Figure 3: Porosity

(a) Isotropic

(b) 30◦

(c) 45◦

(d) 60◦

Figure 4: Concentration

(a) Isotropic

(b) 30◦

(c) 45◦

Figure 5: Permeability

1388

(d) 60◦

Nanoparticle transport in rotated anisotropic permeability ﬁeld

(a) Comparison of the average pressure proﬁle
at the inlet for the diﬀerent anisotropy scenarios.

Chen, Salama, and El-Amin

(b) Comparison of the evolution of the
minimum porosity proﬁle for the diﬀerent
anisotropy scenarios.

Figure 6

(a) Porosity in the center layer. x = 2.5 m

(b) Porosity in the center layer, x = 3.0 m.

Figure 7

scenarios. From this ﬁgure it is clear that the minimum porosity decreases with time as a
consequence of the increase of deposition of nanoparticles. Furthermore, the minimum porosity curves are diﬀerent for diﬀerent anisotropy conditions (porosity is smaller the larger the
anisotropy). This is also manifested in Figure 7 which shows proﬁles of porosities at two xpositions along the height of the middle domain after the anisotropy ratio reduced to 1. Figure
7a shows the porosity proﬁle at the center of the middle layer. One notices that the porosities
for all scenarios are very closed near the source of the nanoparticles. Away form the source,
porosity is the least the larger the anisotropy angle. We also exhibit the porosity proﬁle somewhere in the middle layer but closer to the ﬂow exit, as shown in Figure 7b. The proﬁle deviates
toward the direction of anisotropy and the minimum porosities are very closed in all cases. It
expectable that the porosity is the least the larger the anisotropy angle, since the direction of
anisotropy aﬀects the inlet pressure and the distribution of the deposition of the nanoparticles.
Anisotropy also aﬀects the concentration proﬁle signiﬁcantly. Figures 4 exhibits the concentration contours for diﬀerent scenarios. As seen from the ﬁgures the nanoparticles spread out in
broader range for the case θ = 60◦ than in the other scenarios. In the region near the emission
source, the concentration is the least the larger the anisotropy angle. This is also manifested in
Figure 8a and 8b, which show the comparisons of the concentration proﬁles along the middle
layer height. Based on this ﬁgures, the concentration is higher for the isotropic scenario and
decreases with the increase of anisotropy. These behaviors (Figures 7 and 8) may possibly be
described by exploring velocity proﬁles as shown in Figures 9a and 9b. Figure 9a shows a comparison between the x-component velocity along the height of the middle layer for the diﬀerent
1389

Nanoparticle transport in rotated anisotropic permeability ﬁeld

Chen, Salama, and El-Amin

anisotropy scenarios and it is clear that in the middle of the middle layer, the x-component
velocity drops because of the decrease in permeability. Meanwhile, the x-component velocity
is larger the larger anisotropy angle. Similar phenomena is observed in Figure 9b which shows
the comparison for the magnitude of velocity along the middle layer height. Again, It is clear
that velocity magnitude is larger the larger the anisotropy. This explains the behavior of both
the concentration and the porosity in the middle layer, which is manifested by the fact that
increasing the velocity increases the dispersion and deposition rate.

(a) Concentration in the center layer. x = 2.5
m

(b) Concentration in the center layer. x = 3.0
m

Figure 8

(a) x velocity in the center layer. x = 2.5 m

(b) Speed in the center layer. x = 2.5 m

Figure 9

6

Conclusion

In this work, we have simulated the ﬂow and transport of nanoparticles in porous media with
rotated anisotropy. Spatial variables were discretized using the multipoint ﬂux approximation
method. The linear system for solving pressure ﬁeld arising from MPFA discretization is solved
by aggregation-based algebraic multigrid. A source term in the middle of anisotropic domain
is used to introduce nanoparticles to the domain. We considered a more realistic mechanism
that the anisotropy ratio decreases with time in response to the deposition of nanoparticles.
Several scenarios of anisotropy are considered including diﬀerent anisotropy angles. Since the
simulations stop after the anisotropy ration became 1, the time steps used for various scenarios are diﬀerent. We found that the larger anisotropy angle was, the smaller number of time
step was used. This indicates that large angle between the anisotropy and the principle ﬂow
direction (x-direction) causes faster change in anisotropy ratio. The simulation results and
plots for variables (pressure, porosity, velocity and concentration) manifested this observation.
1390

Nanoparticle transport in rotated anisotropic permeability ﬁeld

Chen, Salama, and El-Amin

When nanoparticles are deposited into the pore space, they deteriorate both the velocity and
permeability ﬁelds. Pressure and velocity ﬁelds change in response to the change in permeability.

References
[1] P. R. Johnson, M. Elimelech, Dynamics of colloid deposition in porous media: blocking based on
random sequential adsorption. Langmuir 11 (1995), 801-812.
[2] J. F. Schijven, S. M. Hassanizadeh, R. H. de Bruin, Two-site kinetic modeling of bacteriophages
transport through columns of saturated dune sand. J. Contam. Hydrol. 57 (2002), 259 - 279.
[3] S. A. Bradford, S. R. Yates, M. Bettahar, J. Simunek, 2002. Physical factors aﬀecting the transport
and fate of colloids in saturated porous media. Water Resour. Res. 38 (2002), 1327 - 1338
[4] E. Goldberg, M. Scheringer, T. D. Bucheli, K. Hungerbhler, Critical assessment of models for
transport of engineered nanoparticles in saturated porous media. Environ. Sci. Technol. 48 (21),
2014, 12732 - 12741.
[5] A. Benamar, N. D. Ahﬁr, H. Q. Wang, A. Alem, Particle transport in a saturated porous medium:
pore structure eﬀects. C. R. Geosci. 339 (2007), 674 - 681
[6] F. He, M. Zhang, T. Qian, D. Zhao, Transport of carboxymethyl cellulose stabilized iron nanoparticles in porous media: column experiments and modeling. J. Colloid Interface Sci. 334(2009) ,
96-102.
[7] E. Cullen, D. M. O’Carroll, E. K. Yanful, B. Sleep, Simulation of the subsurface mobility of carbon
nanoparticles at the ﬁeld scale. Adv. Water Resour. 33 (2010), 361-371.
[8] M. F. El-Amin, S. Sun, A. Salama, Enhanced oil recovery by nanoparticles injection: modeling and
simulation. SPE-164333. SPE Middle East Oil and Gas Show and Exhibition Held in Manama,
Bahrain, March 2013.
[9] M. F. El-Amin, A. Salama, S. Sun, Numerical and dimensional analysis of nanoparticles transport
with two-phase ﬂow in porous media. J. Petrol. Sci. Eng. 128 (2015), 53-64.
[10] C. Gruesbeck, R. E. Collin, Entrainment and deposition of ﬁne particles in porous media. Soc.
Pet. Eng. J. 24(1982), 847?855.
[11] S. Sun, A. Salama, M. F. El-Amin, An equation-type approach for the numerical solution of the
partial diﬀerential equations governing transport phenomena in porous media. Procedia Comput.
Sci. 9 (2012), 661?669.
[12] A. Salama, S. Sun, M. Wheeler, Solving global problem by considering multitude of local problems:
application to ﬂow in anisotropic porous media using the multipoint ﬂux approximation. J. Comput.
Appl. Math. 267 (2014), 117?130.
[13] A. Salama, S. Sun, M. Wheeler, Numerical investigation of nanoparticles transport in anisotropic
porous media. J. Contaim. Hyro., 267 (2014), 117-130.
[14] Y. Notay,
AGMG: Iterative solution with AGgregation-based algebraic MultiGrid,
http://homepages.ulb.ac.be/ynotay/AGMG.
[15] M. Chen, A. Greenbaum, Analysis of an aggregation-based algebraic two-grid method for a rotated
anisotropic diﬀusion problem, Numer. Lin. Alg. with Appl., Vol. 22, Issue 4, Aug. 2015, pp. 681701.

1391

