Procedia
Computer
Science

ProcediaComputer
ComputerScience
Science00
1 (2012)
855–856
Procedia
(2009) 000–000

www.elsevier.com/locate/procedia

www.elsevier.com/locate/procedia

International Conference on Computational Science, ICCS 2010

Fourth Workshop on Teaching Computational Science
(WTCS 2010)
A. Tirado-Ramosa, A.B. Shifletb
a

b

Emory University, Atlanta, Georgia, U.S.A., atirado@emory.edu
Wofford College, Spartanburg, South Carolina, U.S.A. shifletab@Wofford.Edu

Abstract
The Workshop on Teaching Computational Science (WTCS), taking place within the International Conference on Computational
Science (ICCS), is a platform for discussing innovations in teaching computational science in its various aspects, e.g. modeling
and simulation, at all levels and contexts. Innovations may cover the context of formal courses or self-directed learning,
involving, for example, curriculum development, introductory programming, service courses, specialist undergraduate and
postgraduate topics, as well as industry-related short courses. This editorial provides an introduction to the work presented during
the sessions in Amsterdam.
c 2012 Published by Elsevier Ltd. Open access under CC BY-NC-ND license.
⃝
Keywords: teaching; computational science; modeling; simulation

1. Introduction
Computational science deals with mathematical models and numerical solution techniques to solve scientific and
engineering problems. Nowadays, a number of higher learning institutions integrate methods from computer
science, mathematical modeling, simulation, and scientific visualization, among others, to create virtual laboratories
for in-silico experimentation and learning, training students in the complexities of computational science and
preparing them for academic careers and positions in industrial research. To this end, higher education is currently
witnessing the rapid adoption of computational tools and methods by science teachers around the world. In the past
few years, many teachers have shared experiences on the use of high performance, as well as not-so-high
performance, computing facilities in order to promote the benefits and importance of computational science
instruction in science classrooms.
The Fourth International Workshop on Teaching Computational Science (WTCS2010), was held in Amsterdam,
The Netherlands, in conjunction with the International Conference on Computational Science (ICCS 2010). It
offered a session program consisting of presentations dealing with the state of the art in the field, following the
successful 2009 WTCS in Baton Rouge, USA [1], and 2008 WTCS in Krakow, Poland [2]. The workshop includes



Corresponding Author

c 2012 Published by Elsevier Ltd. Open access under CC BY-NC-ND license.
1877-0509 ⃝
doi:10.1016/j.procs.2010.04.093

856

Author name /A.B.
Procedia
00 (2010)
A. Tirado-Ramos,
ShifletComputer
/ ProcediaScience
Computer
Science000–000
1 (2012) 855–856

presentations that describe innovations in the context of formal courses involving, for example, introductory
programming, service courses and specialist undergraduate or postgraduate topics.
2. The Workshop
During the workshop sessions, we had 8 oral presentations. Curriculum development and learning assessment in a
new undergraduate computational science program were addressed by Olsen et al, who reported on the development
and pilot testing of assessment tools in both core and cognate courses, focusing on diagnostic assessment that
predicted success in our introductory computational science course with reasonable reliability. Luelfesmann et al
proposed an interactive educational module to visualize and explore the symbolic Cholesky factorization in terms of
both elimination graphs and matrix representation, describing the design and implementation of an interactive
module intended to be used in a face-to-face learning environments. Muresano et al presented a novel methodology
for teaching parallel programming centered on improving parallel applications written by students through their
experiences obtained during classes; the methodology integrates theoretical and practical sections which are focused
on teaching parallel computing paradigms (e.g., master/Worker and SPMD. Maxville et al discuss the iVEC summer
internship program, which provides an intense research training program to help undergraduate students transition
into postgraduate programs and industry positions; they describe the evolution of the internship program, the goals
and methods used and results. Shiflet et al discuss teaching the simulation on the structural growth of biofilm, which
they use for modeling, simulation, and high performance computing courses; they propose that the consideration of
cellular automaton simulations, boundary conditions, and diffusion in this context can empower students to develop
similar simulations for other applications. Alo et al discuss the US National Science Foundation’s TeraGrid in the
context of defining, promoting and delivering an integrated set of high performance computing resources to the US
academic research community, via a campus-based integrated cyberInfrastructure. Larkins et al describe a new
course designed to introduce engineering students to computational thinking, using edge detection and basic image
processing to motivate the use of programming MATLAB in a non-trivial scientific application. Finally, Corredor et
al propose a methodology for students in computational science to analyze the effect of memory hierarchy on
application performance; their methodology was applied to students, where they acquired a significant improvement
in the parallel application metrics assessment.
3. Conclusions
The presentations at the Fourth International Workshop on Teaching Computational Science (WTCS2010) illustrate
the variety and depth of computational science education around the world. Moreover, the growing success of the
workshop attests to the increasing interest in this interdisciplinary area.
Acknowledgments. We would like to acknowledge P.M.A. Sloot and D. van Albada for their continuous support
and commitment to the success of this workshop.
4. References
1. A. Tirado-Ramos and A.B. Shiflet: Third Workshop on Teaching Computational Science (WTCS 2009), in G. Allen; J. Nabrzyski; E. Seidel;
G.D. van Albada; J.J. Dongarra and P.M.A. Sloot, editors, Computational Science - ICCS 2009: 9th International Conference, Baton Rouge, LA,
USA, Proceedings, Part II, in series Lecture Notes in Computer Science, vol. 5545, pp. 3-4. Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg, May 2009.
2. A. Tirado-Ramos and Q. Luo: Second Workshop on Teaching Computational Science WTCS 2008, in M.T. Bubak; G.D. van Albada; J.J.
Dongarra and P.M.A. Sloot, editors, Computational Science - ICCS 2008: 8th International Conference, Krakow, Poland, Proceedings, Part II, in
series Lecture Notes in Computer Science, vol. 5102, pp. 657-658. Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg, June 2008..

