Procedia Computer Science
Volume 29, 2014, Pages 1835–1845
ICCS 2014. 14th International Conference on Computational Science

Education 2.0: Student Generated Learning
Materials through Collaborative Work
Raul Ramirez-Velarde 1 , Raul Perez-Cazares1, Nia Alexandrov2 , and Jose
Jesus Garcia-Rueda3
1

Tecnologico de Monterrey, Campus Monterrey
rramirez@itesm.mx, raul.perez@itesm.mx
2
Barcelona Supercomputing Center
nia.alexandrov@bs.es
3
Universidad Carlos III de Madrid
rueda@it.uc3m.es

Abstract
The Inside-Outside strategy pushes students to be more involved in their learning . As shown by the
Integrated Learning Processes model this improves learning. A course on operating systems was
redesigned in such a way that students would generate most of their learning materials as well a
significant part of their evaluation exams. This new approach resulted in a statistical significant
improvement of student’s grade as measured by a standardized exam compared with a previous
student intake.
Keywords: Collaborative learning, Integrated Learning Processes, Natural Learning, Google Drive

1. Introduction
In today’s work environment, more than just technical skills are required from professionals. Skills
such as teamwork, decision making, conflict resolution and other similar skills are just as important as
design, management and diagnostic skills. Those skills are not easily acquired in to day’s learning
environments as certain prerequisites need to be present such a structured approach, communication
facilities, training of teachers and students. Simple teamwork assignments will often not teach such
skills, more complicated scaffolding needs to be present in learning environments that will ensure
collaborative work will help students acquire those skills and ensure correct transfer to work
environments.
Selection and peer-review under responsibility of the Scientiﬁc Programme Committee of ICCS 2014
c The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V.

doi:10.1016/j.procs.2014.05.168

1835

Student Generated Learning Materials through Collaborative Work

R. Ramirez-Velarde et al.

Also, it’s a well-known fact, that the more engaged a student is to her learning, the better learning
is achieved. Engagement is directly linked to motivation. As we will discuss later in this article,
motivation improves learning, as well as convincing students that learning is about real life, that they
are stakeholders on their own learning.
The Integrated Learning Processes (ILP) [1] model is a four stage learning model that conforms to
Kolb’s natural learning cycle. ILP consists of four distinct stages in which different parts of the brain
are activated and used, as described by James Zull [2] [3], in order to improve learning. In order to
achieve real, long-lasting learning, the learning cycle must be completed.

Figure 1. Integrated Learning Processes Educational Model [1]
To allow students to acquire soft skills like the ones we have mentioned and to improve learning
on computing and engineering students, we present a new learning strategy called Inside -Outside
(I-O). In this learning strategy, students work collaboratively to develop their own learning materials.
Students develop memorization questionnaires, discussion topics and questions, schemas and synoptic
tables, relation trees and other visualization aids. They also develop specific problems and exercises
that are included in their exam evaluations. This learning strategy has been statistically proven
effective in improving learning in students by increasing their engagement, motivation and interaction
between themselves. It seems also that the strategy improves stud ent’s skills at coordinating tasks,
making decisions and solving conflicts. We call this Education 2.0 as an analogy between Web 1.0
and Web 2.0. Just like in Web 2.0, in Education 2.0 students create their own learning material and
have freedom as to how to use them to improve their learning.

1836

Student Generated Learning Materials through Collaborative Work

R. Ramirez-Velarde et al.

In the first section of this article we will review the ILP model and will explains how it relates to
the I-O strategy. In the next section, we will explain the elements that constitute collaborative learning
and how those elements are present in the new strategy. Next, we describe the I-O strategy itself and
present the results obtained by using it in undergraduate students. Finally we draw our conclusions.

2. The Integrated Learning Processes Model
The Integrated Learning Processes (ILP) model is based on three principles:
x

Kolb’s [2] learning cycle, which James Zull [3] links to specific parts of the brain and
establishes as essential for learning as shown in Fig. 1. The ILP model is the based on the
repetition of four stages of learning that activate different areas of the brain as discussed in
[1]. Any new learning strategy must establish how it goes through the learning cycle. Table 1
shows this for I-O learning strategy.

x
I-O Stage
ILP Stage
Concrete
Experience

Hear problem statements and background information
View videos and objects
Read documents
Feel objects

Construction

Discuss how the new information relates to life
Create analogies, similes, metaphors
Recall anecdotes and stories
Classify and find relations between concepts
Analyze, identify functional parts

Abstraction

Create a hypothesis
Visualize through flow charts, relational charts, comparison tables,
synoptic tables
Create a synthesis

Action

Create questionnaires and exercises
Discuss the solution to each question
Practice solving exercises

Table 1. Relation between the Integrated Learning Processes model and the I-O strategy
x

A progression of increasing knowledge complexity that follows the path: Conceptual and
Contextual Knowledge->Procedural and Problem Solving Knowledge->Cognitive
complexity knowledge. In our case, Table 2 shows this for the I-O learning strategy

1837

Student Generated Learning Materials through Collaborative Work

R. Ramirez-Velarde et al.

Knowledge
Level

I-O Level

Conceptual
and
Contextual

Students create and discuss the solution of questionnaires based on
memorization
Students design questions to engage in discus sions

Procedural
and Problem
Solving

Students design exercises and problems
Students learn to create those questions working together and how to discuss
the solutions

Cognitive
Complexity

Students not just answer questions, they make them. The ques tions have to be
unique and with appropriate complexity or difficulty. Questions will be
evaluated by peers, and since they might also be included in exams, all
participants are stakeholders for all questions
Table 2. Taxonomy of items to be included in questionnaires

x

The use of social interaction and the presence clear and present motivators. Motivation is
based on the following elements:

a)
b)
c)
d)

An orthodox use of collaborative learning
The presence of Active Learning
Putting the students at risk
Showing that learning is about improving life.

We believe that the I-O strategy increases motivation by including in its methodology these
elements in the following manner (see Table 3):

1838

Student Generated Learning Materials through Collaborative Work

Motivation
Element

R. Ramirez-Velarde et al.

Implementati on in I-O strategy

Collaborati ve
Learning

The I-O is constructed around a scaffolding of collaborative learning as
described in section 3. Although collaborative learning does help students
acquire many skills, the relevant point here is the social interaction carried
out. As pointed in [4], social interaction is critical to motivate students.
Also, competition between teams is carried out implicitly, when the work of
a particular team is recognized and rewarded. This reward is realized by
using a team’s problems in the written exam. Therefore, the team that made
the problems has an advantage over other teams

Active
Learning

As discussed in [4], active learning is germane to motivation. Action brings
pleasure. And achievement brings pleasure. But also by including student
developed questions in exams, student work gets recognized, improving
motivation

Putting
Students at
Risk

As discussed in [1] we use Vygotsky’s zone of proximal development and
educational scaffolds [5]. This is what we mean when we say “put the
student at risk”. We present students with problems in which they have a
probability of failure [6], so they may develop ever more complex thinking
strategies.
Also, scaffolding is also used when students do on -the classroom activities
which consist on solving problems of ever increasing difficulty and having
the teacher assist only as a mentor.

Showing that
Learning is
About
Improving Life

As we discussed in [1], learning is an evolutionary tool and as such, its main
objective is help humans survive. Therefore, learning becomes more
significant when learning is related to student’s background, interests, daily
activities and society. This is attacked in two fronts:
1) Similes, analogies and metaphors are used so students can identify with
the contents, even if they are highly analytical
2) When students understand that their work can mean a real advantage on
the evaluation process, the tend to improve their efforts in order to have
questions developed by them included in the exam

Table 3. Social interaction and motivators for de I-O learning strategy

3. Collaborative Learning
A common definition of Collaborative Learning (CL) is: “involved joint intellectual effort by
students or students and teachers. Groups of students work together in searching for understanding,
meaning, solutions or in creating a product” [7].
One of the most important principles in collaborative learning is “Positive Interdependence”.
Positive interdependence is “the degrees to which participants perceive they are interdependent in that

1839

Student Generated Learning Materials through Collaborative Work

R. Ramirez-Velarde et al.

they share a mutual fate and that their success is mutually caused” [8]. Although there are other
important aspects of collaborative learning, positive interdependence stands out because is not only
encourages knowledge and skills acquisition, but it also encourages the practice of certain attitudes
and values such as respect, responsibility to others, personal accounta bility, self-evaluation, etc. [9]
[10].

Elements of Collaborative Learning
There are five elements of collaborative learning [8]:
1.

2.

3.
4.

5.

Clearly Perceived Positive Interdependence. In collaborative learning the success of one
person is bound up with the success of others. There are many ways to ensure positive
interdependence. Goal sharing is one way. This might include shared subject matter, a
particular assessment, joint problem solving or creating and discovering something of value.
Another way is role sharing. This occurs when each group member is given a specific role
that gives a person specific responsibilities. The role describes what group activities that
person might take and the contribution to the overall task. Also, resource information
contributes to positive interdependence and exists when each group member has only part of
the information, cases, material or other resources necessary for the group to achieve its task.
Finally, task interdependence is structured by creating a division of labor so that the actions
of one group member have to be completed before the next member can complete their tasks.
Interaction. Individual students are encouraged to assist others in the group to complete
tasks in order to reach the group's goals. In other words there is an expectation that students
will help each other so that common goals can be achieved. Help may be resources, advice,
provision of feedback and challenging conclusions.
Individual Accountability and Personal Responsibility. Everyone is expected to do their
fair share of work and it is important for all group members to know that they cannot 'free
ride.'
Small Group Skills. Interpersonal skills such as making decisions and solving conflics are
important. In order to achieve these goals students must:
i) Get to know and trust each other
ii) Communicate clearly
iii) Provide and accept support
iv) Resolve conflict constructively
Group Processing. Group work is effective when group participants reflect on how well they
function as a group. This reflection assists members to maintain good working relationships.
Reflection may focus on such things as relationships between people, facilitation of
collaborative skills, rewarding of positive behavior and the celebration of success.

The correct use of CL is very important to the I-O strategy. Since I-O relies so much in teamwork
and collaboration, a failure in this part will cause students to simply divide the work among
themselves and then getting later together to simply ensemble the whole. This will in turn cause
students to learn only a part of the intended learning objective, creatin g less efficient learning, not
better learning. Students will do worst in exam than in a regular course. Positive interdependence must
be created in order to have all students learn all the material.

1840

Student Generated Learning Materials through Collaborative Work

R. Ramirez-Velarde et al.

4. The Inside-Outside Learning Strategy
As stated in [1], any balanced approach is based on three transformations of knowledge and one
transformation of emotions that must take place in order to achieve deep understanding and
competence:
1.

2.

3.

4.

From past to future. Information given to students is by nature the past. Students must be
able to make plans and create strategies: that is to project past learning into the future. This is
effectively achieved when we transition from reflective observation to abstract hypothesis.
Observations are in the past, therefore we reflect about those observations. Plans and
hypothesis intend to predict the future.
From inside to outside. Human beings receive knowledge through their senses. It must then
be effectively stored. After such process, new knowledge is created, transforming students
from knowledge receivers to knowledge producers. Again, this is achieved in the transition
from reflective observation to abstract hypothesis. We store inside our minds, in our memory,
knowledge that we took from the outside. When we make plans or create hypothesis, we
project what we know and create new knowledge about the real world, the world outside our
mind. This the transformation of knowledge that gives the strategy its name.
From learning to teaching. This is a power transformation in which initially students are
dependant on outside authority to inform them. Eventually, students take control of their
learning taking decisions of how, where and why. Teachers become tutors and even mentors,
through a carefully constructed scaffolding lattice of slowly retracting learning support, until
student become experts on the knowledge area.
Motivation. Students will be presented with knowledge that is meaningful, that relates to
their needs, their work responsibilities, they environment, their culture, and their background.
This will motivate students to be involved and active participants of their learning, as it is
interesting to them, and most of all, useful. Another source of motivation is sensation of
movement through active learning and the sensation of achievement, through evaluation and
feedback.

The Inside-Outside learning strategy intends to emphasize the transformations: from inside to
outside and from learning to teaching.
In the I-O learning strategy, students collaborate to create their own learning materials. Students
develop memorization questionnaires, discussion topics and questions, schemas and synoptic tables,
relation trees and other visualization aids. They also develop specific problems and exercises t hat are
included in their exam evaluations. Each learning item developed by students is peer-reviewed before
being approved as a learning material.
The general algorithm is as follows:
x

x
x

Students are organized in three-member teams. Two-member teams are accepted, but
discouraged. Students working alone are not accepted (as one of the objectives is to develop
the capacity for social interaction), and also teams with more than three members are not
accepted to avoid free rides
Students are asked to take any of the three roles: coordinator, speaker and information
specialist.
A coordinator is someone with high degree of management activities. She is not the boss, but
she will coordinate the work of the team

1841

Student Generated Learning Materials through Collaborative Work

x
x
x

x
x

x
x
x

x

x

1842

R. Ramirez-Velarde et al.

A speaker is someone that is able to speak in public and defend the team’s perspective
An information specialist is someone who knows where knowledge is stored or can be
acquired.
Students are asked to read all the material related to the particular educational objective at
hand. Students may need to answer a quiz in order to ensure that they have reviewed all the
material. At this moment the teacher can resolve questions and concerns. A fraction of the
learning objective is handed to each team. Each team is to create original questions and other
learning materials from the part of the learning objective assigned to it. At this moment, more
question and concerns come out and the teacher resolves them
Students use Google Docs or Google Drive to transparently write their learning materials.
Learning items are classified as Memorization, Discussion and Problems Solving. Each team
is required to create at least one question of each type of item.
Students work in the classroom to create the items. Teacher clears any questions or concerns
right before the start of the design of the learning materials and also during the development
of the original questionnaire since more questions and concerns will arise as students struggle
to design learning materials. In this respect, the teacher acts as much as a mentor as a teacher.
Review collectively. All new items of the questionnaires must be reviewed by all students to
ensure that everybody understands what is exactly that is expected as an answer and th at all
necessary data is given in every item.
Then, the teacher must include exercises and discussion question that she feels that need to be
answered additionally to those designed by the students.
In order to be thoroughly prepared, all students must be able to answer all questions and
exercises. Students do work both in the classroom and at home. Naturally it’s better to do as
much work in the classroom as possible, having the teacher as consultant and guide. But a lot
of work will also be done at home, so students must learn to coordinate geographically
separated entities.
Each team publishes the answer to its questions. It is very important at this point, that all the
discussions designed by students be carried out, as they help link new knowledge to p revious
knowledge. The correctness of the answer of each problem and exercise must be assessed, as
this will end any remaining misconceptions, erroneous mental associations or down right
mistakes in student’s calculations. Therefore, the transformation fro m reflective observation
to abstract hypothesis must be also asserted.
The learning material is ready to be used by future generations. And the group is rea dy for
qualitative exam assertion. Furthermore, if a non-negligible part of this exam is constructed
by using student generated questions this create a positive cycle in which items in the
questionnaire will be increasing in quality as the course progresses. Also, if the criteria to
select the questions is very clear, this creates healthy competition bet ween teams as each
team will strive to get as many owned questions as possible in the exam. Also, teams that do
not get their questions included in the exam will improve if only to avoid low self-esteem.

Student Generated Learning Materials through Collaborative Work

R. Ramirez-Velarde et al.

5. Results and Statistical Analysis
The results of the I-O learning strategy were compared using standardized tests between two
cohorts of students. The chosen class was Operating Systems. The first cohort Jan -11 consisted of 28
students. That course ran from January to May 2011. The second cohort Jan -13 consisted of 15
students and it ran from January to May 2013. The academic objectives were identical and the exams
were nearly identical. In total, four exams were carried out, three partial evaluations and one final
assessment. We will present the results of only one test, which is the one in which I-O was used
exclusively as learning strategy, whereas in the other evaluations, although with results consistent with
the one we are about to present, used mixed learning strategies.
We present the results on the second partial evaluation. The Jan-11 cohort used a learning strategy
in which students answered and discussed among themselves as teams and with the teacher a
questionnaire designed by the teacher which contained memorization items, one or two discuss ion
items and finally, problems to be solved. The Jan-13 cohort used for the second partial evaluation a
strategy that was on the mechanics, similar to the Jan-11 strategy. Students will answer and discussed
a questionnaire consisting in memorization questions, discussion questions and exercises. The main
difference was that for the Jan-13 cohort, the questionnaire was collaboratively designed by the
students, not the teacher. In the associated exams, in which the scores are graded from 0, all answers
wrong, to 100, all answers correct, were as follows (see Table 4):
Jan-11

Jan-13

Count

28

15

Mean

71.43

78.40

Variance

172.99

151.69

Std Dev

13.15

12.32

Table 4. Statistical results of assertion exam
As can be observed in Table 4, cohort Jan-13 did better in average grade and variance. A test was
carried out to verify that the difference in the mean grade observed was statistically significant [11].
The hypothesis tested was that there is no statistical difference in the means, and therefore the means
are statistically equivalent. From tables we observed that t critical was to be 1.682878. As the
computed t was -5.28953 and since t critical is greater than t computed, we reject the hypothesis and
thus, the means are statistically different. This means that the mean from the Jan -13 cohort is greater
the mean from Jan-11 cohort. This is evidence that the I-O strategy improved learning.

6. Conclusion
Collaborative Learning has many advantages over traditional learning. Mainly, it gives support to
students by creating positive interactions between students, creating shared experiences that derive in
comradeship within teams and most importantly, motivating students. The Integrated Learning

1843

Student Generated Learning Materials through Collaborative Work

R. Ramirez-Velarde et al.

Processes model allows the construction of a learning process that drives students to achieve natural
learning by creating scaffolding according to Vygotsky’s [12] in which students acquire ever
increasing independence and deeper understanding on the knowledge and skills they will need to
perform in society. This is achieved by creating learning experiences in which different parts of the
brain that are involved in learning are addressed in a carefully constructed sequen ce of events.
The Inside-Outside learning strategy helps students not only to learn new concepts and procedures,
but also to transform knowledge in a way that follows the Integrated Learning Processes model and
facilitates the complicated jump from analys is to synthesis and from reification to planning. As a side
effect, it diminishes the chances of plagiarism since at every cohort of the course student produced
learning activities will be different from each other. This may be one of the key factors in improving
learning.

7.

Bibliography

[1] N. S. Alexandrov, R. V. Ramirez-Velarde and V. N. Alexandrov, "Natural Learning and
Collaborative Learning, , 2013.," in “Technological Advances in Interactive Collaborative
Learning, Boca Raton, USA, CRC Press, 2013, pp. 121-143.
[2] A. Kolb and D. A. Kolb, Experiential Learning Theory Bibliography 1971-2001, Boston,
USA: McBer and Co, 2001.
[3] J. Zull, The Art of Changing the Brain, Sterling, USA: Stylus Publishing, 2002.
[4] N. S. Alexandrov and R. V. Ramirez-Velarde, "The Integrated Learning Processes,
Metacognition, and Collaborative Learning," in Technological Advances in Interactive
Collaborative Learning, Boca Raton, USA, CRC Press, 2013, pp. 145-161.
[5] J. J. G. Van Merriënboer, P. A. Kirschner and L. Kester, "Taking the load of a learners'
mind: Instructional design for complex learning," Educational Psychologist, vol. 38, no.
1, pp. 5-13, 2002.
[6] N. V. Cherenkova and N. S. Alexandrov, "Transfer of E-Learning Metacognitive Skills
Using Games," in ” in “Technological Advances in Interactive Collaborative Learning,
Boca Raton, USA,, CRC Press, 2013, pp. 163-175.
[7] "Collaborative Learning," Wikipedia, [Online]. Available:
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Collaborative_learning. [Accessed 2013].

1844

Student Generated Learning Materials through Collaborative Work

R. Ramirez-Velarde et al.

[8] D. W. Johnson and R. T. Johnson, "Positive Interdependence: Key to Effective
Cooperation," in Interaction in Cooperative Groups: The Theoretical Anatomy of Group
Learning, Cambridge, USA, Cambridge University Press, 1991, pp. 174-199.
[9] E. Barkley, P. Cross and C. H. Major, Collaborative Learning Techniques: A Handbook for
College Faculty, Jossey-Bass, 2004.
[10] V. H. M. Dale, L. Nasir and M. Sullivan, "Evaluation of Student Attitudes to Cooperative
Learning in Undergraduate Veterinary Medicine," Journal of Veterinary Medical
Education, vol. 32, no. 4, pp. 511-516, 2005.
[11] D. Remenyi, G. Onofrei and J. English, An introduction to statistics using microsoft
excel, Reading, UK: Academic Publishing International, 2010.
[12] L. Vygotsky, Mind in society: The development of higher psychological processes,
london: Harvard University Press, 1978.

1845

