Procedia Computer Science
Volume 80, 2016, Pages 2402–2412
ICCS 2016. The International Conference on Computational
Science

A computational approach to investigate patterns of acute
respiratory illness dynamics in the regions with distinct
seasonal climate transitions
Vasiliy N. Leonenko1 , Sergey V. Ivanov2 , and Yulia K. Novoselova3
1
2
3

ITMO University, Saint Petersburg, Russian Federation
vnleonenko@yandex.ru
ITMO University, Saint Petersburg, Russian Federation
sergei.v.ivanov@gmail.com
ITMO University, Saint Petersburg, Russian Federation
juliaeternity@gmail.com

Abstract
In the current work we present a set of computational algorithms aimed to analyze the
acute respiratory infection (ARI) incidence data in the regions with distinct seasonal climate
transitions. Their capabilities include: (a) collecting incidence data, ﬁxing the under-reporting;
(b) distinguishing phases of seasonal ARI dynamics (lower ARI level, higher ARI level, level
transitions, epidemic outbreak); (c) ﬁnding the connections between the ARI dynamics (epidemic and interepidemic) and the weather factors. The algorithms are tested on the data for
Saint Petersburg, Moscow and Novosibirsk and compared with the results for Ile-de-France
region (Paris and its suburbs). The results are used to clarify the underlying mechanisms of
ARI dynamics in temperate regions.
Keywords: data analysis, mathematical epidemiology, acute respiratory infection, seasonal inﬂuenza,
Python

1

Introduction and motivation

Seasonal acute respiratory infections (ARI) are among the oldest and the most common human
infectious diseases. The most notorious of these infections is inﬂuenza, which causes repetitive
outbreaks both in temperate and tropical regions resulting in high worker/school absenteeism
and productivity losses. The annual incidence for inﬂuenza is claimed to be from 3 to 5 million
cases, and the mortality rate is from 250 to 500 thousand individuals [20]. The other ARI viruses
as a rule don’t reach such high levels of virulence and infectivity as inﬂuenza, nevertheless, they
remain active throughout the year aﬀecting badly the countries economy. The certain diagnosis
whether a person is infected by inﬂuenza or by another acute respiratory infection with similar
2402

Selection and peer-review under responsibility of the Scientiﬁc Programme Committee of ICCS 2016
c The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V.

doi:10.1016/j.procs.2016.05.538

A computational approach to investigate patterns . . .

Leonenko, Ivanov and Novoselova

symptoms is possible only through laboratory testing [3], that’s why clinical surveillance systems
often monitor the so-called ”inﬂuenza-like illness” (ILI), which includes all severe ARI cases
ﬁtting a certain description1 . It often happens that only the ILI statistics is available through
the surveillance systems, while the information on less severe cases of ARI is not shown.
The task of foremost importance connected with ARI and ILI is to detect the epidemic
outbreak as soon as possible or, which is even better, to predict it in advance. Although the
seasonality of acute respiratory infections outbreaks is widely known, its mechanism still doesn’t
have satisfactory explanation. A lot of factors are named that may inﬂuence the moment of the
outbreak onset and its dynamics other time, but the extent of inﬂuence of one or another factor
on the outbreak parameters is arguable. One of the major problems that stands on the way
of establishing a clear picture of the outbreak mechanism is that the long-term incidence data
for the analysis is available from limited sources, for it could be provided only by the countries
with well-established inﬂuenza surveillance. As a result, the most of the research is performed
on the data which comes from the regions of Western Europe ([4], [18]) and Northern America
([5], [16], [19]), although certainly there are exceptions ([2]). The usage of the regional data
which is not representative could bring the researchers to disputable assumptions. For instance,
when ﬂu incidence data from tropical regions has become available in recent years it showed
the limited applicability of some well-established hypotheses on the nature of ILI dynamics
emerged from the temperate regions data [17].
The aim of the research presented in this paper is to analyze the long-term ARI weekly
incidence data in Russian cities from 1986 to 2015 using the computational approach to ﬁnd out
the patterns of ARI dynamics and to assess the role of weather factors on epidemic outbreaks.
Since the pioneering but now outdated work of Baroyan and Rvachev [1], [14] the data analysis
and modeling of ARI dynamics in Russia have attracted only limited attention. The few works
that can be named in this ﬁeld are [8] and [13]. Nevertheless, the Russian ARI data, for our
opinion, could be used eﬀectively to verify the existing hypotheses concerning the ARI and ILI
dynamics mechanism. The particular thing to mention is that in the majority of Russian regions
the climate is subjected to very sharp and distinct seasonal transitions, which is not so inherent
to Western Europe or Northern America. That peculiarity could potentially help to ﬁnd the
connections between the climate factors and the ARI incidence that cannot be distinguished
clearly enough in other regions with temperate but milder climate.

2

The structure of ARI incidence analysis algorithm

For the sake of automatic data analysis the ARI incidence analysis algorithm was created. The
algorithm ﬂowchart is presented in the ﬁgure 1. Each rectangle on the ﬂowchart corresponds to
a separate script or set of scripts implemented in Python programming language (Python 3.x
with numpy and matplotlib libraries was used).

2.1

Gathering and correcting the data

Data sources. The dataset that we used contains weekly ARI incidences in Russian cities
from 1986 to 2015 provided by the Research Institute of Inﬂuenza, Saint Petersburg, Russia [6].

1 There

exist diﬀerent criteria of determining an ILI which vary dramatically between diﬀerent national
healthcare systems; according to WHO, ILI is an acute respiratory infection with measured fever of ≥ 38 C and
cough with onset within the last 10 days [21]

2403

A computational approach to investigate patterns . . .

ARI incidence
data (weekly)

Temperature and
spec. humidity (6hr)

Correcting missing data
and under-reporting

Gathering the input and
bringing it to daily format

Generating derived data:
- interepidemic ARI levels;
- epidemic onset days;
- epidemic peak heights.

Finding relations between
different data types

Database for ARI incidence/
weather factor levels

Leonenko, Ivanov and Novoselova

Stage 1. Creating/
refreshing the
database for ARI
incidence and the
levels of weather
factors
Stage 2.
Analysing data
and finding
relations between
them

Generating output

Figure 1: Algorithm ﬂowchart

Correcting missing data and under-reporting biases. It is known that people tend to
reduce their attendance to healthcare facilities during holidays, that’s why the under-reporting
of real inﬂuenza incidence is higher those days than in general [1]. Our algorithm is set to replace
the incidence points for the weeks that included holidays by means of cubic interpolation. The
lists of holidays for the corresponding years are uploaded from the separate ﬁles. The same
interpolation operation is applied to the encountered data gaps.
Gathering all the input and bringing it to daily format. The daily values for temperature and speciﬁc humidity are found by averaging the 6-hour period measurements that come
from the database. The assessment for daily incidence is received by interpolation of the weekly
hu
W
= nW
incidence, assuming that nTinf
inf /7, where ninf is a weekly incidence value taken from the
T hu
database and ninf is the daily incidence for Thursday of the corresponding week.

2.2

ARI phases evaluation.

For the sake of convenience we have chosen to split the data into distinct time frames from
July 1st to June 30th of the following year. The data analysis has shown that several phases
of ARI dynamics could be distinguished within one time frame (see ﬁgure 2), those are lower
ARI level, higher ARI level, level transitions, and an epidemic outbreak which could be absent
in some years. This consequent repetition of phases forms a certain pattern typical for all
the Russian cities with incidence data available. A stable and relatively low ARI incidence in
summer months is followed by a steep rise of the number of new ARI infections in SeptemberOctober. In late autumn the ARI incidence is either become stabilized again until the epidemic
outbreak (ﬁg. 2b) or is subjected to ﬂuctuations (ﬁg. 2a,c). In one of the spring months (from
March to May) the backward transition from higher ARI to lower ARI incidence starts, ending
in July. To receive the parameters of the phases within a ﬁxed time frame the incidence data
is analyzed in the following sequence:
Assessing the higher and lower ARI incidence levels
1. Let di ∈ 1, 366 be the i-th day of the time frame. The interval d1 , d74 (July 1st to
September 12th) gives us the time period characterized by the lower ARI incidence in
2404

A computational approach to investigate patterns . . .

Leonenko, Ivanov and Novoselova

Figure 2: ARI incidence curves for three consequent time frames demonstrating diﬀerent incidence patterns: (a) late epidemic outbreak, (b) early epidemic outbreak, (c) the absence of an
outbreak.

Russian cities (the assessment of the ﬁrst and the last days of this period was performed
using the incidence data available). The interval d75 , d340 (from September 13th to June
5th of the following year) corresponds to higher ARI level.
2. Let y(di ) be the daily incidence for the i-th day, then Y1 = {y(d1 ), y(d2 ), · · · , y(d74 )} is
the sequence of incidence points, roughly corresponding to the lower ARI. In the same
fashion we deﬁne Y2 = {y(d75 ), y(d76 ), · · · , y(d340 )} — starting points to ﬁnd the higher
ARI level.
3. To ﬁnd a1 and a2 , the average lower and higher ARI incidence levels during the particular
time frame, we seek the approximation for each point set Yi , i = 1, 2 by a horizontal line
y = ai via the iterative ﬁtting procedure:
2405

A computational approach to investigate patterns . . .

Leonenko, Ivanov and Novoselova

(j)

(a) Calculate the parameter value ai (scipy.optimize.curve fit procedure from
Python SciPy library is used), then calculate δj2 , the square of distance between the
(j)

corresponding line y = ai
(0)
Y i = Yi .
(b) If δj2 > , where

(j)

and the set Yi , where j > 0 is the iteration number,

> 0 is the accuracy parameter selected by the user, then remove
(j)

(j)

one incidence point from Yi , which is the farthest from the line y = ai (thus
(j+1)
(j)
deﬁning a set Yi
), and proceed to the next iteration. Otherwise ai =: ai is
the demanded incidence level.
The levels of lower and higher ARI incidence are marked on the incidence graphs by blue
and red horizontal dashed lines (see ﬁgure 2). The actual incidence, as it was mentioned
before, could ﬁt almost perfectly the corresponding levels (ﬁg. 2b), or could be subjected to
ﬂuctuations, from minor to major ones (ﬁg. 2a,c). The major ﬂuctuation as a rule corresponds
to the epidemic outbreak.
Allocating the epidemic curves. Denote Y (j) , j = 1, 2, · · · — the consequence of ordered
incidence sets used to search for the epidemic curves. Y (1) := Y2 (higher ILI level incidence
points from the previous paragraph). For the i-th iteration step:
• Finding dm : y(dm ) = maxdk ∈Y (i) y(dk ), which is the day with the highest incidence in
Y (i) . We consider y(dm ) a peak of some incidence curve (in the degenerate case it could
consist of one point).
• Finding Ycurv , the set of all the points of prospected incidence curve by iteratively adding
(i)
(i)
(i)
(i)
points y(dm−1 ), y(dm−2 ), · · · to the left and y(dm+1 ), y(dm+2 ), · · · to the right of the peak,
until reaching the higher ILI level a2 , the inﬂection points (those that suﬃce the conditions
(i)
(i)
(i)
(i)
y(dm−k ) ≥ y(dm−(k−1) ) and y(dm+l ) ≤ y(dm+(l−1) ) correspondingly), or the end of the
2
incidence points sequence .
(i)

• Calculating the curve peak excess yexc = y(dm ) − a2 , where a2 is the higher ARI incidence
(i)
level. If yexc > ε, then Ycurv contains the points of epidemic outbreak3 .
• Proceeding to the next iteration with Y (i+1) := Y (i) − Ycurv , until Y (i+1) = ∅.
The incidence points that lie in the interval [a1 + Δ; a2 − Δ], where Δ > 0 is a user-deﬁned
small parameter (it’s assumed, however, that Δ << a1 , Δ << a2 ), are considered to belong to
level transition phase.
The epidemic curves allocated by the algorithm are shown on ﬁgure 2 with red solid lines,
vertical dashed lines correspond to the epidemic point markers taken from the ARI incidence
database (they are stored there along with the incidence data). As far as we’re working with
incidence data retrospectively, whereas the database epidemic markers were set in real time4 ,
we consider our algorithm to be more accurate in deﬁning the start and the end of an epidemic
outbreak — this could be crucial for the statistical analysis, particularly the one that is described
in the next section.
2 Includes

reaching the incidence points that were removed during the previous iterations
value ε was statistically assessed to make all the peaks be contained in the set of epidemic points
provided with the ARI database
4 The epidemic marker is set by surveillance specialists if the corresponding weekly incidence exceeds the
epidemic threshold for the given week, which is assessed via statistical methods on the data of past epidemics
[11]
3 The

2406

A computational approach to investigate patterns . . .

3

Leonenko, Ivanov and Novoselova

ARI incidence and the weather conditions

After we have found the recurring patterns of ARI dynamics and created an algorithm to
distinguish the epidemic and inter-epidemic ARI incidence, we can use this information to
seek the relation between the epidemics and the weather factors — which are temperature and
speciﬁc humidity5 . In a few papers this analysis was already made for some of Russian ARI
incidence data, particularly, in [13] the dependence of weekly incidence data and the weekly
average temperature was analyzed on Moscow data from 1959 to 1989.

3.1

Data sources

From the various cities available through the database we have chosen to take Moscow, SaintPetersburg and Novosibirsk. Being the three biggest Russian cities, they have slightly diﬀerent
weather conditions which make it interesting to compare their ARI incidence patterns.
For comparison purposes we have also used the daily incidence data converted by means of
our algorithms from French weekly ILI incidence ( Ile-de-France region, 1985 to 2015) gathered
and provided in open access via French Sentinelles surveillance system [15]. The approximate
epidemic threshold to distinguish the inter-epidemic and epidemic ARI was evaluated from
weekly ILI reports available on the Sentinelles website (180 weekly cases per 100000 persons,
which gives approximately 0.3 daily cases per 1000). As far as the incidence data for particular
cities was not available, we’ve decided to consider Ile-de-France a solid urban conglomerate6
Another problem of French data is that only the cases of inﬂuenza-like illness are considered7 ,
thus leaving behind the majority of ARI cases.
The dataset on temperature and speciﬁc humidity was provided by NOAA National Center
for Environmental Prediction [7]. Although all four urban areas under consideration belong to
temperate zones, Russian cities have more dramatic temperature variation, as one can see from
Table 1.

Temp. (C)
Spec. hum. (kg/kg)

Saint-Petersburg

Moscow

Novosibirsk

Ile-de France

-35.7..+31.1
0.0002-0.018

-33.9..+30.8
0.0002-0.019

-44.7..+27.9
0.000025-0.018

-15.3..+30.4
0.0011-0.016

Table 1: Ranges for average daily temperature and humidity from 1986 to 2015

3.2

Preliminary analysis

In the ﬁgure 3 the daily ARI incidence points for four urban areas (Saint Petersburg, Moscow,
Novosibirsk and Ile-de-France) are plotted against the corresponding data on temperature and
speciﬁc humidity. The correlations between the ARI incidence data and the data on humidity
and temperature were found using scipy.stats.linregress routine (Python SciPy library)
along with the corresponding p-values (two-sided p-values were found for a hypothesis test
5 As far as temperature and speciﬁc humidity are highly correlated, one of these factors could have been
chosen instead of regarding both, but we were interested in ﬁnding particular values of these two characteristics
rather than just establishing the existence of correlation between the weather factors and the ARI incidence.
6 This assumption is not that far from reality, because Ile-de-France consists of Paris and its suburbs which
are tied to the French capital by daily workforce migration.
7 According to French standards ILI requires sudden fever > 39 C with myalgia and respiratory signs [15]

2407

A computational approach to investigate patterns . . .

Leonenko, Ivanov and Novoselova

Figure 3: The daily ARI (ILI) incidence vs weather factor levels

2408

A computational approach to investigate patterns . . .

Leonenko, Ivanov and Novoselova

whose null hypothesis is that the linear trendline slope is zero, which is equal to absence of
correlation). The results show that the inter-epidemic ARI incidence (blue dots) is inversely
proportional to both temperature and humidity (see table 2) with p-values not distinguishable
from zero, whereas the cases attributed to the epidemic ARI (red dots) don’t show that kind
of dependence — the correlation coeﬃcients between the epidemic ARI incidence and weather
factors are very small and in most cases statistically non-signiﬁcant (table 3). Also it could be
seen that the epidemic cases clouds are limited at their right edge by certain temperature and
speciﬁc humidity thresholds. It means that for temperature and humidity values exceeding a
certain value (roughly 3 C and 0.04 kg/kg for Russian cities; 14 C and 0.09 kg/kg for Ile-deFrance) there are no corresponding red points in the graph. The mentioned values are only
rough assessments, we also need to take into the account that the right edges of red point clouds
are not strictly vertical. In fact they lean towards the ordinate axis: the higher the value of
epidemic ARI incidence is, the more limited weather conditions suﬃce that incidence (at least
when we talk about a posteriori analysis of historical incidence data). To be able to establish
this slope automatically for any epidemic ARI dataset we have created the right edge allocation
algorithm described in the next subsection.
Saint-Petersburg
Corr. coef.

Moscow

Novosibirsk

Ile-de-France

Temp.

Hum.

Temp.

Hum.

Temp.

Hum.

Temp.

Hum.

-0.64

-0.62

-0.63

-0.63

-0.68

-0.69

-0.55

-0.47

Table 2: Correlations between the non-epidemic ARI incidence and the weather factors

Saint-Petersburg
Corr. coef.
p-value

Moscow

Novosibirsk

Ile-de-France

Temp.

Hum.

Temp.

Hum.

Temp.

Hum.

Temp.

Hum.

-0.03
0.33

-0.01
0.79

-0.05
0.18

-0.06
0.07

-0.15
2.2 · 10−7

-0.16
1.4 · 10−7

-0.01
0.73

-0.03
0.23

Table 3: Correlations between the epidemic ARI incidence and the weather factors

3.3

Right edge allocation algorithm

The algorithm is implemented if a form of a Python program, the modules spatial, stats and
odr of SciPy package were used. It follows the speciﬁed sequence of actions:
1. A convex hull C is build for the the epidemic ARI incidence point cloud. The edge of C is
formed by a number of intervals, each of those being deﬁned by two points. Let’s deﬁne
the set of that points as E.
2. The contour of C is divided into n parts (n is user-deﬁned, for our case n = 4..5) in the
following fashion:
(a) Let us consider the set of angles M = {∠Ai−1 Ai Ai+1 |Aj ∈ E}, where Ai−1 and
Ai+1 are the neighboring points of Ai on the contour of C.
2409

A computational approach to investigate patterns . . .

Leonenko, Ivanov and Novoselova

(b) Deﬁne ∠XY Z := min(M ). Then the vertex Y we consider a separation point for
the contour of C.
(c) Exclude ∠XY Z from M
(d) Repeat until we have n separation points that deﬁne n parts of the contour of C.
3. The contour part that lies to the right of the red cloud points is deﬁned as the right edge
(the green lines on the plots of ﬁg. 3). It could consist of one or several segments of a
contour. To assess the slope of the epidemic cloud we need to ﬁnd a linear approximation
for the ARI incidence points which lie on the right edge (if the latter consists of one
segment, the resulting line will obviously coincide with it). That is done by means of
orthogonal regression (the conventional one doesn’t work well for the vertically oriented
point clouds, which is our case). On the plots the linear approximation of the right edge
of the convex hull is represented by thick dashed yellow line.
The linear approximation of the right edge that we have found allows us to answer the
question whether a chosen daily incidence is possible in combination with chosen temperature
or speciﬁc humidity. That helps understand if the epidemic outbreak is possible and particularly
what levels of epidemic incidence could be observed for the given weather conditions.
As it is seen from the plots, there are dispersed outliers to the right of more dense part of the
cloud which make the contour expand and inﬂuence the slope of the edge greatly. Whether they
represent unlikely but probable numbers of epidemic incidence for given weather conditions or
they are simply wrong is a matter of a separate investigation. Also it’s interesting to mention
the blue outliers for the Russian ARI incidence plots that lie within the epidemic convex hull
(in French plots they don’t exist due to the form of deﬁning epidemic incidence points). They
apparently correspond to high daily incidences which however haven’t passed the epidemic
threshold according to the assessments of Russian healthcare experts (see ﬁg. 2b). It’s possible
that those curves represent some kind of an epidemic process too, only a slight one, which
occurs due to the onset of a non-dominant ﬂu strain or some other ARI virus. The answer
on this question could be given with the help of the laboratory statistics of the virus forms
detected over time — that could be one of the aims of our future works, in addition to those
that are noticed in the next section.

4

Discussion and future works

In this paper we have analyzed the Russian ARI incidence data analysis, established the repeated seasonal patterns of ARI and created an algorithm which allows to allocate automatically
diﬀerent phases of epidemic process for a given time frame. Also we have demonstrated an algorithm which allows to assess the chances of the particular epidemic incidence under certain
weather conditions by analyzing the long-term epidemic incidence data.
One of the possible drawbacks of our work consists in employing the daily ARI incidence
interpolated from the weekly incidence: the resulting curves are more smooth than the real
daily incidence and so using the interpolated data probably diminish to some extent the relation
between the incidence and the weather factors. Unfortunately, the daily ARI incidence data
is less available than the weekly one and it suﬀers from biases caused by human weekly cycle.
We have access to some limited information on the daily ARI incidence in Saint Petersburg
during autumn and winter seasons, so we plan to implement an algorithm for daily incidence
2410

A computational approach to investigate patterns . . .

Leonenko, Ivanov and Novoselova

correction 8 and compare the results with interpolated data we have used so far, thus giving
the answer to what extent the interpolated incidence data diﬀers from the real daily incidence.
The insights into the nature of ARI dynamics that we have gained by employing the computational approach will be used to design the multicomponent modeling system of ARI+ILI
seasonal dynamics in Russian cities. In addition to the the algorithm for the ILI incidence data
analysis and correction described in this paper the modeling system will include the model
for inter-epidemic ARI dependent on the external factors (similar to [12]), the model for the
ILI outbreak, and an algorithm for the outbreak prediction which will be also in charge of
switching between the two models. The development of a framework based on this model using high-performance computing technologies [10] for the sake of predicting the ARI+ILI ﬂu
incidence in Russian cities is the main aim of our further research.

5

Acknowledgments

The authors want to thank Kirill Stolyarov, Research Institute of Inﬂuenza, for providing us
with Russian ARI incidence data and consultations on the nature of ARI and ILI seasonal
dynamics, and Elena Novikova for her moral support and encouragement. This paper is ﬁnancially supported by The Russian Scientiﬁc Foundation, Agreement #14-21-00137 (15.08.2014).
The work was partly performed by the student (Yulia Novoselova) of the Master’s Program in
Computational Science [9].

References
[1] OV Baroyan, UV Basilevsky, VV Ermakov, KD Frank, LA Rvachev, and VA Shashkov. Computer
modelling of inﬂuenza epidemics for large-scale systems of cities and territories. In Proc. WHO
Symposium on Quantitative Epidemiology, Moscow, 1970.
[2] R. Burger, G. Chowell, P. Mulet, and L.M. Villada. Modelling the spatial-temporal progression
of the 2009 A/H1N1 inﬂuenza pandemic in Chile. Mathematical Biosciences and Engineering,
13(1):43–65, 2016.
[3] CDC. Inﬂuenza signs and symptoms and the role of laboratory diagnostics. [online]. http:
//www.cdc.gov/flu/professionals/diagnosis/labrolesprocedures.htm.
[4] Nele Goeyvaerts, Lander Willem, Kim Van Kerckhove, Yannick Vandendijck, Germaine Hanquet,
Philippe Beutels, and Niel Hens. Estimating dynamic transmission model parameters for seasonal
inﬂuenza by ﬁtting to age and season-speciﬁc inﬂuenza-like illness incidence. Epidemics, 13:1–9,
2015.
[5] Daihai He, Jonathan Dushoﬀ, Raluca Eftimie, and David JD Earn. Patterns of spread of
inﬂuenza A in Canada. Proceedings of the Royal Society of London B: Biological Sciences,
280(1770):20131174, 2013.
[6] Flu Institute. Research Institute of Inﬂuenza website. [online]. http://influenza.spb.ru/en/.
[7] Eugenia Kalnay, Masao Kanamitsu, Robert Kistler, William Collins, Dennis Deaven, Lev Gandin,
Mark Iredell, Suranjana Saha, Glenn White, John Woollen, et al. The NCEP/NCAR 40-year
reanalysis project. Bulletin of the American meteorological Society, 77(3):437–471, 1996.
[8] M. Kondratyev and L. Tsybalova. Long-term forecasting of inﬂuenza-like illnesses in Russia.
International Journal of Pure and Applied Mathematics, 89(4):619–641, 2013.
[9] Valeria V Krzhizhanovskaya, Alexey V Dukhanov, Anna Bilyatdinova, Alexander V
Boukhanovsky, and Peter MA Sloot. Russian-dutch double-degree masters programme in com8 Some

of the ideas how to correct Russian daily incidence data were already tested as long ago as in 1970

[1]

2411

A computational approach to investigate patterns . . .

[10]

[11]

[12]

[13]
[14]
[15]
[16]

[17]

[18]

[19]

[20]
[21]

Leonenko, Ivanov and Novoselova

putational science in the age of global education. Journal of Computational Science, 10:288–298,
2015.
Vasiliy N Leonenko, Nikolai V Pertsev, and Marc Artzrouni. Using high performance algorithms
for the hybrid simulation of disease dynamics on CPU and GPU. Procedia Computer Science,
51:150–159, 2015.
I. G. Marinich, L. S. Karpova, and V.A. Kondratyev. Methodological recommendations for the operational analysis and forecasting of the epidemiological situation on inﬂuenza and acute respiratory
infections (ARI). Moscow, 2005. In Russian.
Sergey A Mityagin, Sergey V Ivanov, and Alexander V Boukhanovsky. Multi-factorial predictive
modelling of drug addiction for large urban areas. In Application of Information and Communication Technologies (AICT), 2014 IEEE 8th International Conference on, pages 1–7. IEEE, 2014.
AA Romanyukha, TE Sannikova, and ID Drynov. The origin of acute respiratory epidemics.
Herald of the Russian Academy of Sciences, 81(1):31–34, 2011.
Leonid A Rvachev and Ira M Longini. A mathematical model for the global spread of inﬂuenza.
Mathematical biosciences, 75(1):3–22, 1985.
Sentinelles. Sentinelles surveillance system website. [online]. https://websenti.u707.jussieu.
fr/sentiweb/.
Jeﬀrey Shaman, Virginia E Pitzer, C´ecile Viboud, Bryan T Grenfell, and Marc Lipsitch. Absolute humidity and the seasonal onset of inﬂuenza in the continental United States. PLoS Biol,
8(2):e1000316, 2010.
James Tamerius, Martha I Nelson, Steven Z Zhou, C´ecile Viboud, Mark A Miller, and Wladimir J
Alonso. Global inﬂuenza seasonality: reconciling patterns across temperate and tropical regions.
Environmental health perspectives, 119(4):439, 2011.
´
Sander P van Noort, Ricardo Aguas,
S´ebastien Ballesteros, and M. Gabriela M Gomes. The role of
weather on the relation between inﬂuenza and inﬂuenza-like illness. Journal of theoretical biology,
298:131–137, 2012.
C´ecile Viboud, Ottar N Bjørnstad, David L Smith, Lone Simonsen, Mark A Miller, and
Bryan T Grenfell. Synchrony, waves, and spatial hierarchies in the spread of inﬂuenza. science,
312(5772):447–451, 2006.
WHO. Inﬂuenza (seasonal). Fact sheet No. 211, March 2014. [online]. http://www.who.int/
mediacentre/factsheets/fs211/en/.
WHO. Surveillance case deﬁnitions for ILI and SARI. [online]. http://www.who.int/influenza/
surveillance_monitoring/ili_sari_surveillance_case_definition/en/.

2412

