Procedia Computer Science
Volume 80, 2016, Pages 962–964
ICCS 2016. The International Conference on Computational
Science

9th Workshop on Biomedical and Bioinformatics
Challenges for Computer Science – BBC2016
Stefano Beretta1 , Mario Cannataro2 , and Mauro Castelli3
1

2

1

Dept. of Informatics, Systems and Communication,
University of Milano - Bicocca, Milano - Italy
stefano.beretta@disco.unimib.it
Bioinformatics Laboratory, Department of Medical and Surgical Sciences,
University Magna Græcia of Catanzaro, Catanzaro - Italy
cannataro@unicz.it
3
NOVA IMS, Universidade Nova de Lisboa, Lisboa - Portugal
mcastelli@novaims.unl.pt

Introduction

Computer science plays a fundamental role in many biological ﬁelds, mainly due to the advent of
new technologies that produce a vast amount of data which requires a continuous development
of new technologies and methods for their analysis. Research areas such as bioinformatics and
computational biology have been deeply inﬂuenced by this revolution, and several challenges,
which require the adoption of computer science methods for their solution, have emerged.
More precisely, bioinformatics has started to play a central role in several ﬁelds like genomics,
transcriptomics, interactomics, and metagenomics, mainly thanks to the introduction of new
sequencing technologies which have, on the one hand changed the nature of the data to be
analyzed and, on the other hand, opened new directions of research. In order to tackle these
new needs, novel methods and approaches, requiring the knowledge of both theoretical and
applied aspects of computer science, have been developed. Moreover, although the main focus
of computational biology was on modelling and simulating biological processes, the advent of
the developed technologies, contributed to make these two disciplines closer and related each
other.
Several areas of computer science are employed to tackle the emerging challenges in the
life science domain, ranging from high-performance computing to theoretical aspects, or from
artiﬁcial intelligence to data structures. In particular, these new approaches are likely to involve
computational methods, technologies, and infrastructures, such as:
• high-performance architectures and systems(e.g., multicore, GPU);
• distributed computing (e.g. grid, cloud, peer-to-peer);
• computational simulation (mechanistic, stochastic, multi-model);
962

Selection and peer-review under responsibility of the Scientiﬁc Programme Committee of ICCS 2016
c The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V.

doi:10.1016/j.procs.2016.05.390

BBC2016

Beretta, Cannataro and Castelli

• algorithms (theoretical and experimental aspects);
• applied bioinformatics (analysis pipelines, tools, applications);
• artiﬁcial and computational intelligence (machine learning, agents, evolutionary techniques, bio-inspired methods).
The ninth edition of the Workshop on Biomedical and Bioinformatics Challenges for Computer Science (BBC) took place between 6-8 June 2016. San Diego, California (USA), was the
setting, and the Catamaran Resort Hotel and Spa was the venue.
The main aim of this renowned international workshop was to highlight recent approaches
to face new emerging problems in ﬁelds of computer science, bioinformatics and computational
biology, as well as to discuss future research directions in these ﬁelds. As in the past, also
this year the workshop has been organized in conjunction with the International Conference on
Computational Science (ICCS).
The ﬁrst session, which is dedicated to Biomedical works, comprised four full papers and
one abstract. In the ﬁrst paper Supermodeling in simulation of melanoma progression, Witold
Dzwinel et al. propose the use of a supermodeling strategy for simulating cancer proliferation.
The approach creates supermodels by coupling models of single cells to model the growth
of a melanoma, which was used as a case study also to check the adaptive ﬂexibility of the
system. Moreover, thanks to the synchronization of sub-models, the supermodel was shown to
be able to simulate qualitatively diﬀerent modes of cancer growth than those observed for a
single model. In the paper Modeling cumulative biological phenomena with Suppes-Bayes causal
networks, Daniele Ramazzotti et al. present a theoretical framework underlying the SuppesBayes Casual Network (SBCN), a model that has been previously applied by the same group
to infer cancer progression. The model is shown to be eﬀective for cumulative phenomena.
An investigation on the eﬀects of the priors based on Suppes’ theory and maximum likelihood
regularization parameters on the performance of the CAPRI method has also discussed. A case
study on simulated data is also presented in order to validate the proposed approach and also
to assess its performances. In the paper Targeting deep brain regions in transcranial electrical
neuromodulation using the reciprocity principle, Mariano Fernandez-Corazza et al. explores the
problem of targeting deep regions in the brain, by means of computer simulations within a ﬁnite
element head model constructed from high resolution MRI and CT volumes. In the paper CFD
investigation of human tidal breathing through human airway geometry, Jamasp Azarnoosh et
al. provides a very interesting analysis of the airﬂow through the human respiratory tract. It
presents an analysis of the eﬀect of the extra-thoracic airways on the ﬂow ﬁeld through the lower
airways by means of CFD simulations of the airﬂow through the human respiratory tract. In the
paper Forward Error Correction for DNA Data Storage, Meinolf Blawat et al. presents a way
to encode information in a synthetic DNA sequence. The authors argue that their forward error
correction scheme is able to cope with all error types of today’s DNA synthesis, ampliﬁcation
and sequencing processes. This approach has been also tested on a real experiment in which a
binary data of 22 MB has been encoded in a DNA sequence and then decoded.
The second session, which is dedicated to Bioinformatics works, comprised four full papers
and one poster. In the ﬁrst paper Generating a 3D Normative Infant Cranial Model, Binhang
Yuan et al. describes an algorithm to generate a normative model of infant’s head shape from
CT scans of normal infant skulls. A mesh creation, registration, and a normal model which is
obtained from CT scans, is discussed with the goal of helping the evaluation of the eﬃcacy of
plastic surgeries in a more objective way. More precisely, a correspondence map between meshes
based on a registration algorithm was generated, and this averaging algorithm was applied to
construct the normative model. In the paper Denormalize and Delimit: How not to Make Data
963

BBC2016

Beretta, Cannataro and Castelli

Extraction for Analysis More Complex than Necessary, by Alex Bokov et al. a method to help
bio-statisticians in speeding up the data extraction process is described. In particular, this
method is for denormalizing data from the approximations of 2NF and 3NF to a single table in
1NF for support to statistical analysis. Finally, the authors describe a tool called DataFinisher,
which is part of the i2b2 Query and analysis system, and it is able to reduce complex data to the
simple 1NF format, which can be easily read by multiple statistical tools. In the paper Computationally characterizing genomic pipelines and benchmarking results using GATK best practices
on the high performance computing cluster at the University of Kentucky, Xiaofei Zhang and
Sally Ellingson present some experiments in variant calling from NGS data using GATK which
is the most widely used pipeline so far. The results were obtained by executing the experiments
on the high-performance computing cluster at the University of Kentucky, and analyze diﬀerent
aspects. In terms of accuracy, two variations of the GATK pipeline (UG vs. HC) are assessed,
while in terms of computational eﬃciency, the two pipelines in Single Threading and Multiple Threading are compared. Finally, the incidence of the choice of the evaluation tool and
of the assumed gold standard variant calls is discussed. In the paper Partitioning of arterial
tree for parallel decomposition of hemodynamic calculations, Andrew Svitenkov et al. describes
the use of graph partitioning to decompose the human arterial network. More precisely, the
detailed model of full human arterial tree and some simpler geometries are discussed. Some
graph partitioning strategies are described and applied, and their results are compared. Finally,
in the short paper Novel Allosteric Sites of Insulin-Degrading Enzyme Identiﬁed through Applied Structural Bioinformatics Analysis, Suryani Lukman describes the application of several
bioinformatics techniques to analyze the structural dynamics of the Insulin-degrading enzyme
(IDE). Novel druggable sites that are speciﬁc to particular conformational states of IDE, which
can potentially be explored for designing investigative probes or therapeutic agents for speciﬁc
spatiotemporal contexts, have also been identiﬁed.
This workshop proceedings includes the ﬁnal revised versions of the BBC papers, taking
the feedback from reviewers and workshop audience into account. The program chair sincerely
thanks the Program Committee members for the time and expertise they put into the reviewing
work, the ICCS organization, for providing the opportunity to arrange the BBC workshop in
conjunction with the ICCS 2016 conference, and all the workshop attendees.
June 2016
Stefano Beretta
Mario Cannataro
Mauro Castelli

964

