Procedia Computer Science 1 (2012) 1883–1884
Procedia Computer Science 00 (2010) 1–2

Procedia Computer
Science
www.elsevier.com/locate/procedia

International Conference on Computational Science, ICCS 2010

2nd Workshop on New Trends in Numerical Methods
for Multi-Material Compressible Fluid Flows
Universit´e de Toulouse, Institut de Math´ematiques de Toulouse et CNRS, France

Pierre-Henri Maire
UMR CELIA, CNRS, Universit´e Bordeaux 1, CEA, France.

Mikhail Shashkov
Theoretical Division , Group T-5, MS-B284 Los Alamos National Laboratory Los Alamos NM 87545, U.S.A.

Abstract
This workshop follows on from the successful ﬁrst one held in San Diego during the SIAM
Annual Meeting 2008. It provides a forum for exploring the new trends in numerical methods
devoted to the simulation of multi-material compressible ﬂuid ﬂows.

c 2012 Published by Elsevier Ltd. Open access under CC BY-NC-ND license.
⃝

Keywords: Lagrangian hydrodynamics, ALE, multi-material ﬂows, compressible ﬂows
Presentation of the workshop
The ﬁrst workshop of this kind was held in San Diego during the SIAM Annual Meeting
2008. ICCS 2010 in Amsterdam will present the 2nd Workshop on New Trends in Numerical
Methods for Multi-Material Compressible Fluid Flow after the success of the ﬁrst one. It simply
provides a forum for exploring the new trends in numerical methods devoted to the simulation of
multi-dimensional multi-material compressible ﬂuid ﬂows.
It aims at bringing together applied mathematicians from Universities and research laboratories to discuss the state of the art for multi-material hydrodynamics simulations especially in the

Email addresses: raphael.loubere@math.univ-toulouse.fr (Rapha¨el Loub`ere),
maire@celia.u-bordeaux1.fr (Pierre-Henri Maire), shashkov@lanl.gov (Mikhail Shashkov)
URL: http://loubere.free.fr (Rapha¨el Loub`ere), http://www.celia.u-bordeaux1.fr/˜maire/
(Pierre-Henri Maire), http://cnls.lanl.gov/˜shashkov/ (Mikhail Shashkov)

c 2012 Published by Elsevier Ltd. Open access under CC BY-NC-ND license.
1877-0509 ⃝
doi:10.1016/j.procs.2010.04.210

1884

R. Loub´ere et al. / Procedia Computer Science 1 (2012) 1883–1884
R. Loub`ere, P.-H. Maire, M. Shashkov / Procedia Computer Science 00 (2010) 1–2

2

context of mesh moving methods (Lagrangian methods, Arbitrary-Lagrangian-Eulerian, MeshFree, etc.). It will focus on the analysis and the applications of these numerical methods which
is essential for research dealing with new sources of energy such as Inertial Conﬁnement Fusion.
Speciﬁc topics of this workshop are:
• Numerical methods for multi-dimensional Lagrangian hydrodynamics in a cell-centered
framework or staggered framework. Several talks will deal with general formalisms in
which Lagrangian numerical schemes can be derived. These schemes are devoted to become the ﬁrst brick of an Arbitrary Lagrangian Eulerian methodology;
• Artiﬁcial viscosity for polyhedral meshes. Most of staggered Lagrangian schemes possess an artiﬁcial viscosity mechanism that allows entropy deposition through shock waves.
One talk sill focus on a mimetic tensor artiﬁcial viscosity method for arbitrary polyhedral meshes. A second talk is an attempt to bridge the cell-centered Lagrangian schemes
and the staggered ones by using Riemann solvers as a new way of dealing with artiﬁcial
viscosity.
• Mesh Free methods using ALE with topology reconnection;
• Mesh smoothing techniques in an ALE context. The rezone part of an ALE code must be
able to smooth the mesh without washing out the information hold by the Lagrangian mesh.
A technique using the feasible set will be presented in order to improve the robustness and,
consequently the eﬃciency of an ALE code;
• Finally conservation and preservation of symmetries in Lagrangian cylindrical geometry,
a critical issue for many codes, will be studied in two more talks.

