Procedia Computer Science
Volume 29, 2014, Pages 1433–1445
ICCS 2014. 14th International Conference on Computational Science

Double-Degree Master's Program in Computational
Science: Experiences of ITMO University and
University of Amsterdam
Alexey V. Dukhanov1, Valeria V. Krzhizhanovskaya1,2,3 , Anna
Bilyatdinova1 , Alexander V. Boukhanovsky1,4 , Peter M.A. Sloot 1,2,5
1

ITMO University, St. Petersburg, Russia
University of Amsterdam, The Netherlands
3
St. Petersburg State Polytechnic University, Russia
4
Netherlands Institute for Advanced Study in the Humanities and Social Sciences, The Netherlands
5
Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
dukhanov@niuitmo.ru, V.Krzhizhanovskaya@uva.nl,
a.bilyatdinova@gmail.com, avb_mail@mail.ru, p.m.a.sloot@uva.nl
2

Abstract
We present a new double-degree graduate (Master's) programme developed together by the ITMO
University, Russia and University of Amsterdam, The Netherlands. First, we look into the global
aspects of integration of d ifferent educational systems and list some funding opportunities fro m
European foundations. Then we describe our double-degree program curricu lu m, suggest the timeline
of enrollment and studies, and give some examples of student research topics. Finally, we d iscuss the
peculiarities of joint programs with Russia, reflect on the first lessons learnt, and share our thoughts
and experiences that could be of interest to the international community expanding the educational
markets to the vast countries like Russia, Ch ina or India. The paper is written for education
professionals and contains useful information for potential students.
Keywords: teaching computational science; M aster's program; double degree; curriculum; enrollment; student
research; funding opportunities

1 Introduction: Why computational science? Why now?
In the past decade, Co mputational Science has become an indispensable tool in all fields of hu man
life: fro m trad itional physics and engineering to biology, med icine, economics, arts, sociology and
more "exotic" fields like fashion or criminology. The world turns progressively more digit ized and
interconnected, with smart phones and smart homes continuously computing something for us , smart
systems controlling transportation and production, and early warning and decision support systems
protecting our safety and well-being.
Selection and peer-review under responsibility of the Scientiﬁc Programme Committee of ICCS 2014
c The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V.
doi:10.1016/j.procs.2014.05.130

1433

Double-Degree Master’s Program in Computational Science

A. Dukhanov et al.

Progress in these smart technologies requires a growing pool of new-wave professionals who can
develop models, algorith ms and software tools, and then efficiently harness computational resources
available in a mult itude of hardware and middleware environ ments (fro m s martphones and laptops to
high-performance clusters, supercomputers, Grids and Clouds). Experts in co mputational science are
highly valued in all research institutions and industrial sectors, but until recently only few universit ies
provided complete coherent educational programmes in computational science, e.g. [1], [2], [3].
The University of A msterdam pioneered this field by establishing the Co mputational Science
group [4] in 1990 and a Master's program [3] in 2005, first as a track in Co mputer Science and Grid
Co mputing programs. The Co mputational Science group led by Prof. Peter Sloot has been
collaborating with several Russian research institutes within international pro jects. These strong ties
resulted in a special award fro m the Russian government fo r setting up an Advanced Computing Lab
[5] at the ITM O University, St. Petersburg, within the Lead ing Scientist Programme [6]. One of the
goals of this program was the development of joint educational and research programs [7].
A great init iative taken by the organizers of the Workshop on Teaching Computational Science [8],
held in conjunction with the International Conference on Co mputational Science [9], brings together
researchers and educators to push forward this challenging and excit ing branch of science. Joint efforts
and strong incentives fro m high-tech industries helped to promptly establish several new educational
programmes in computational science around the world [2], [10], but the curricula and educational
methods were often inherited from the existing programmes in computer science and applied
mathematics and physics. Establishing an internationally recognized benchmark in Co mputational
Science curriculum could be one of the goals in this Workshop.
In this paper we present a new double-degree Master's programme developed together by the
ITMO University, Russia and Un iversity of A msterdam, The Netherlands. First, we look into the
global aspects of integration of different educational systems and list some fund ing opportunities fro m
European foundations (Chapter 2). Then we describe our double-degree program curriculu m, suggest
the timeline of enrollment and studies, and give some examples of student research topics (Chapter 3).
This information may be useful to the prospective students. Finally, we d iscuss the peculiarities of
joint educational programs with Russia, reflect on the first lessons learnt, and share our thoughts and
experiences that could be of interest to the international community expanding the educational markets
to the vast countries like Russia, China or India (Chapter 4).

2 Global integration of educational systems: Why and How?
2.1 Past, present and future of global education
Globalization and amalgamation o f world economies, with strong interdependencies between the
countries, have led to gradual integration of the educational systems. The first wave came with the
Age of Enlightenment in 17th-18th centuries, which defined the school of thought in Western Europe1
and spread out to Southern and Eastern Europe, Russia, European colonies in Africa, Asia and
America. In the next two centuries, the educational systems developed consistent and compatible
programs for primary and secondary education, and started to form the basis of a global higher
education. Alas, the two World Wars and the Cold War of the 20th century disrupted the integration
process and essentially separated the educational systems of the Western Bloc and the Eastern Bloc.
The only positive side of this separation was the extreme co mpetition that boosted higher education
(although largely inclined towards the military-driven engineering).
Only the last years of the 20th century resumed the integration process by the Lisbon Recognition
1
Curiously, British coffeehouses (not to be confused with the modern Dutch "coffeeshops" for smoking marijuana) played
a crucial role in scientific exchange and educational reform discussions.

1434

Double-Degree Master’s Program in Computational Science

A. Dukhanov et al.

Convention 2 (1997) and the Bo logna Process (1999), which created the European Research Area
(2000) and European Higher Education Area (2010) 3 . With these new rules and standards, joint-degree
and double-degree programs are beco ming very popular in higher education. The un iversities benefit
fro m this model because they can introduce new educational programmes without hiring extra staff,
instead offering some courses in partner-universities. The students find it very attractive because they
can learn fro m the best teachers in the field and gain a un ique international experience while studying
in different countries. Recognizing these benefits, European foundations offer a variety of granting
opportunities through Tempus 4 , Marie Curie 5 , Erasmus and Erasmus Mundus Programmes 6 . A review
of the progress made in international student mobility can be found in [11].

2.2 Focus on Russia and BRICS: Why is EU & USA interested?
All successfully developing countries (e.g. BRICS countries) reach a point when they need to
adopt the top technologies to progress further. That requires more than just a few highly skilled
experts imported fro m the technologically developed countries ; it requires a "mass education". In the
past decade China and Russia have entered this phase; now India and Brazil are jo ining the race. At
the same time, Western Europe is aging and outsourcing most industries to other countries, instead
concentrating on banking, management and research. These two factors shrink the supply of local
students enrolled in the "hard"-science (STEM) programs.
This is a happy point where the demand for top-quality education in developing countries meets
the supply of professors and educational programs in the developed world. China was only partly
successful in sending their students to top universities (mostly in the States), under the condition that
they come back to work in Ch ina: most students did not return. Of course the high -tech companies
where they land are happy with this fact, but for the Chinese government this method is questionable 7 .
Another way to make both parties satisfied is establishing joint educational programs. Th is is the way
we are exploring in the University of Amsterdam, the Netherlands and ITMO University, Russia.
Russian education has been traditionally very strong in hard sciences: mathematics, physics,
chemistry, engineering, and info rmatics. Th is important tradition fro m the Soviet t imes co mes together
with the highest in the world ratio of h ighly educated people: 54% of the Russian labor force has
attained a tertiary (co llege) education, according to a 2008 World Bank statistic http://goo.gl/1KcMUr.
With this excellent background and a tradition of working hard 8 , Russian students are well prepared to
take even the most challenging courses in top world universities, that is, if they manage to learn the
foreign language (more on that in the next section).
2
Lisbon Convention on the Recognition of Qualifications concerning Higher Education in the European Region is an
international convention of the Council of Europe elaborated together with the UNESCO, ratified by all 47 member states of the
Council of Europe. It was also signed by Canada and United States, but not ratified yet.
3
T he Bologna Process strengthened the competitiveness of the European higher education and fostered student mobility
and employability. It includes all 47 member states of the Council of Europe. The European Higher Education Area was created
to ensure more comparable, compatible and coherent systems of higher education in Europe http://www.EHEA.info
4
T empus (Trans-European Mobility Programme for University Studies) is the European Union’s programme which
supports the modernisation of higher education in the Partner Countries of Eastern Europe, Central Asia, the Western Balkans
and the Mediterranean region, mainly through university cooperation projects http://eacea.ec.europa.eu/tempus./
5
Marie Curie Fellowships are European research grants available to researchers regardless of their nationality or field of
research. Scientists have the possibility to complete their training with competences or disciplines useful for their careers.
http://ec.europa.eu/research/mariecurieactions/
6
Erasmus Programme (European Community Action Scheme for the Mobility of University Students) is a European Union
(EU) student exchange programme. From 2014, Erasmus+ took over, a new European programme for Education and Training,
2014-2020 http://ec.europa.eu/education/opportunities/index_en.htm
7
As we were finishing this paper, Russian government declared a similar program, fully covering education of 3000
Russian students in top 200 universities http://en.itar-tass.com/opinions/1643 under the condition of coming back to work in
Russia. There is one important question though: Does this project still make sense if very few students actually return? Chin ese
experience shows that the imposed fine cannot solve the problem.
8
Russian high schools and most universities had a workload of 40 "contact" hours per week in the class plus up to 20 hours
homework per week. This load is now reducing, after Russia joined the Bologna Process limiting the program workload.

1435

Double-Degree Master’s Program in Computational Science

A. Dukhanov et al.

In 2012, Russia decided to promote 15 Russian universities to the TOP-200, out of which 5
universities should land in the TOP-100 of the world's leading universit ies according to the QS World
University Ran kings by 2020. This Program, conveniently called "5-100-2020", has a budget of over
40 b illion Rubles (over 1 billion Euro or 1.4 billion US dollars) for the first 3 years (till 2016).
Without discussing the pros and cons of this "urgent" desire to be in the international ranking, the top
15 universities, including the ITMO University, have already received the money and are eager to
invest in academic mobility and scientific cooperation with the TOP -500 world universit ies. Joint
research projects and educational programs are extremely important in this race, therefore the number
of such programs will grow exponentially in the very near future.

2.3 Integration with Russia: Global issues and solutions
We see 4 global issues that may hamper a quick progress in the ranking race: (1) separation of
Russian educational system fro m research institutes; (2) cultural differences; (3) language issues; and
(4) partial inco mpatibility of Russian educational system with the majority of the leading world
universities, including those in EU. A few words about each issue and possible solutions:
(1) Russian higher education is trad itionally run by the universities under the M inistry of
Education, whereas research institutes are run by the Russian Academy of Science. They are
disconnected. Some collaboration and a few academicians and researchers teaching in educa tional
institutions only slightly allev iate the problem. Th is is a fundamental issue that requires a strong
political decision and immense wisdom in its imp lementation. Last year the first steps have been taken
in transforming the Academy; that stirred a wave of protests. We can only hope that the merger of
education with research will bring more benefits than losses.
(2) The cultural differences are acutely experienced by the students and coordinators of joint
Master's programs. Russian education has been traditionally more "rig id", with teachers and
supervisors giving precise instructions and requiring exact execution. Co mb ined with the high
workload (both in class and at home), this approach gave students very strong qualificat ions in the
subjects they learnt, but as a result students often lack the skills of self -learning and innovative
thinking. In recent years, new young teachers appeared in universities, often with some research
background. They will gradually transform the old stiff approach into a more open-minded style
practiced in European Union and in the States, where students are expected to show initiat ive and
work on their own. Changing the Russian style will take another half-generation because it would be
disrupting to dismiss the old profes sors with a valuable knowledge and teaching experience. As a
short-term solution, we can only tell students about these cultural differences and "instruct" them not
to wait for instructions in European universities, to enjoy the freedom in selecting research topics and
optional courses, and to find their own ways in solving problems.
(3) Most EU countries have launched international Master's programs in English, and most Russian
schools are teaching English starting fro m the secondary education (or primary education in
specialized schools), and most Russian universities offer weekly English lessons in the first 2 years of
Bachelor programs. But in spite of this, the situation with the language is not as cloudless as we would
like it to be. There are two reasons for this: First, the Russian language is very far fro m the English 9 ;
and second, Russia has been largely isolated fro m Western Europe for several generations (roughly,
fro m the Russian revolution in 1917 t ill the fall o f the Soviet Union in 1991 and s everal years of chaos
that ensued). This unfortunate combination exp lains why even after a decade of so mewhat "open"
international relations and modernization of Russian education, the English language is still a
challenge most of the students are facing –often without even knowing it until they take the TOEFL or
9
Most countries in Western Europe speak either Latin (Romance) or Germanic languages, whereas Russian belongs to the
Slavic branch, very different in structure, grammar, vocabulary and sounds. In addition to Russian, many federal regions have
their own co-official languages, often belonging to a completely different language family: Latin (Romance), Germanic and
Slavic (Russian) languages belong to the Indo-European family; whereas southern and eastern regions of Russia speak
languages from Altiac, Mongolic, T urkic, Uralic families.

1436

Double-Degree Master’s Program in Computational Science

A. Dukhanov et al.

IELTS test. Our experience shows that most students enrolled in our Master's program are good in
reading, about a half can decently write, but only 10% score high in listening and speaking tests.
The only global solution to this problem would be introducing the English lessons earlier (in
primary school or even kinder garden) and increasing the professional level of teachers. Obviously,
this will take a long time and lots of efforts on all levels, f ro m govern ment to schools and parents. The
short-term solutions for the joint Master's programs could be either introducing intensive language
courses, preferably starting on a Bachelor level, or adding an entry requirement of TOEFL or IELTS
score only slightly below than that required by the partner-university in EU or USA.
(4) Until recently, the Russian higher education system was incompatib le with the Bologna
Process: the lowest degree in Russian universities was the Specialist, obtained after 5–6 years of
studies. Only in October 2007 Russia enacted a move to the two-tier education model in line with
Bologna Process. Transition to real Master's degree will be co mpleted in 2014. The labor market in
Russia still regards BSc dip lo mas as inferior to "class ic" Specialist education, thus MSc stage remains
mandatory for most graduates. This is a d isadvantage to new students, since Master's programs are not
free any more. But it is an advantage for European and A merican universities, especially since the start
of the 5-100-2020 program, where joint or double degrees from foreign universities are greatly valued.
There are smaller related issues with partial incompatib ility of the semester periods, enrollment
processes and timelines, exam procedures, evaluation systems, grade registrations, credit point
workload, exit qualifications, student feedback, etc. A ll these questions are not fully discovered yet,
and the only way to solve them is by trial and error. The second intake of students will have a much
better start, after the first students have walked the road and put the sign posts.
While we are now considering just one particular programme between a Russian university and a
Dutch university, these global issues and solutions are generic and applicable to all jo int educational
programs established between EU or USA and developing (BRICS) countries.

2.4 Why University of Amsterdam and ITMO University?
The University of A msterdam (UvA) was founded in 1632 and today ranks amongst the top 50100 universit ies in the world. UvA provides excellent opportunities for mult idisciplinary education
and research thanks to some of the most advanced computing, networking, storage and visualization
facilit ies in the world. The Faculty of Science at UvA has more than 70 international master programs
including MSc in Computational Science [3] run by Professor Sloot’s research group [4].
The ITMO Un iversity is the leader in informat ional technologies in Russia and the World
Champion in A CM International Collegiate Programming Contest, see Figure 1 and Table 1. In 2010

Figure 1: ITMO University is the World Champion in ACM International Collegiate Programming Contest.
Photo courtesy of ITM O University http://en.ifmo.ru/

1437

Double-Degree Master’s Program in Computational Science

A. Dukhanov et al.

Table 1: Winners of the ACM International Collegiate Progr amming Contest. ITMO won 5 times. Source:
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/ACM _International_Collegiate_Programming_Contest

the ITMO Faculty of Informat ion Technology and Programming and eScience Institute won a
150 million Ruble (3.5 mln Euro) grant for setting up an Advanced Computing Lab [5] under the
leadership of Prof. Sloot [6].
Within this project, researchers worked together on leading-edge computational science problems
in co mplex networks and dynamical systems [12], [13], [14], in adaptive load balancing for distributed
computing [16], in v irtual problem-solving environ ments for semiconductor research [17], in artificia l
intelligence and finite element models for flood early warn ing and decision support systems [18], [19],
[20]. Another goal of the project was development of jo int educational programs. Based on our
previous experience [3], [21], [22], we launched a double-degree Master's program in Co mputational
Science and held the first International Young Scientists Conference, which resulted in a special issue
of the Journal of Computational Science [7].
The education in Co mputational Science is supported with in various projects of the Russian
Govern ment and President. The first program on Supercomputer Education was held in 2010-2012
http://hpc.msu.ru/?q=node/117. More than 40 Russian universities participated in this project and
more than 100 courses were designed for Bachelor and Master Programs. It created a strong
foundation to train specialists and researchers in Co mputational Science. In that project the ITM O
University played a flagship role in the area of designing international joint educational programs ,
including our new Double-Degree Master's Program in Computational Science.
The decision to combine efforts in marry ing Russian educational system to European standards
emerged as a logical continuation of a long-term scientific cooperation of the ITMO eScience
Research Institute and the UvA Computational Science group.
The quality of students in ITMO University and their career opportunities.
According to the Report of the Higher School of Econo mics on quality of students admitted to
state universities http://goo.gl/3UVsOH, out of over 650 universit ies in Russia, ITMO Uni versity is
#7 in quality of the enrolled high-school graduates and #1 in the number of schol arships in the field
of Informatics & Computer Science (see Table 2).
The main criteria of a program selection for a student are career opportuni ties and future salary.
Statistics of salary offers in Russia –based on over 2 million open positions collected from a hundred
job search requests in websites Superjob.ru, HeadHunter.ru, Rabota.ru, Job.ru– shows that the highest
salary is offered in engineering positions with higher education in Applied Mathematics, Co mputer
Science and ICT. In St. Petersburg, an entry-level engineer earns about 1000 Euro/ month, 30% higher
than an HR of finance specialist, and nearly 2 times higher than a shop assistant or other vacancy not
requiring higher education. With an average monthly salary in Russia of 26822 rubles [23] (around
EUR 600), ITM O graduates can earn twice as much, working as researchers, programmers, web designers and alike . The demand for master programs in IСT and Computati onal Science steadily
grows and appears a lucrative undertaking for potential students.

1438

Double-Degree Master’s Program in Computational Science

#
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.

University

St. Petersburg State University
Moscow Institute of Physics and Technology
Higher School of Economics, Moscow
Novosibirsk State University
National Research Nuclear University, Moscow
Russian Presidential Academy of National Economy and
Public Administration, Moscow
7.
ITMO University, St. Petersburg
8.
Higher School of Economics , Nizhny Novgorod
9.
Financial University under the Government of the Russian
Federation, Moscow
10. Voronezh State University

A. Dukhanov et al.

Average grade of
enrolled students
(max. 100 points)

Number of
scholarships

92.5
92.3
91.7
88.0
87.4

32
11
111
75
148

86.0

16

84.9
83.9

269
16

83.1

61

81.9

84

Table 2: Average grade of enrolled students (based on the Unified State Examination) and the number of statefunded scholarships in the Informatics & Computer Science programs in 2013. Source: Report of the Higher
School of Economics on quality of students admitted to state universities http://goo.gl/3UVsOH

One of the co mpetitive advantages of our double-degree Master's program fro m ITM O
University and UvA is its novelty and uniqueness. This program will teach students to build
computational models fro m real life observations, to turn these models into computational codes and
to perform large-scale simu lations. These skills are in h igh demand in Rus sian and foreign co mpanies,
both in industry and academia. A Master's degree fro m a TOP-100 university gives extra opportunities
to go for a PhD in prestigious universities or to work in international corporat ions, where Russian
degree would not mean as much as a degree from the University of Amsterdam.
Above all, studying in The Netherlands is a happy and excit ing experience for Russian students.
Dutch people are very open and friendly with foreigners, and the Un iversity of A msterdam is oriented
towards international students and offers a number of services and support facilities to ensure smooth
and pleasant stay and efficient study process .

3 Double-degree Master's programme "Computational Science
in Multidisciplinary Research"
In 2012, the University of ITMO and University of A msterdam launched a double-degree Master's
program "Co mputational Science in Multidisciplinary Research". The program takes two years and
gives 120 ECTS credits. During the first year (60 ECTS) students study at ITMO University, and the
second year (60 ECTS) they spend in UvA. The credits earned in the partner university are mutually
recognized by the other partner. In the end, students defend their master thesis and obtain two
Master's degrees: from UvA and from ITMO.
The two prerequisites are as follo ws: (1) Bachelor's degree in the field of co mputational science
or equivalent, completed with good grades; and in UvA (2) Sufficient proficiency in the English
language. The min imu m score required on the TOEFL Internet-based test (iBT) is 90, IELTS test: 6.5,
and a Cambridge Examination Score with a minimum test result of CAE A or B http://goo.gl/lzLtCn.
The education in ITMO is free. Good students receive a small stipend and in addition have a
chance to work in research projects and earn money sufficient for independent living in the
Netherlands. The tuition fee in UvA is 1835 Euro for our program, 10 times lo wer than a regular fee
for foreign students outside of the European Union, thanks to th e support from the board of the UvA.

1439

Double-Degree Master’s Program in Computational Science

A. Dukhanov et al.

In addition to the regular studies, the students participate in the annual Young Scientists
Conferences http://acl.ifmo.ru/?ws=15 and in Summer Schools organized by UvA and ITM O
together with the SkolTech and MIT. The next two-week summer school will be held in July 2014 in
Amsterdam and in St. Petersburg http://goo.gl/vm24kW.

3.1 Curriculum
Competencies. According to the Bologna Process, Russian education is moving towards a
competency-based system. Our courses are covering three levels of competencies:
(1) Social and personal competencies in communication, ethics, linguistics, teamwork, etc.
(2) General scientific competencies in mathematics, natural sciences, economics, etc.
(3) Professional competencies specialized in the area of Master's degree, organizational skills, etc.
Core Courses in the first semester (see Table 3) develop the basic knowledge and skills in the
field of applied mathematics and informat ics, parallel co mputing technologies , and software
development. Core Courses in the second semester lay the foundation for modeling and simulation
in various fields of science and teach to apply mathemat ical theory in develop ment of scientific
software applications. The first year courses are taught in ITMO.
The English language courses. Most Russian students, especially those specializing in STEM
fields, have difficu lties with the English language. To help them preparing for the studies in UvA, two
additional courses are given in the first semester: Academic English and Scientific Writing in English.
Electi ve Courses in the third semester are taught in UvA. They specialize in one of the
application domains like co mputational bio logy, finance, or earth sciences. The students may also take
some courses from other UvA programs if that will help them in their research pro ject. The fourth
semester is fully devoted to the Master's research project conducted either in UvA or in ITMO.

The first year

The First Semester (ITMO)

1. Applied Mathematics and
Informatics
2. Parallel Programming Technologies
3. Modern Informational Theory
4. Mathematical Models of Software
English language courses :
1. Academic English
2. Scientific Writing in English

The second year

The Third Semester (UvA)

Five of the elective courses:
1. Complex Systems Simulation
2. Evolutionary Computing
3. Scientific Visualization and Virtual
Reality
4. Geoinformatics and Geoecological
Systems Simulation
5. Bioinformatics
6. Computational Finance
7. Forensic Informational Systems
8. eScience Infrastructures
9. Non-linear Economic Dynamics

ECTS

The Second Semester (ITMO)

ECTS

6

6
6
6
6

3
3

1. Continuous Mathematical Models
2. Discrete Mathematical Models
3. Probabilistic Mathematical
Models
4. Models and Methods of High
Performance Computing
5. Design and Analysis of
Algorithms

ECTS

The Fourth Semester (UvA or ITMO)

ECTS

6
6
6

6
6
6

Master's research project (30 ECTS)

6

30

6
6
6
6
6
6

Table 3: Curriculum of the double-degree M aster's program in Computational Science. Credit points are given
in the European Credit Transfer System (ECTS)

1440

Double-Degree Master’s Program in Computational Science

A. Dukhanov et al.

3.2 Timeline of enrollment and studies
The total duration of the program is 2 years, see Figure 2. The program starts in September. The
admission process in ITM O begins in March and closes on June 25. Foreign applicants who need a
student visa should submit their documents before April 1. To enroll in ITM O Un iversity an applicant
should pass an entrance interdisciplinary exam in the first half of July.
To enroll in the University of Amsterdam a prospective student should fill in an application form
before February 1 next year, submit the results of an English language test (TOEFL or IELTS) before
May 1, and provide the t ranscript of records in July. Students are then enrolled in UvA in July and
receive the residence permit and visa before July15. After that the students register for the first -block
courses 4 weeks before the start of the second academic year, i.e. by the end of July. The "UvA
introduction week" helps the students to prepare for their studies by offering lectures and crash courses
and organizing Amsterdam city tours and night parties.
In the end of the second year, students have to defend their Master's theses. The option to submit
the thesis only in English, without a Russian translation, is one of the many unique features of our
program in Russia. The united examination board consists of the supervisors and experts fro m both
universities, and fro m the representatives of other institutions and business organizations. A link to the
potential emp loyers is a relatively new requirement introduced by the third-generation educational
standard of the Russian Federation.

Figure 2: Timeline of the ITM O-UvA double-degree M aster's program. Dates are given for students starting in
September 2012.

3.3 Research topics of Master's projects
The students select a research topic for their Master's project fro m one of the many application
domains of Co mputational Science. They usually solve applied real-world problems, developing
software that utilizes high-performance computing resources and e-Science infrastructures. That may
include data assimilation and processing (including Big Data), decision support systems, or Urgent
Co mputing applications [24] with dynamic control over the co mputational resources (data, software
packages, computing power) in a distributed environment [16]. The students are working in big

1441

Double-Degree Master’s Program in Computational Science

A. Dukhanov et al.

research projects [5], [15], [20], [25], and in the business sector, where innovative ICT technologies
are actively imp lemented and used [26]. So me of the research topics of the first Master students and
their brief descriptions are given below.
1. Real-ti me estimati on of workflow execution ti me in cloud computing environments. The aim
of this work is to find appropriate methods and techniques to create software systems that can
adaptively estimate application execution time. Estimat ion is based on previously obtained
historical data and on the real-time status of workflow execution.
2. Genetic algorithms in modeling relati vistic jets from massive bl ack holes .
Magnetohydrodynamic flow processes (i.e. fluid dynamics with relat ivity and magnetic fields) are
modelled for the jets fro m black holes. Each solution gives a new jet model with a different
spectrum, which will be co mpared to experimental data. With thousands of possible solutions,
smart methods and algorithms are required to choose an optimal model best describing the jet. In
this study, genetic algorithms will be applied to optimize the choice of solution.
3. Study of the news spread among soci al network users with respect to their stakehol dership.
The goal of this work is statistical data analysis from social networks, such as burst size for
different kinds of reactions (positive, negative, and neutral); correlat ion between the user activity
level and the type of his react ion. For examp le, we can suggest that the users with neutral reaction
are less active than with positive/negative reaction.
4. Findi ng vulnerabilities of cri minal systems by complex network modeling. Fighting organized
crime has been an important task of the police forces for a long time. Yet there is still no definite
answer on how, having different sorts of informat ion about the structure of a given criminal
system, police can most effectively affect the system. This project works with the information
collected by the Dutch police about various members of a criminal network, their ro les and
connections. The goal is to build a working imitational model of this system and to find an
algorith m to identify the most crit ical members of the network, targeted removal of which will
disrupt the criminal network.

4 Program implementation status and the first lessons learnt
The first students were enrolled in the summer of 2012, now they are working on their Master
theses. 17 students came fro m 7 reg ions of Russia and fro m Kazakhstan. Unfortunately, only four
students scored sufficiently high grades in TOEFL test and were admitted to UvA for their second
year. They have completed successfully the courses they selected in UvA with the grades of 8. 0 and
8.5 (out of 10). All the other students will receive only one degree, from ITMO University.
It was a hard lesson for the international program, and we took this lesson seriously, introducing
two additional courses in English for the second group of students enrolled in 2013. Since all
additional teaching falls on the shoulders of the same teachers/researchers (without extra pay or
reducing other load), this practice shall be a one-time effort to keep the program going. A better
solution would be to impose an entrance requirement on Eng lish test in ITMO , equal or slightly lower
than that in UvA. This is however a disputable option, since legally Russian universities cannot
request that yet.
A serious problem related to the group split-up is the "double" load on teaching staff: while a few
students study in A msterdam, another few shall be taught in St. Petersburg, and ideally the same
courses that UvA is teaching, to fit the prescribed curriculu m. Alternatively, the students have to be
moved to a different program and merged with another group, which is a lso very difficu lt or
impossible in some cases.
After the second admission campaign in the summer of 2013, 18 students (including one student
fro m China) have been enrolled in ITM O University. At the date of this paper submission, most of

1442

Double-Degree Master’s Program in Computational Science

A. Dukhanov et al.

them have co mp leted the courses of the first semester, except of the additional English courses , where
3 students failed and a few students were at the threshold. All successful students are now filling in the
pre-application forms to register in UvA for the second year of the program.
This hints at another inconvenience: double degree means two enrollment procedures, two thesis
in two languages, two supervisors, and two thesis defenses. It all strains the students . There are two
ways out: First, to convert the program into a joint degree, where just one set of procedures is
necessary and only one degree is g iven jo intly by t wo universit ies. That, however, is far fro m
straightforward due to the many legal and bureaucratic constraints. The second option is to alleviat e
the hurdles as much as possible. We have managed to cut down two trees so far: (1) we will accept a
Master thesis in one language (English) with a su mmary in Russian; and (2) we will organize just one
thesis defense procedure (also in English), where two Master Exam Co mmittees will be present: fro m
UvA and from ITMO.

5 Conclusions and future work
The trend towards global integration of the world economies inevitably leads to integration of
educational systems. A special attention goes to the BRICS countries, wh ich are eager to study in the
best world universities, by all means. A brief discussion of Why and How given in this paper should
have convinced the reader. There are however global issues that shall be tackled to make the joint
educational programs successful, most notably (1) separation of Russian educational system fro m
research institutes; (2) cu ltural differences; (3) language issues; and (4) partial incompatib ility of
educational systems. While the first hurdle might be only Russia-specific, the last three are definitely
present in most other developing countries. While global solutions are possible in the long run, we
discussed also some short-term solutions that could be implemented with a careful planning.
Based on a long-standing collaboration between the University of A msterdam, The Netherlands
and ITMO Un iversity, Russia, we have launched a double -degree graduate (Master's) program in
Computational Science. The bigger part of this paper can serve as a Program curriculu m description
and a source of useful links and action points essential for successful studies. So me examp les of
student research topics and scientific framework projects could inspire future scholars.
There are still many open questions in the program organization, for instance in case of a group
splitting into those who come to Amsterdam and those who stay in St. Petersburg. The curricu lu m is
also changing every year, both in UvA and in ITM O; therefore fixing the program in the agreement
between the universities was not the smartest idea, which we will have to correct now.
A lot of work is being done, and much more is to be done in the future to comply with ever
changing environment and competit ion. We have set very audacious goals: to make our master
program internationally recognizable and to ensure that our graduates stand out from the crowd in
the job market worldwide. Studying abroad, learn ing fro m the top experts in the field, working in real world p rojects and taking internships in leading IT co mpanies will make our Master's programs very
attractive to Russian students, and perhaps to a wider audience. Already this summer Russian teachers,
who raised the World Champions in programming, will be giving an intensive course in parallel
programming to the European students during the Summer School http://goo.gl/vm24kW.
In 2014 ITMO University pl ans to open two more international Master's programs : "Urban
Supercomputing" and "Big Data and Ext reme Co mputing", in partnership with UvA and Technical
University of Catalonia, Spain http://www.upc.edu under the Erasmus+ Programme. Another direction
of future work is formalizing a joint PhD degree between UvA and ITM O. We already have three
PhD students who have been doing a collaborative research under the joint supervision fro m UvA and
ITMO, and who shall defend their PhD theses in August 2014. But under current Russian rules, the
future doctorates will prefer to defend their thes is in UvA, rather than go for additional bureaucratic

1443

Double-Degree Master’s Program in Computational Science

A. Dukhanov et al.

procedures and translation of their thesis into Russian. This way, ITMO and Russia at large are
investing resources into the honor of another university and another country.
One final co mment, after looking at the topics of the Workshop on Teaching Computational
Science: we have noticed that there are barely any female students in Co mputational Science in UvA,
while in ITM O we now have 4 females in a g roup of 15 students. This is not much compared to th e
non-STEM sciences, but much more than Co mputational Science attracts in UvA. It is too early to do
any analysis, but it would be very interesting to find out if (and why) Russian females find
Co mputational Science more attractive than EU females, especially given the fact that Russian
Co mputer Science (IT and programming) also attract very few females (1 in 10 or even 20). Is that the
cultural d ifferences? or linguistic? or the drive to study abroad suppresses the fear of programming? In
a few years we will know.
Acknowledgements. This research is supported by the Leading Scientist Program o f the Russian
Federation, contract 11.G34.31.0019 and by the "5-100-2020" Programme of the Russian Federation,
Grant 074-U01. P. Sloot acknowledges the Co mp lexity Institute of NTU. A. Boukhanovsky
acknowledges the Netherlands Institute for Advanced Study in the Humanities and Social Sciences .

References
[1]
[2]
[3]
[4]
[5]
[6]
[7]
[8]
[9]
[10]
[11]
[12]
[13]
[14]
[15]
[16]
[17]
[18]

A.B. Shiflet, G.W. Shiflet. Introduction to Computational Science: Modeling and Simulation for the Sciences, 2nd E dition.
Princeton U. Press, 2014-01-31
SIAM Graduate Programs in Computational Science http://www.siam.org/students/resources/cse_programs.php
University of Amsterdam Master's programme in Computational Science http://www.uva.nl/en/education/master-s/masters-programmes/item/computational-science.html
Computational Science group at the University of Amsterdam http://uva.computationalscience.nl/
Advanced Computing Lab, ITMO University. http://acl.ifmo.ru/?ws_lang=en
Dutch
computing expert
awarded €3.3M grant to
set
up
Russian computing lab. 2010.
http://www.p220.ru/en/publications/media/?ELEMENT_ID=533
P.M.A. Sloot, A.V. Boukhanovsky. Young Russian researchers take up challenges in the computational sciences, Journal
of Computational Science, V. 3, Issue 6, November 2012, pp. 439-440, http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jocs.2012.08.009
A. Tirado-Ramos, A.B. Shiflet. The Fifth Workshop on T eaching Computational Science (WT CS 2011). Procedia
Computer Science 4 (2011) 1898–1900. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.procs.2011.04.206
V. Alexandrov, M.H. Lees, V.V. Krzhizhanovskaya, J. Dongarra, P.M.A. Sloot. Computation at the Frontiers of Science,
preface for ICCS 2013. Procedia Computer Science, V. 18, pp. 1 -9, 2013. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.procs.2013.05.163
J. Dongarra, L. Petzold, V. Voevodin. Survey of Computational Science and Engineering Graduate Programs.
http://web.eecs.utk.edu/~dongarra/Summary-of-CSE-Survey.pdf
K. Guruz. Higher Education and International Student Mobility in the Global Knowledge Economy: Revised and Updated
Second Edition. SUNY Press, May 1, 2011. 463 pages.
R. Quax, A. Apolloni, P.M.A. Sloot. The diminishing role of hubs in dynamical processes on complex networks. J. R. Soc.
Interface, 6 November 2013, vol. 10, no. 88, 20130568, http://dx.doi.org/10.1098/rsif.2013.0568
P.M.A. Sloot and A.G. Hoekstra: Modeling Dynamic Systems with Cellular Automata, Chapter 21, in P.A. Fishwick,
editor, Handbook of Dynamic System Modeling, pp. 1-20. Chapman & Hall/CRC, 2007. ISBN 1-58488-565-3
P.M.A. Sloot, G. Kampis, L. Gulyás: Advances in dynamic temporal networks: Understanding the temporal dynamics of
complex adaptive networks, The European Physical Journal - Special Topics, vol. 222, nr 6 pp. 1287-1293, 2013
H. Falcke, E. Koerding, S. Markoff. A scheme to unify low-power accreting black holes-Jet-dominated accretion flows
and the radio/X-ray correlation. http://arxiv.org/abs/astro-ph/0305335
V.V. Korkhov, J.T. Moscicki and V.V. Krzhizhanovskaya. The User-Level Scheduling of Divisible Load Parallel
Applications with Resource Selection and Adaptive Workload Balancing on the Grid. IEEE Systems Journal, V. 3, Issue 1,
pp. 121-130. 2009 http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/JSYST .2008.2011301
V.V. Krzhizhanovskaya, M.A. Zatevakhin, A.A. Ignatiev, Y.E. Gorbachev, W.J. Goedheer and P.M.A. Sloot. A 3D
Virtual Reactor for Simulation of Silicon-Based Film Production. ASME Conference Proceedings, Vol. 2004, N 46865b,
pp. 59-67, Paper #PVP2004-3120. ASME 2004. http://dx.doi.org/10.1115/PVP2004-3120
A.L. Pyayt, I.I. Mokhov, A. Kozionov, V. Kusherbaeva, N.B. Melnikova, V.V. Krzhizhanovskaya, R.J. Meijer. Artificial
Intelligence and Finite Element Modelling for Monitoring Flood Defence Structures. Proceedings of 2011 IEEE Workshop
on Environmental, Energy, and Structural Monitoring Systems (EESMS). Milan, Italy, 28 September 2011. pp. 1 -7,
http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/EESMS.2011.6067047

1444

Double-Degree Master’s Program in Computational Science

A. Dukhanov et al.

[19] N.B. Melnikova, V.V. Krzhizhanovskaya, P.M.A. Sloot. Modeling Earthen Dikes Using Real-T ime Sensor Data. Journal
of Hydrology, Elsevier, V. 496, 24 July 2013, pp. 154-165, http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jhydrol.2013.05.031
[20] V.V. Krzhizhanovskaya, N.B. Melnikova, A.M. Chirkin, S.V. Ivanov, A.V. Boukhanovsky, P.M.A. Sloot. Distributed
simulation of city inundation by coupled surface and subsurface porous flow for urban flood decision support system.
Procedia Computer Science, V. 18, pp. 1046-1056, 2013. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.procs.2013.05.270
[21] Y.E. Gorbachev, A.I. Zhmakin, M.A. Zatevakhin, V.V. Krzhizhanovskaya, M.V. Bogdanov, A.V. Kulik, D.H. Ofengeim,
M.S. Ramm. From Electronic Textbooks to Virtual Laboratories. Telecommunications and Informatization in Education,
N 5 (36), 2006, pp. 35-52. Publ: SGU, Moscow (in Russian)
[22] V.V. Krzhizhanovskaya, S.V. Ryaboshuk. Information T echnologies and Software Packages for Education of Masters of
Science in Materials Science. Proceedings of the International Conference on Innovative Information Technologies (I2T).
Prague, Czech, 23-27 April 2012. pp. 87-89, 2012 (in Russian). Ed. Uvaysov S.U., et al. Publ. M.: MIEM, 2012, ISBN
978-5-94506-317-4 http://i2t.diag.ru/uploads/swfupload/files/0e515ef51701b494c13425d4c34e3f1f10ad8c84.pdf
[23] Federal State Statistics Service. Accrued average monthly wages of employees 2000-2012.
http://www.gks.ru/bgd/regl/b13_12/IssWWW.exe/stg/d01/7-08.htm
[24] A.V. Boukhanovsky, S.V. Ivanov. Urgent Computing for Operational Storm Surge Forecasting in Saint-Petersburg,
Procedia Computer Science, V. 9, 2012, pp. 1704-1712, http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.procs.2012.04.188
[25] Dijkstra, L.J., Yakushev, A.V., Duijn, P.A.C., Boukhanovsky, A.V., Sloot, P.M.A. Inference of the Russian drug
community from one of the largest networks in the Russian Federation. Quality & Quantity, pp. 01-17, 07-09-2013.
[26] Ministry of Regional Development of the Russian Federation. Flood Protection Barrier, 2011.

1445

