Procedia Computer Science
Volume 51, 2015, Pages 2464–2473
ICCS 2015 International Conference On Computational Science

Dynamic Data-Driven Deformable Reduced Models for
Coherent Fluids∗
Sai Ravela
Earth Signals and Systems Group
Earth, Atmospheric and Planetary Sciences
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
ravela@mit.edu

Abstract
In autonomous mapping of geophysical ﬂuids, a DDDAS framework involves reduced models
constructed oﬄine for online use. Here we show that classical model reduction is ill-suited to
deal with model errors manifest in coherent ﬂuids as feature errors including position, scale,
shape or other deformations. New ﬂuid representations are required. We propose augmenting
amplitude vector spaces by non-parametric deformation vector ﬁelds which enables the synthesis
of new Principal Appearance and Geometry modes, Coherent Random Field expansions, and
an Adaptive Reduced Order Model by Alignment (AROMA) framework. AROMA dynamically
deforms reduced models in response to feature errors. It provides robustness and eﬃciency in
inference by unifying perceptual and physical representations of coherent ﬂuids that to the best
of our knowledge has not hitherto been proposed.
Keywords: Data assimilation, Uncertainty Quantiﬁcation, Reduced Modeling, Field Alignment, Field
Coalescence, Principal Appearance and Geometry Modes, Coherent Random Fields, Deformable Reduced Models.

1

Introduction

Mapping the structure and composition of localized geophysical phenomena, from benign thermals to hazardous hurricanes, is important to many applications in natural hazards and climate.
Observational evidence in the form of maps can be used to verify, calibrate, constrain and adapt
physics-based numerical models. They can also fundamentally advance understanding of geophysical processes.
Traditionally, observational information has been sparse. However, the arrival of small
unmanned aircraft systems (sUAS), amazingly hobby aircraft [11], that match the time and
∗ This work is funded in part by the AFOSR DDDAS program (FA9550- 12-1-0313), Lincoln
Laboratory(FA8721-05-C-0002), NSF DBI-1146747 and MIT MISTI. Any opinions, ﬁndings, conclusions, or
recommendations expressed in this paper are those of the authors and do not necessarily reﬂect the views of the
funding agency.

2464

Selection and peer-review under responsibility of the Scientiﬁc Programme Committee of ICCS 2015
c The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V.

doi:10.1016/j.procs.2015.05.355

AROMA

Ravela

length scales of many key phenomena and serve as useful testbeds for others has encouraged
new methodological and experimental advances. Many eﬀorts are afoot, our Cooperative Autonomous Observing System (CAOS) paradigm focuses on coherent ﬂuids and seeks to eﬃciently deliver observational evidence for improved prediction, understanding and management
of environmental events.
Coherence is a central characteristic of localized phenomena that are also often transient.
The thermal is a classic example. Coherent ﬂuids can be readily visualized as dynamically
deformable objects that exponentially intensify and decay. They can be described kinematically
using few features at preferred positions, scales and shapes, in addition to the dynamics that
causes their amplitude appearance to change over time. Such a characterization encompasses
Lagrangian descriptors of ﬂows, e.g., Lagrangian Coherent Structures, but in the context of
our work also includes vortex elements, tracer texture, ﬁlaments and contour like features, with
arbitrary dynamical properties attached to these objects.
Mapping coherent Fluid volumes is challenging largely because they must be Simultaneously
Localized And Mapped, which we call the Fluid-SLAM problem. Classical Eulerian sampling
remains unmatched to the sampling rates demanded by many Fluid-SLAM problems. Classical Lagrangian sampling also fails on account of the fundamental nonlinearities that localized
transient systems often entail. Targeted Observation (TO), a technique well known in Numerical Weather Prediction (NWP) entails the use of a numerical model to predict features and
subsequently target them to optimize key measures such as forecast uncertainty reduction. TO
is a clear example of a Dynamic Data-Driven Application System (DDDAS), however, targeted
observation using full-ﬂedged numerical models is too high dimensional and with too many uncertain parameters. For the supplementary observations to be eﬀective, a large set of primary
measurements will already have been ingested to constrain the model. In Fluid-SLAM problems
such as volcanic plume or cloud mapping, this may not be feasible.
Reduced Order Modeling (ROM) that focuses on key features or few parameters of the
dynamical process over short horizons can be used to ameliorate dimensionality issues. One
way to create reduced models for coherent ﬂuids is perceptual. Remotely sensed plumes, for
example, can be used to detect key locations, scales and shapes of features in the observed
tracer ﬂow. The apparent Lagrangian feature dynamics can then be used to make predictions.
Similarly, the apparent motion, growth and decay of the observed tracer ﬁelds (brightness
appearance) and their Eulerian features (gradients, ﬁlter responses) can be used for short term
predictions of the plume. Although such an approach is easily usable in the ﬁeld [9, 11], one
key question is on how to incorporate physics (the thermodynamics of convective processes, for
example), the lack of which restricts predictability.
One classical way to create retain physics is through model order reduction of detailed
numerical models. Another popular and convenient framework involves using the snapshots
of numerical model outputs to estimate the principal modes, known also as Proper Orthogonal Decomposition (POD) or Empirical Orthogonal Function (EOF) among others. Reduced
models are used typically in an oﬄine-online scheme for mapping applications. The reduced
model estimated in the oﬄine stage is used to make predictions in the online stage, and the
reduced state variable is directly adjusted using the measurements to track the real phenomena
of interest. But “model error,” a term that is typically used to represent systematic epistemic
errors, is a key problem with this approach too. If the original model is imperfect (which is
always), then the reduced model is likely to be worse. The unaccounted for model errors can
be aliased in the reduced model, creating many diﬃculties. In this situation, optimal reduced
state variable estimates can be poor.
This is a particularly important issue for coherent ﬂuids. Predictions of coherent ﬁelds typically contain errors that include both amplitude errors (the increasing strength of a vortex, for
2465

AROMA

Ravela

example) and feature errors (errors in position, scale, shape, and other Lagrangian characteristics). In the oﬄine-online scheme based on POD (also applicable to nonparametric reduced
models), however, both the principal mode estimation and reduced variable assimilation steps
do not account for feature errors. This can be disastrous as the following examples show.
For the mode ﬁnding problem, as shown in Figure 1(left), consider an ensemble of coherent
ﬁelds that we will use to ﬁnd a reduced model. The very ﬁrst calculation for the mean is
a disaster. As has been pointed out in earlier work [9], the mean is not an exemplar of the
ensemble, it loses coherence. Further, if the snapshots were used to estimate a Gauss Markov
random ﬁeld model, then the random samples from that reduced model become incoherent
even if all modes are retained in the Karhunen Loeve (KL) expansion (middle). In other words,
the KL expansion of the amplitude ﬁeld is inappropriate when there are feature (in this case
position) errors.

Figure 1: Unaccounted coherence attributes can lead to incoherent statistics (left), and incorrect
reduced models (middle) or distorted estimates (right).
For the assimilation problem, let’s consider optimal estimation for the amplitude ﬁeld. In
the right panel, the optimal estimate (red) from sparse, noisy measurements (dots) and an
imperfect prediction (green) with position error is distorted instead of being coherent. This
is a well-documented problem [10] that plagues estimation in both the physical space and
its reduced sub-space. It is easy to see why. A simple translation of the predicted feature
X ◦ q 1 ≡ X(p − q(p)) with Taylor expansion X ◦ q ≈ X(p) − q0 ∂X
∂p for a translation q(p) = q0
T

∂X
has covariance Cq = C + q02 E[ ∂X
∂p ∂p ]. For non-zero perturbations, Cq has less information
that weakens further with sparse observations. Optimality becomes vacuous even when position
perturbations allow the amplitude errors to be Gaussian.
Augmenting the state vector (amplitude ﬁeld) with detected features (e.g. peak positions
in Figure 1’s signals) could solve the problem. However, feature detection in multidimensional,
sparse and noisy ﬁelds, complex shapes or deformations is diﬃcult. A more general way forward
is non-parametric. Since location, scale and shape can be controlled through a deformation ﬁeld
X(p − q(p)), one could augment amplitude ﬁelds (including vector ﬁelds such as velocities) with
an auxiliary deformation vector ﬁeld q to compensate for a broad class of feature-based errors.
The joint amplitude-deformation representation [10] entailed accounts for all manifestations of
model error on numerical model output ﬁelds, enabling a large number of applications. Visit
stics.mit.edu for detailed information.
In this paper, the joint amplitude-deformation representation is applied to reduce model
errors in reduced models for coherent ﬂuids. In the oﬄine stage, we provide a new method
to produce reduced modes that respects both amplitude and deformation variability observed
in coherent ﬂuids. In the online stage, we again use the joint error to adapt both the model
1 Gridded

2466

spatial ﬁelds are interchanged as vector spaces.

AROMA

Ravela

basis and the reduced state variable. These steps rely on solutions to two key problems. The
ﬁrst is for optimal amplitude-deformation estimation between two gridded spatial ﬁelds, which
is a supervised inference problem using distribution P (X, q|Y ) on sparse, noisy measurements
Y to recover gridded amplitude ﬁeld X and deformation ﬁeld q respectively [10]. The other
¯ using
is a solution to an unsupervised inference problem to calculate the ensemble mean X
f
f
¯
P (X, {q}|{X }) for an ensemble of coherent ﬁelds {X }. This is obtained using a technique
that we call Field Coalescence [9].
Using these two tools, a new spectral/modal decomposition in the amplitude-deformation
space that we call Principal Appearance and Geometry modes (PAG) is introduced. This
leads immediately to a new random ﬁeld model called the Coherent Random Field (CRF) that
is analogous to the KL-expansion. PAG/CRF allows us to create a new dynamic, data-driven
Adaptive Reduced Modeling by Alignment (AROMA) framework, that is robust in the presence
of model error for coherent ﬂuids. We demonstrate results on simple problems and, as such, we
are not aware of other techniques that show robustness of ROM for coherent ﬂuids.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Related work is presented in Section 2.
Supervised and unsupervised inference procedures in amplitude-deformation space are discussed
in Section 3. PAG and CRF is developed in Section 4. AROMA is developed in Section 5 and
Conclusions are presented in Section 6.

2

Related Work

Many eﬀorts in the DDDAS community use sUAS for mapping environmental ﬂuids. In contrast
to custom sUAS aircraft that are both costly and diﬃcult to maintain, or 3D printed versions [13]
that do not yet have economies of scale, we proposed the use of low-cost hobby aircraft. The
original plume hopper using the Skywalker X8 [11] has led to several other duplicate eﬀorts
in environmental mapping (see 1dddas.org). After observing stability issues, we modiﬁed the
designs, see Figure 2 (visit caos.mit.edu). A version implemented by Itzamna Aero (Maya-i9
sUAS) is used for experiments.

Figure 2: The Maya i9 sUAS based on MIT X8 modiﬁcations is used for CAOS experiments.
From a methodological perspective, we proposed a ”Nowcasting” approach, where remotely
observed tracer ﬁelds are used to construct reduced models [9]. Nowcasts are then used for a
second class of sUAS to eﬃciently gather insitu data. Together, the in situ and remotely sensed
data are used to create map through Gaussian Process-based heteroskedastic reconstruction [11],
producing the ﬁrst autonomous “plume hopper” that characterized plume vertical kinetic energies at unprecedented resolution. The contrasting technique is based on an online-oﬄine
approach for producing and using ROMs [7, 13], which has also been used in environmental
mapping in the context of sensor placement and control coordination. We argue and show here
that such identical-twin studies [13] (the reduced model is obtained from the same model that
generates observations) are incapable of representing or accounting for model error for coherent
structures. This deﬁciency is then corrected for coherent ﬂuids by introducing the notion of a
dynamically deformable reduced model that operates jointly on appearance-deformation error
spaces.
2467

AROMA

Ravela

The notion of position errors and grid deformation or distortion has been proposed for the
supervised inference problem [6] and Ravela et al. [10] ﬁrst proposed joint appearance-geometry
optimization in ensemble and deterministic settings. This was then solved using EM and iterated marginalization [12] using scale-cascaded alignment [15], explicit incorporation of dynamical balance constraints and stochastic optimization [12]. Implicit in the deformation-appearance
representation is the notion of a deformation model, which is related to diﬀeomorphic alignment [3, 2, 4, 14, 8]. These approaches are superseded by [1, 15] in our view for the problems
of interest. Of the two, scale-cascaded alignment (SCA) [15] oﬀers a parsimonious and controllable deformation solution that can be generalized. SCA is related to Heeger’s spatio-temporal
ﬁlters [5] but with a diﬀerent formulation for large nonlinear deformation [15]. None of the
other approaches incorporate dynamical constraints nor are they capable of recovering deep
minima. From a vision perspective our work on local variability of amplitude (appearance)
and deformation extends classical work that assumes marginal or global appearance changes
with motion. From a ROM perspective for coherent ﬂuids, a new perceptual component is
introduced through our work.

3

Inference in Amplitude Deformation Space

The amplitude-deformation representation for reduced coherent ﬂuid models is developed
through two essential tools. The ﬁrst, a supervised problem, jointly minimizes the amplitudedeformation error between two ﬁelds. The second, an unsupervised inference problem, estimates
the meanﬁeld from an ensemble of coherent ﬁelds. Both these problems are approached using a
non-parametric representation of deformation, without explicit feature identiﬁcation and with
applicability to highly deformable and sparsely observed features.

3.1

Supervised Inference: Field Alignment

Consider, for simplicity, the deformation X ◦ q = X(p − q(p)) of gridded scalar ﬁeld X (vector
ﬁelds are easily handled [8]) deformed by a dense vector ﬁeld q. Also consider a second ﬁeld Y
related to the ﬁrst ﬁeld by the linear observation operator Y = H(X ◦ q) + n. Both ﬁelds have
uncertainties. To solve for X and q, consider a Bayesian expansion of the posterior P (X, q|Y ) ∝
P (Y |X, q)P (X|q)P (q) with three terms: the likelihood, the appearance (or amplitude) prior
conditioned on grid geometry, and the deformation prior. Formulated this way, the negative
log likelihood of the posterior yields a quadratic objective [12]:

J(X, q)

:=

1
1
δX T C(X f ◦ q)−1 δX + δY T R−1 δY + Λ(q)
2
2

(1)

The term δX ≡ X ◦ q − X f ◦ q and δY ≡ [Y − H(X ◦ q)], C is the amplitude error
covariance, X f is the prior estimate, Λ a potential function on deformation, and R is the
observation error covariance. One way to solve this complicated equation is to note that in
Equation 1, the solution for X is only valid at the optimal q ∗ (see [12] for other approaches).
Objectives from the marginal distributions P (X|Y ) and P (q|Y ) can therefore be iteratively
solved. Resetting X f as the amplitude estimate from the previous iteration, P (q|Y ) leads to
Field Alignment:
Jq (q|X f )
2468

=

1
Y − H(X f ◦ q)
2

T

R−1 Y − H(X f ◦ q) + Λ(q)

(2)

AROMA

Ravela

ˆ f ≡ X f ◦ qˆ, δX ≡ X − X
ˆ f , δY ≡ [Y − HX], Cˆ ≡ C(X
ˆ f ) and
Using the solution qˆ, deﬁne X
solve the second objective:
Jx (X|ˆ
q)

=

1
1
δX T Cˆ −1 δX + δY T R−1 δY
2
2

(3)

ˆ the solution and repeat. Jq and Jx must be iterated [12], generalizing the
Reset X f = X
S
earlier two-step [8]. In an ensemble setting, the objective Jqs = s=1 Jq (qs |Xsf ) is solved with
ˆ f }).
ensemble member s. Similarly, amplitude Jxs can be constructed with Cˆ ≡ C({X
s
The objective Jq itself can nominally be solved iteratively. The solution is initialized with
X f (0) = X f and q (0) = 0. At each iteration i, update X f (i) = X f (i−1) ◦ q (i−1) , deﬁne Z (i) ≡
H T R−1 (Y − HX f (i) ) and q˜(i) ≡ L(i) q (i) then solve:
q˜(i) (r)

=

(i)

[∇X f (r)]T Z (i) (r) ≡ f (i) (r)

(4)

Here, Lq (i) = dΛ/dq (i) , the gradient of the potential. Note that Equation 4 is evaluated
for each component of q˜(i) at pixel or grid point r. Yang and Ravela propose a power-law
constraint [15] for Λ, which they approximate as a weighted sum of Gabor scale-space basis.
Deformation modes are estimated iteratively by cascading from DC (translation) to higher wave
number basis functions; this is called Scale-Cascaded Alignment (SCA) and oﬀers superior performance to diﬀeomorphic approaches [3, 2]. Ravela et al. also use a multiresolution framework
for large deformations [10], solve for multivariate and vector ﬁelds [10], including dynamical
balance [12]. Ravela et al. [12] also provide a non-local stochastic minimization procedure using Broyden-Fletcher-Goldfarb-Shanno algorithm (BFGS) with multiple random initialization,
and Markov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC). Supporting examples and animations are shown at
stics.mit.edu.
ˆ f ≡ X f ◦ qˆ.
Amplitude Optimization: The ﬁnal solution solving Jq is qˆ = i q (i) and X
The objective Jx is then a standard conditional optimal estimation problem whose solution for
the linear observational operator is:
ˆa = X
ˆ f + CH
ˆ T (H CH
ˆ T + R)−1 (Y − H X
ˆf)
X

(5)

Figure 3: Field Coalescence automatically to recovers the mean (left) from the initial ensemble
in Figure 1(left), and associated deformation ﬁelds. Random realizations from just the leading
mode of a coherent random ﬁeld model (middle) out performs classical synthesis whether one
mode is used (right) or all (Figure 1(middle)).

3.2

Unsupervised Inference: Field Coalescence

The second problem we solve is for the meanﬁeld of an ensemble of coherent ﬂuid ﬁelds. Explicit feature detection and correspondence is assumed to not be available, particularly due
2469

AROMA

Ravela

to the highly deformed patterns that can form, in addition to sparse observations typical in
meteorological application. The solution is developed using stochastic-EM to the unsupervised
¯ {q}|{X f }) [9]. The intuition
problem for the mean is obtained using the distribution P (X,
here is that each ensemble member experiences a body force from the other, and the resulting
N-body problem leads to the discovery of the coherent mean ﬁeld as its solution [9, 12].
f (i)
f (i−1)
(i−1)
In the ith EM iteration (i > 0) ensemble members are deformed Xs = Xs
◦ qs
,
also implicitly updating the ensemble covariance Ci . Omitting subscript i for simplicity by
f (i)
writing Xsf ≡ Xs , the E-step forms an updated objective:
S

¯ {qs }|{X f }) =
J(X,
s

¯ − X f ◦ qs )T C −1 (X
¯ − X f ◦ qs ) + Λs (qs )
(X
s
s

(6)

s=1
f
¯= 1
The ﬁrst normal equation that emerges is an expression for the amplitude mean, X
s Xs ◦
S
¯
qs . Substituting it in the objective again produces a pure alignment problem eliminating X.
Nomimally, this can be solved iteratively as discussed for Jq , but as an inner loop of the EM.
(j)
Further, the instantaneous deformation qs of ensemble member s in inner iteration j satisﬁes:

q˜s(j) (p)

=

1
S

(j)

∇Xsf (j)T (p) Zts (p)

(7)

t=s

(j) .
f (j)
f (j)
(j) .
(j)
(j)
f (j) .
f (j−1)
(j−1)
where Zts = Ci−1 (Xt
− Xs ) , q˜s = Ls qs = dΛs /dqs and Xs
◦ qs
,
= Xs
(0)

j > 0 and qs = 0. Naturally, both MCMC and stochastic BFGS versions can also be used with
.
(j)
SCA [12]; we prefer the latter. Once Equation 7 converges, the solution qˆs = j qs produces
f
ˆ (i) = 1
a mean ﬁeld estimate X
ˆs . The next iteration of the E-step commences.
s Xs ◦ q
S
An interpretation of Equation 7 is that every ensemble member experiences a body force
from the other ensemble members and, in this way, all coalesce to a mean. Both synchronous
and asynchronous solutions exist. The coherent structures in Figure 3(left) are coalesced from
Figure 1(middle) which contain foreground and background variability. Other examples in
2D [9, 12] are available at stics.mit.edu. In these examples, features are neither detected nor
corresponded, and observations are sparse.

4

Coherent Random Fields: Principal Appearance and
Geometry (PAG) Modes

Figure 4: Comparison of the distribution of coherent feature amplitude and positions. PAG
preserves the statistics better.
2470

AROMA

Ravela

A natural application of Field Coalescence is to generate deformation statistics that can be
¯ + U Sη
used to produce random ﬁeld models for coherent structures. Let’s assume that X = X
2 T
is the KL expansion with covariance C = U S U , and η is i.i.d. normal with unit variance.
Such decompositions ﬁnd ready use, for example, in POD/EOF. Given that coherent structures
do not necessarily distribute in amplitude via a Gauss Markov process, an alternative is needed
by considering the joint appearance-deformation distribution P (X, q). Sampling is modeled as
X ◦ q ∼ P (X|q)P (q), decomposed here as
X ◦q

=

¯ ◦ q + (Ux ◦ q)Sxx ηx
¯ + Ux Sxx ηx ) ◦ q = X
(X

(8)

Equation 8 establishes that the deformation of the amplitude ﬁeld can be expanded as a deformation of the mean and each principal mode Ux ◦ q ≡ Ux (:, i) ◦ q. The latter term deﬁnes the
notion of a deformable reduced model that we will shortly consider. If the deformation variable
q is also stochastic, we may further write
X ◦q

=
=

¯ + Ux Sxx ηx ) ◦ (¯
q + Uq Sqq ηq )
(X
¯ ◦ q¯ + (Ux ◦ q¯)Sxx ηx ) ◦ q˜
(X

(9)
(10)

¯ and q¯ are the appearance and geometry mean ﬁelds respectively, Ux and Uq are the
Here, X
principal appearance and geometry (PAG) modes, Sxx and Sqq their spectra, and ηx and ηq are
amplitude and deformation stochastic variables. Equation 9 deﬁnes the coherent random ﬁeld
model while Equation 10 oﬀers a practical method to adjust the amplitude ﬁeld with the mean
deformation ﬁeld leaving the perturbation component as a dynamic component.
In Figure 3, the coherent appearance modes are synthesized from the coalesced ensemble.
Random realizations with just one leading PAG mode (middle) is superior to either all (Figure 1(middle)) or one leading normal modes (Figure 3(right)). To conﬁrm, we check the peak
amplitude distribution and peak amplitude’s position distribution, as shown in Figure 4. As
suspected, the peaks are distributed but incorrectly in the classical KL expansion (for Gauss
Markov Random Field – GMRF) whereas CRF produces coherent features with the correct
distribution of peak amplitudes and positions. The implication of CRF for reduced modeling
of coherent structures is immediate.

5

Adaptive Reduced Order Modeling by Alignment

In the AROMA approach, shown in Figure 5, the reduced variable consists of the reduced
appearance variable νx = Σxx ηx and reduced geometry variable νq = Σqq ηq (formulation
¯ Uxx , Σxx and
works with ηx and ηq ), and the principal appearance and geometry statistics, X,
q¯, Uqq , Σqq respectively, with terms as in Section 4. These statistics are obtained by Coalescing
snapshots oﬄine because Field Coalescence produces a deformation ﬁeld for each snapshot, a
GMRF, and leading to the amplitude ensemble also admissible as a GMRF. These statistics
are then used online.
¯ (after coalescence) is used
In this example, during runtime the predicted coherent mean X
to solve Jq when a new measurement comes in. A partially reconstructed state, time average,
or ensemble average could also be used depending on the problem. The incremental deformation q over iterations of solving Jq in Field Alignment are thus used to deform the mean
¯ ←X
¯ ◦ q, and the PAG appearance basis U ← Orth(Uxx ◦ q) where Uxx ◦ q ≡ [U (:, i) ◦ q].
X
The re-orthogonalization (Orth) is essential to assert the conditions on Uxx during incremental
deformation. The dynamic data-driven calculation of q allows the reduced model to adapt without which it simply cannot account for deformation inducing model error, a common occurance
in coherent ﬂuids. Note that Jq could be solved with the norm induced by Uqq , Σqq , and this
2471

AROMA

qˆn
❄
✛ηˆn+1

AROMA ✛

ηˆn

✛ yn

DA

✛ ηn

FA

✲

Coalesce: PAG

Ravela

✛ ηn

✻

✻
¯
Ux , Σx , X

✻
✛
Snapshots

❄

✛ yn

Uq , Σq , q¯
✲

Figure 5: Using Field Alignment (FA) and Coalescence, an Adaptive Reduced Order Model
by Alignment (AROMA) is constructed so that the principal modes can adapt to model error
during reduced variable Data Assimilation (DA).

Figure 6: Automatic deformation of reduced models using PAG modes and Field Alignment
demonstrates the ability to ﬁx model errors for coherent ﬂuids.
iteself can be updated with an ensemble and measurements, but we have not attempted that
here.
In Figure 6, the state reconstructions from reduced predictions from PAG modes are shown
(top-left). The sparse measurements (dots) are shown at the assimilation time (top right) with
truth (green). The automatically deformation adjusted modes (only ﬁrst mode is shown, bottom
left) automatically transforms the predictions to have correct phase. Amplitude assimilation
on the reduced variable then recovers from the amplitude error. The reduced model predictions
are now “phase synchronized,” Without accounting for the position errors, the estimates and
subsequent predictions simply become incoherent. Without correcting the basis, the model
error simply persists. No correspondence or feature detection is used, measurements are sparse.
To the best of our knowledge, AROMA is new.

6

Conclusion

The DDDAS mechanism proposed in this paper is fundamental and novel way to make ROM,
shown here using POD, robust. Without this feedback, current approaches cannot account for
2472

AROMA

Ravela

coherent ﬂuid prediction errors, thus making them unsuitable approach for many Fluid-SLAM
problems. Because errors in source parameters, model parameters, initial conditions, boundaries
and forcings must manifest as deformation or amplitude errors, the joint representation is
therefore complete. The non-parametric representation through auxiliary deformation vector
ﬁeld is robust and avoids feature detection. Simple examples show that Field Alignment and
Field Coalescence can produce Principal Appearance and Geometry modes which leads to a
Coherent Random Field model. We further show that Field Alignment and CRF can be used
to build a dynamic data-driven adaption to ROM, which we call Adaptive Reduced Order
Modeling by Alignment (AROMA). This leads to a new oﬄine-online architecture whose utility
is demonstrated in simple examples. The proposed approach combines a perceptual framework,
without explicit feature detection, with a ﬂuid dynamical framework, so that both properties
are jointly utilized for inference. As such we believe that this approach is novel and has not
hitherto been proposed. We plan to extend our Nowcasting framework with the proposed
AROMA framework for plume mapping experiments with sUAS.

References
[1] Yali Amit, Ulf Grenander, and Mauro Piccioni. Structural image restoration through deformable
templates. Journal of the American Statistical Association, 86(414):376–387, 1991.
[2] G. Charpiat, O. Faugeras, and R. Keriven. Image statistics based on diﬀeomorphic matching. In
ICCV, pages 852–857, 2005.
[3] G.E. Christensen, R.D. Rabbitt, and M.I. Miller. Deformable templates using large deformation
kinematics. IEEE Transactions on Image Processing, 5(10):1435–1447, Oct 1996.
[4] C. Gramkow and M. Bro-Nielsen. Comparison of three ﬁlters in the solution of the navier-stokes
equation in registration. In Proc. Scandinavian Conference on Image Analysis, pages 785–802,
1997.
[5] D. J. Heeger. Optical ﬂow using spatiotemporal ﬁlters. IJCV, 1(4):279–302, Jan 1988.
[6] R. N. Hoﬀman, Z. Liu, J. Louis, and C. Grassotti. Distortion representation of forecast errors.
Monthly Weather Review, 123:2758–2770, 1995.
[7] Chad Lieberman, Karen Willcox, and Omar Ghattas. Parameter and state model reduction for
large-scale statistical inverse problems. SIAM J. Sci. Comput., 32, 2010.
[8] S. Ravela. Two new directions in data assimilation by ﬁeld alignment. Lecture Notes in Computer
Science, Proc. ICCS, 4487:1147–1154, 2007.
[9] S. Ravela. Quantifying uncertainty for coherent structures. Procedia Computer Science, 9:1187–
1196, 2012.
[10] S. Ravela, K. Emanuel, and D. McLaughlin. Data assimilation by ﬁeld alignment. Physica D,
230:127–145, 2007.
[11] S. Ravela, I. Sleder, and J. Salas. Mapping coherent atmospheric structures with small unmanned
aircraft systems. AIAA Infotech@Aerospace (I@A) Conference, pages 1–11, 2013.
[12] Ravela S. Spatial inference for coherent geophysical ﬂuids by appearance and geometry. In Winter
Conference on Applications of Computer Vision, 2014.
[13] Isaac Sledge, Liqian Peng, and Kamran Mohseni. An empirical reduced modeling approach for
mobile, distributed sensor platform networks. In Sai Ravela and Adrian Sandu, editors, Dynamic
Data Driven Environmental Systems Science, page to appear. Springer (LNCS), 2015.
[14] J.-P. Thirion. Fast non-rigid matching of 3D medical images. In MRCAS, Nov 1995.
[15] C. Yang and S. Ravela. Spectral control of viscous alignment for deformation invariant image
matching. Proceedings of International Conference on Computer Vision, 1:1303–1310, 2009.

2473

