Procedia Computer Science
Volume 51, 2015, Pages 1801–1810
ICCS 2015 International Conference On Computational Science

Analysis of Space-Time Structures Appearance for
Non-Stationary CFD Problems
Alexander Bondarev and Vladimir Galaktionov
Keldysh Institute for Applied Mathematics RAS
bond@keldysh.ru, vlgal@gin.keldysh.ru

Abstract
The paper presents a combined approach to finding conditions for space-time structures appearance in
non-stationary flows for CFD (computational fluid dynamics) problems. We consider different types
of space-time structures, for instance, such as boundary layer separation, vortex zone appearance,
appearance of oscillating regimes, transfer from Mach reflection to regular one for shock waves, etc.
The approach combines numerical solutions of inverse problems and parametric studies. Parallel
numerical solutions are implemented. This approach is intended for fast approximate estimation for
dependence of unsteady flow structures on characteristic parameters (or determining parameters) in a
certain class of problems. The numerical results are presented in a form of multidimensional data
volumes. To find out hidden dependencies in the volumes some multidimensional data processing and
visualizing methods should be applied. The approach is organized in a pipeline fashion. For certain
classes of problems the approach allows obtaining the sought-for dependence in a quasi-analytical
form. The proposed approach can be considered to provide some kind of generalized numerical
experiment environment. Examples of its application to a series of practical problems are given. The
approach can be applied to CFD problems with ambiguities.
Keywords: space-time structures, parallel computations, multidimensional data

1 Introduction
The main factor defining current state in mathematical modeling is intensive development of highperformance computing and parallel algorithms. This is especially important for CFD problems
because application of parallel computations allows to transfer CFD mathematical modeling to a new
level. Being applied to direct CFD problems parallel computing enables to speed up the computations
to use finer resolution grids in numerical experiments. Naturally, it makes the numerical experiments
for standard direct problems very effective, especially for modeling of time-dependent processes.
Time-dependent processes are important in computational fluid dynamics (CFD) studies. These
processes are often accompanied by appearing of changeable space-time structures in the flow, such as

Selection and peer-review under responsibility of the Scientiﬁc Programme Committee of ICCS 2015
c The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V.

doi:10.1016/j.procs.2015.05.396

1801

Analysis of Space-Time Structures Appearance for Non-Stationary
Alexander Bondarev
CFD Problems
and Vladimir Galaktionov

separation zones, circulating flows, vortex bursts, etc. The presence of such time-dependent structures
in the flow cause many undesirable effects in practice: reduced lift, airframe and control vibrations,
audible noise. Space-time structures can appear and disappear in the flows defining the flow pattern
and quantitative characteristics of the flow field. Simulating these changeable structures is therefore
an important aspect of CFD.
The proposed new approach in mathematical modeling is an opportunity to solve multidisciplinary
problems, inverse problems and parametric studies. As it is known these three types of problems are
high-priority problems for modern parallel computing. Multidisciplinary problems provide
combination of models for different physical processes in one numerical experiment.
Inverse problems are problems where causes for a desired or an observed effect are to be
determined. The causes are unknown so one should determine them based on observation of their
effects. This is in contrast to the corresponding direct problem, whose solution involves finding effects
based on a complete description of their causes. The inverse problems are very important or practical
engineering, where the typical problem is the choice of desired variant from the set of admissible ones.
This can be the choice of a geometric shape, the choice of flow control, etc. The inverse problems are
classified as boundary searches, coefficient searches, and retrospective inverse problems (Beck J.V.,
Blackwell B., St.Clair C., 1985).
Parametric studies allow to get numerical solution not for particular CFD problem only, but for
the whole class of problems. For such cases the class of problems is defined in multidimensional space
created by characteristic (or determining) parameters of the problem under consideration. These
characteristic parameters are varying in definite ranges. Parametric studies are very difficult and
require a lot of computer resources. But the procedure of parameter optimization and analysis is the
most difficult numerical research. It is a kind of standard parametric studies where the inverse problem
is considered for each point of grid in multidimensional space of characteristic parameters instead of
direct problem. This type of numerical research is intended for finding the domains in the space of
determining parameters where a phenomenon of interest occurs for a certain class of problems.
Such types of numerical research have one specific feature from the point of view of
visualization. Their numerical results are presented in general discrete form as multidimensional
arrays for grid points set in the space of characteristic parameters. The dimensionality of such array
corresponds to the quantity of determining parameters. The arrays need processing and visual
presentation for analyzing and comprehension. Visualization methods are applied to such array with
purpose to bring out hidden dependencies.
To bring out hidden dependencies one should combine visualization approaches with Data
Analysis methods for decreasing of dimensionality (Bondarev A.E., Galaktionov V.A., 2013). It is
necessary due to the evident lack of visualization concepts and tools for spaces having more than 3
dimensions.

2 Problem statement
The procedure of parameter optimization and analysis requires multiple inverse problems solution.
For parameter optimization and analysis one should find the determining parameters where a
phenomenon of interest occurs in a certain class of problems, defined by characteristic parameters
varying in definite ranges. In general, the problem statement for this procedure can be presented in
accordance with (Bondarev A.E., Galaktionov V.A., 2013) as follows.
Let’s suppose we have some mathematical model describing time-dependent CFD process and
reliable numerical method for simulation. So we are able to simulate the direct problem for this
process. During the simulation some event occurs inside the flowfield. For the problem under
consideration a numerical solution F=F(x, x1, …, xn) is formed as a result of simulation. This solution
is defined by control parameter x and finite set of characteristic (determining) parameters (x1, …, xn).

1802

Analysis of Space-Time Structures Appearance for Non-Stationary
Alexander Bondarev
CFD Problems
and Vladimir Galaktionov

Let X denote X=(x, x1,…, xn ).
Then we can consider event functional J (F(X)). Just as logical variable so the functional has two
values:
J (F(X)) =1 – If the event of interest occurs (independently on the event details),
J (F(X)) =0 - if the event of interest doesn’t occur.
Let x΄ denote the value of control parameter when the considered event appears. Thus, the
problem is to find the value x΄ with suitable accuracy.
As a result we obtain the sought-for value x΄(x1*,…, xn*) of control parameter for fixed set of
determining parameters (x1*,…, xn*). But the whole problem is constructing of dependence x΄(x1,…, xn)
for all possible sets of determining parameters inside the ranges under consideration.
If we have a grid containing, for instance, M grid points for each characteristic parameter, then we
should solve Mn similar inverse problems with purpose of finding the values x΄ for all grid points
(x1*,…,xn*) in the space of characteristic parameters. After solving Mn inverse problems one obtains all
grid points where event in hand occurs in the space of characteristic parameters.
Considering the determining parameters (x1,…,xn) as a set of basis vectors, one can present the
space of the determining parameters L(x1,…,xn) having n dimensions.
Then for general case the inverse problem can be formulated as the problem of finding in this
space L all the subdomains L* where the event of interest is observed, i.e. J(L*) =1.
At the same time the problem of data filtration is solved. Setting the ranges for characteristic
parameters one can not guarantee the fact of appearance of the sought-for event inside the range. So if
the event in question is not observed for some point of space (x1,…, xn) at all (i.e. for all values of
control parameter x ), this point is not considered.
Such approach can be quite useful if we are dealing with CFD problems having ambiguity in
solution. There are some well-known CFD problems with dual type of solution such as Mach and
regular reflection for shock waves or oscillating and non-oscillating regimes for flow interacting with
solid surface, etc. All these processes are expressed by changing of existing time-space structures.
Using the proposed approach one can trace the transfer from one type of solution to another one in
multidimensional space of characteristic parameters.
In the final analysis such general problem statement allows to get the conditions of unsteady event
appearance not for separate problem only, but for the whole class of problems. The class of problems
is determined by the set of characteristic parameters varying in definite ranges.
It is necessary to note that for common case we have not any theoretical criterion of selecting a
control parameter from the set of characteristic parameters. For each specific class of CFD problems
the main criterion of control parameter choice is practical experience basing on previous numerical
and physical experiments.

3 Parallelization
The whole algorithm for parameter optimization and analysis (POA) requires to solve very large
number of inverse problems (Mn, if we assume Mn grid points for each from n directions). Each of
these inverse problems assumes solving of many direct problems. It makes the whole procedure of
computation laborious, especially for large and complex flows. The only way out of this situation is
applying of parallel computations. The problem of the optimal and effective way of parallelization was
thoroughly discussed in the paper (Bondarev A.E., Galaktionov V.A., 2013). There were considered
parts of the whole algorithm for parameter optimization and analysis. For these parts the main criterion
of applicability for parallelizing is independence of specific numerical method. From this point of
view the most perspective way for parallelizing is applying the approach of multitask parallelism
using the principle “one task – one process”. Due to minimal quantity of internal exchanges between
the processes we are able to create an effective practical tool for POA.

1803

Analysis of Space-Time Structures Appearance for Non-Stationary
Alexander Bondarev
CFD Problems
and Vladimir Galaktionov

The general parallel computing scheme used for parameters analysis and optimizing is shown in
Figure 1.

Figure 1: Parallel computing scheme for POA.

We assume that k processes are provided for parallel computation. The control process P0 creates
the grid in the multidimensional space of determining parameters, then P0 forms tasks and sends the
tasks to others processes and to itself also. After task completion P0 collects the results and
implements all procedures defined by user, such as data processing and transformation.
Due to the absence of internal exchanges between the processes the procedure of parallelizing
amounts to creation of control interface for tasks distribution and data collecting in one
multidimensional array.
There are two effective and easy ways to create such interface for parallel computations. The first
way is to apply MPI (Message Passing Interface) (Pacheco, 1997). This variant of parallelizing
allows implementing a program tool for POA. The computation can be carried out k times faster
according to the number of provided processes.
The other way of parallelization is application of DVM technology (DVM-System, 2015),
elaborated in Keldysh Institute of Applied Mathematics RAS. DVM-system provides unified toolkit to
develop parallel programs of scientific-technical calculations in C and Fortran. DVM parallel model is
based on data parallel model. The DVM name reflects two names of the model - Distributed Virtual
Memory and Distributed Virtual Machine. These two names show that DVM model is adopted both
for shared memory systems and for distributed memory systems. DVM high level model allows not
only to decrease cost of parallel program development but provides unified formalized base for
supporting Run-Time System, debugging, performance analyzing and prediction. Unified parallel
model is built in C and Fortran languages on the base of the constructions, that are "transparent" for
standard compilers, that allows to have single version of the program for sequential and parallel
execution. C-DVM and Fortran DVM compilers translate DVM-program in C or Fortran program
correspondingly, including parallel execution Run-Time Support system calls. So only requirement to
a parallel system is availability of C and Fortran compilers. This way of code parallelizing allows one
to save a lot of human resources for coding and debugging. At the same time DVM parallelization
provides less speed of computations in comparison with MPI.
For both types of parallel technologies control interfaces for parameter optimization and analysis
were designed. Both control interfaces were applied to jet interaction problem for testing. Testing
computations were carried out for 20 processors. According to test results the time of computations for

1804

Analysis of Space-Time Structures Appearance for Non-Stationary
Alexander Bondarev
CFD Problems
and Vladimir Galaktionov

DVM method is 205 seconds. The same test for MPI case requires 144 seconds. At the same time
DVM application allowed to decrease human expenses for coding and debugging up to ten times as
against MPI. So both types of parallel technologies are quite applicable for problems in question.
As a result of such computations one obtains control parameter dependence on determining
parameters in general discrete form as n-dimensional array x΄(x1,…, xn).

4 Multidimensional Data Analysis
For practical CFD problems the main goal of simulation is usually obtaining the control parameter
dependence on determining parameters of the problem in quasi-analytical form or in tabulated form.
As a matter of fact obtaining such dependencies have been the main point of practical CFD
applications last 50 years.
Using described above approach for parameter optimization and analysis one obtains control
parameter dependence on determining parameters in general discrete form as n-dimensional array
x΄(x1*,…, xn*) for grid points in the space of characteristic parameters.
It is necessary to note that multidimensional data analysis was not used in CFD problems before
last years. The methods and approaches of Scientific Visualization (Bondarev A.E., Galaktionov V.A.,
Chechetkin V.M., 2011) were quite sufficient for analyzing even the most complicated CFD
processes. But at the current time we are able to solve the problems of POA and parametric studies.
The solutions of such problems are multidimensional data volume, so one should be able to process
and analyze the data with final purpose to find out the sought-for dependencies.
The form of multidimensional array is not suitable for practical analysis. The most effective way of
finding the sought-for dependence in a quasi-analytical form is a visual presentation of array.
If we have visual presentation of data array, we are able to approximate the data (where it is
possible) by simple geometric elements, such as lines, planes, parts of spheres etc. After
approximation we can present the sought-for dependence as a quasi-analytical expression.
Due to evident lack of adequate visual concepts for data volumes with dimensionality number
more than three (Bondarev A.E., Galaktionov V.A., Chechetkin V.M., 2011) one should try to
decrease the volume dimensionality up to 3 with purpose to apply standard Scientific Visualization
methods after decreasing.
There are some ways to decrease the array dimensionality. These ways are well known from the
group of methods for multidimensional data processing and analysis. Being frank we should note the
fact that most of these methods were used for a long time before computers appearance. This field of
science was known as “experimental data processing”.
The first way is the analysis of variances for each characteristic parameter. Characteristic
parameter is considered as coordinate direction. Data variances D1, D2, … Dn are computed along the
each direction. Then the variances should be arranged. The direction with minimal variance D min =
min{Di} is rejected. This procedure sometimes is called as compactification.
More radical kind of compactification can be implemented as follows. After variances computing
and arranging one chooses three directions with maximal variances. If other variances are much less
than this triplet one changes the data for directions corresponding to other variances by means. After
such decreasing of dimensionality one can operate in standard 3D space. This approach has one
disadvantage - it does not work if multidimensional data are close to hypersphere. Nevertheless for
many practical cases with small dimensionality (4 or 5) the approach works well enough.
Another way is the construction of different 3D data projections for various triplets of determining
parameters. If the data on projections for some direction are close to constant then this direction can be
rejected.
Both approaches are not based on any scientific theory. The approaches are the ways of creation
some hypothesis about data in question. But both approaches allow to obtain real results in practice.

1805

Analysis of Space-Time Structures Appearance for Non-Stationary
Alexander Bondarev
CFD Problems
and Vladimir Galaktionov

Applying Data Analysis methods one can use PCA method (Principal Component Analysis) with
purpose to decrease the number of dimensions (Zinovyev, 2000). The principal component is a
direction in multidimensional space with maximal data variance along. PCA method application is
based on localization of 3 principal components and data presentation using these components as new
coordinate system. So this method provides the choice of a new orthogonal basis with coordinate
directions corresponding to the variances arranged in descending order. For the case of data with
complex topology PCA method is generalized. The generalized method is called principal manifolds
method (or principal curves) (Gorban A., Kegl B., Wunsch D., Zinovyev A. (Eds.), 2007).
PCA method allows one to project original array to plane or to 3D space created by principal
components. Before PCA applying one should make a decision how many principal components are
required for adequate description of multidimensional data volume under consideration. For this
purpose one should compute and arrange eigenvalues for covariance matrix built from original data.
The best variant is that one where 2 or 3 principal components provide the main income to general
variance of data volume.
For this case the scheme of data volume processing looks as follows.
For original data volume we define 3 first principal components Y1, Y2, Y3 , where each of them is a
linear combination created from original variables Y(x1, …,xn) = ∑Bixi . Then the points from original
data volume are transferred to principal components
Ai(x1, …,xn)= Ai(Y1(x1, …,xn), Y2(x1, …,xn), Y3(x1, …,xn)).
Then one can easily implement 2D visual presentation Ai(Y1,Y2) or 3D one Ai(Y1, Y2, Y3). The
visualization allows one to estimate the shape of dependencies in the data volume and to approximate
the shape by geometric primitives having analytical form. For the simplest case one can apply rough
linear approximation by parametric plane. Using inverse transformation for the approximating
parametric plane one obtain the sought-for quasi-analytical dependence in original variables. If using
of one approximating parametric plane is insufficient then one can use a set of such planes.
Combining these methods we can decrease the array dimensionality for many practical cases.

5 Applications
This section contains the examples of the proposed above approach applied to some practical
problems. It is applied in some variations due to different aims for each class of problems.
The first example is the problem of unsteady interaction of the supersonic viscous flow with jet
obstacle (Bondarev, 2014). Figure 2 illustrates the example. The obstacle appears due to co-current
underexpanded jet exhausting from the nozzle. The nozzle is placed to external supersonic viscous
flow. Expanding jet propagates on the external surface of the nozzle creating obstacle in external
flowfield. Typical flow structure is shown in Figure 2 (a) by streamlines. Time-dependent control
action (the velocity of pressure ratio growth in underexpanded jet) allows to change time-space
structure of flowfield (Figure 2 (b)). New space-time structure presents specific flow regime where jet
propagates upwind on the external wall of the nozzle. We consider crucial velocity of jet pressure ratio
growth as control parameter. The main target of research is estimating and defining the control
parameter dependence on four characteristic parameters of the problem – Mach, Reynolds, Prandtl and
Strouhal numbers. These parameters are varied in definite ranges creating four-dimensional space. We
want to find for each point in this space the crucial velocity corresponding to a new time-space
structure appearance.
According to the scheme presented in the previous chapters parallel algorithm is implemented for
computations. For the space of determining parameters two types of grids are chosen: 5 and 10 points
for each determining parameter. It requires computing 625 and 10000 inverse problems. The

1806

Analysis of Space-Time Structures Appearance for Non-Stationary
Alexander Bondarev
CFD Problems
and Vladimir Galaktionov

computations are performed by parallel cluster K100 (Keldysh Institute of Applied Mathematics RAS,
Moscow, Russia). Both MPI and DVM technologies were applied to control parallel computations.
As a result of approach application five-dimensional data array is obtained, where variables are
four characteristic parameters M∞, Re∞, Pr, Sh∞ and crucial velocity V*. For obtained data three
principal components are defined and we construct data visual presentation in principal components
(Figure 2 (с)). The presentation allows us to suppose that the points of data volume can be roughly
approximated by parametric plane. After defining the coefficients for plane and inverse transformation
to the original variables we obtain the sought-for dependence V*= F(M∞, Re∞, Pr, Sh∞) in analytical
form. Obtained results present a solution of parameter optimization and analysis for the class of
problems, where the class is defined by multidimensional volume of characteristic parameters.

Figure 2: Parameter optimization and analysis applied to jets interaction

Another example of approach application is quite close to previous one. We consider timedependent processes of supersonic underexpanded jet interaction with flat plate (Alexeev A.,
Bondarev A., 2014). Numerical investigations are performed to study some special modes of
interaction. The goal of studies is to consider the conditions for existence of oscillating mode where
separation zones can appear and disappear. Figure 3 (a) presents the flowfield by density distribution
for the problem in question. The separation zones appear in the vicinity of the point where the jet
meets flat pate. The presence of oscillating mode is illustrated by pressure on the symmetry axis in
dependence on time Figure 3 (b).
Underexpanded supersonic jet propagates up to flat plate. For some conditions vortex zone can
appear in the vicinity of flat plate. This zone begins to appear and disappear in oscillating mode. The
target of research is to define the conditions of oscillations appearance. There are some known
experimental results for this class of problem (Glaznev V., Zapryagaev V., Uskov V. , 2000). So we
know in advance that for this problem we have three characteristic parameters – Mach number M∞, jet

1807

Analysis of Space-Time Structures Appearance for Non-Stationary
Alexander Bondarev
CFD Problems
and Vladimir Galaktionov

pressure ratio n, specific heat ratio ɣ. The distance from jet to plate x is considered as control
parameter. According to (Glaznev V., Zapryagaev V., Uskov V. , 2000) the control parameter
dependence on characteristic parameters can be presented by expression x2 ~ 16 ɣ n M∞. This
dependence is a condition for oscillating mode appearance. The computations confirm this
experimental fact.

Figure 3: The search of oscillating regime appearance in jets interacting with plate.

Figure 4: Axisymmetric body in the supersonic flow.

The next example of approach application can be referred to parametric studies. We consider timedependent gasdynamic processes around axisymmetric body placed in the supersonic flow (Figure 4).
The problem is to define aerodynamic coefficients for the body in dependence on time, velocity,
viscosity, humidity, height of the flight, angle of attack. To compute the dependence we should use
parallel computations according the approach described in previous sections. As a result we obtain
multidimensional data array. To process the data in array we apply described combined approach
including analysis of variances and principal components. As data processing result we obtain

1808

Analysis of Space-Time Structures Appearance for Non-Stationary
Alexander Bondarev
CFD Problems
and Vladimir Galaktionov

aerodynamic coefficients dependencies on characteristic parameters by approximation. The results of
approximation can be used further for computations of flight parameters.
The examples show applicability of presented approach for a wide range of practical applications,
so the approach can be considered as quite universal one.

6 Discussion
Described in previous sections methods and approaches are intended to be integrated in a whole
set. This set is built as technological chain of algorithms or pipeline for multidimensional data
producing, processing and analyzing. Such chain one can consider as some kind of prototype of
generalized experiment for fluid dynamics problems. The scheme for implementation of such
generalized experiment is presented in Figure 5.

Figure 5: Scheme of generalized experiment.

This experiment is to be based on reliable mathematical model, numerical method and capabilities
of experimental research. The methods for searching and tracing of time-dependent structures in the
flow under consideration should be integrated in the set of methods. Such generalized experiment
should be able to solve inverse problems and optimization problems. During the process of numerical
computation the results are to be directly compared with experimental ones for all possible cases. It
would provide the process of constant verification. Being implemented by means of parallel methods
the properties mentioned above would provide a possibility of parametric studies and parameter
optimization and analysis. These approaches would give us the results in a form of multidimensional
arrays. To analyze the results one should use Data Analysis methods, which should be integrated in
the set of numerical methods for generalized experiment. Finally the future generalized experiment
would provide solution for classes of CFD problems. It can be very effective for practical applications.
Constant verification is to be used for improving of numerical methods and conditions of experiment.
Such generalized numerical experiment is quite universal. It can be applied to many timedependent processes in mathematical modeling. The implementation of such generalized numerical
experiment should provide large-scale computations for industrial purposes.

1809

Analysis of Space-Time Structures Appearance for Non-Stationary
Alexander Bondarev
CFD Problems
and Vladimir Galaktionov

7 Conclusions
The paper considers combined approach to finding of conditions for space-time structures
appearance in non-stationary flows for CFD problems. The approach allows to estimate how the
crucial points of flow structure transformation depend on determining parameters of the problem.
Considered problem of parameter optimization and analysis amounts to solving a set of similar small
tasks, so it can be applied also for parallel computations. The results of such computations are
multidimensional data volumes. The main purpose is to find hidden dependencies in such volumes.
For some practical cases one can apply Data Analysis methods for decreasing number of dimensions
up to three. Then one can approximate the resulting dependence by geometric primitives. The
approximation allows to obtain the sought-for dependencies in a quasi-analytical form. The approach
can be applied to studies of CFD problems with ambiguity to determine the domains for different
branches of solution in multidimensional space of characteristic parameters.
Being organized for data producing, processing and analyzing in a form of pipeline the approach
can be considered as a prototype of generalized numerical experiment.

Acknowledgements
This work was partially supported by RFBR grants (projects 13-01-00367A and 14-01-00769A).

References
Alexeev A., Bondarev A. (2014). Mesh methods for boundary-value problems and applications.
Proceedings of 10th International Conference. Modeling of Time-Dependent Modes for
Supersonic Underexpanded Jet Interacting with Plate (pp. 64-68). Kazan: Otechestvo.
Beck J.V., Blackwell B., St.Clair C. (1985). Inverse Heat Conduction. Ill-posed Problems. NY: John
Wiley&Sons.
Bondarev A.E., Galaktionov V.A. (2013). Parametric Optimizing Analysis of Unsteady Structures and
Visualization of Multidimensional Data. International Journal of Modeling, Simulation and
Scientific Computing, 4(suppl. issue 1).
Bondarev A.E., Galaktionov V.A., Chechetkin V.M. (2011). Analysis of the development concepts
and methods of visual data representation in computational physics. Computational
Mathematics and Mathematical Physics, 51(4), 624-636.
Bondarev, A. (2014). Multidimensional Data Analysis in CFD Problems. Scientific Visualization, 6(5),
61-68.
Retrieved
January
2015,
from
DVM-System.
(2015).
http://www.keldysh.ru/dvm/dvmhtm1107/eng/dvmINTRe.htm
Glaznev V., Zapryagaev V., Uskov V. . (2000). Jets and unsteady flows in gas dynamics [Struynye i
nestacionarnye techeniya v gazovoy dinamike]. Novosibirsk: SB RAS.
Gorban A., Kegl B., Wunsch D., Zinovyev A. (Eds.). (2007). Principal Manifolds for Data
Visualisation and Dimension Reduction (LNCSE 58 ed.). Berlin – Heidelberg – New York:
Springer.
Lee K., Hong S. (2004). Supersonic Jet Impingement Navier-Stokes Computations for Vertical
Launching System Design Applications. J. SPACECRAFT&ROCKETS, 41(5).
Pacheco, P. (1997). Programming Parallel with MPI. San Francisco, CA: Morgan Kaufmann.
Zinovyev, A. (2000). Vizualization of multidimensional data [Visualizaciya mnogomernyh dannyh].
Krasnoyarsk: Krasnoyarsk Univ.

1810

