Procedia Computer Science
Volume 80, 2016, Pages 335–344
ICCS 2016. The International Conference on Computational
Science

Inﬂuence of Charging Behaviour given Charging Station
Placement at Existing Petrol Stations and Residential
Car Park Locations in Singapore
Ran Bi1 , Jiajian Xiao2 , Vaisagh Viswanathan3 , and Alois Knoll4
1

4

TUM CREATE, Singapore, Singapore
ran.bi@tum-create.edu.sg
2
TUM CREATE, Singapore, Singapore
jiajian.xiao@tum-create.edu.sg
3
TUM CREATE, Singapore, Singapore
vaisagh.viswanathan@tum-create.edu.sg
Technische Universit¨
at M¨
unchen (TUM) Munich, Germany
knoll@in.tum.de

Abstract
Electric Vehicles (EVs) are set to play a crucial role in making transportation systems more
sustainable. However, charging infrastructure needs to be built up before EV adoption can
increase. A crucial factor that is ignored in most existing studies of optimal charging station
(CS) deployment is the role played by the charging behaviour of drivers. In this study, through
an agent-based traﬃc simulation, we analyse the impact of diﬀerent driver charging behaviour
under the assumption that CSs are placed at existing petrol stations and residential car park locations in Singapore. Three models are implemented: a simple model with a charging threshold
and two more sophisticated models where the driver takes the current trip distance and existing
CS locations into account. We analyse the performance of these three charging behaviours with
respect to a number of diﬀerent measures. Results suggest that charging behaviours do indeed
have a signiﬁcant impact on the simulation outcome. We also discover that the sensitivity of
model parameters in each charging behaviour is an important factor to consider as variations
in model parameter can lead to signiﬁcant diﬀerent results.
Keywords: Charging Station, Charging Behavior, Traﬃc Simulation, Electric Mobility

1

Introduction

A wide adoption of Electric Vehicles (EVs) is important in moving towards a sustainable transportation system. An EV oﬀers the advantage of zero local emissions; this is especially useful
in mega-cities where dense vehicle population can cause signiﬁcant health concerns. In order
to prevent range related anxiety, two approaches exist. On the one hand, there is signiﬁcant
Selection and peer-review under responsibility of the Scientiﬁc Programme Committee of ICCS 2016
c The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V.

doi:10.1016/j.procs.2016.05.347

335

Inﬂuence of Charging Behaviour given Charging Station Placement ...

Bi, Xiao, Viswanathan, Knoll

research being done in advancement of battery technology for increased range and decreasing
battery cost [25]; on the other hand, there is a recognition that an eﬃcient charging infrastructure is also crucial.
In the last few years, much research has focused on the charging station (CS) placement
problem. Diﬀerent optimisation objectives are chosen to address the problem, such as cost,
travel time and waiting time at CS. However, most of these charging infrastructure optimisation
work either neglects the charging behaviour of the EV driver, or at best, considers very simple
charging behaviours. A ﬁxed threshold of the battery state-of-charge (SOC) is deﬁned at which
the EV driver decides to go charging [19].
In this paper, we analyse the impact that diﬀerent charging behaviours can have on the effectiveness of CS placement. In particular, we consider three charging behaviour with diﬀerent
level of complexity. The least complex one makes charging decision based on a battery SOC
threshold as in [19]. The next charging behaviour makes estimation on the trip energy consumption. The most complex one takes the CS locations at the trip destination into account,
additionally to the energy consumption estimation in the previous behaviour. For our analysis,
we investigate a Singapore based scenario.
The major contribution of this paper is the analysis of the eﬀect that diﬀerent charging
behaviours can have on a realistic electric mobility scenario in the case study of Singapore.
We discuss our ﬁndings with respect to real world traﬃc data and a realistic vehicle energy
consumption model. Results show that diﬀerent charging behaviours do have an inﬂuence
on the electric mobility system as a whole. Performance diﬀerences are also observed within
one charging behaviour but using diﬀerent model parameters. These results suggest that the
charging behaviour plays an important role when optimising for CS locations.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows: Section 2 describes related work regarding the CS placement problem using analytical and simulation-based approaches. This section
also highlights work addressing charging behaviour modelling from a psychological perspective.
Section 3 explains the three charging behaviours in more detail. Section 4 provides an overview
of the simulation setup. Section 5 presents the experimental results. Section 6 discusses the
work and gives an outlook for future work.

2

Related Work

Diﬀerent optimisation objectives are used to solve the CS placement problem. Operation costs,
maintenance and network loss costs of the CSs [34], CS coverage and convenience for EV
drivers to reach CSs [23] as well as energy cost for vehicles to travel to CSs [8] are objectives
for minimization in addition to investment costs. [6] estimated the optimal density of EV CSs
accounting for the delay time cost of charging and access cost to the CS besides the investment
and operation costs. The cost for EV drivers to go charging is modelled as the travel time
to [32] and queuing time at the CS [26]. [16] and [21] maximises the CS coverage. [31] has the
objective to optimise the amount of energy recharged with a focus on diﬀerent type of chargers.
Real world data can support the work towards CS placement optimisation. Household
travel survey data is used to generate traﬃc pattern and break down vehicles are used as an
input for the optimisation [7]. The objective is to minimise the total travelled distance to
access CSs. Similarly, those vehicles where a full charge of battery is not suﬃcient to cover
their daily commute and require intermediate charging are taken into account for charging cost
optimisation in [17]. Household travel survey data is also used in [10] to select CS locations with
an objective function that minimises the total walking distances from the CS to the destination.
As an alternative to household travel survey, [29] describes the usage of pervasive cell-phone
336

Inﬂuence of Charging Behaviour given Charging Station Placement ...

Bi, Xiao, Viswanathan, Knoll

data to model the mobility demand in the city of Boston. The total travelled distance from
trip destination to the nearest CS is minimised. Drivers’ discomfort is considered in terms of
maximum hops in a grid partitioned road network. Another way to derive mobility demand
is to use large-scale trajectory data of taxi ﬂeet [9]. Public EV CS locations are identiﬁed in
Beijing based on these data. EV taxi trajectory data is used in [24] to optimally locate CSs
and assign optimized number of charging plugs with the objective of minimizing the average
time to ﬁnd a CS and waiting time before charging.
The CS placement problem can also be addressed from the power grid perspective. A
simulation-based approach for investigating the impact of transport electriﬁcation on power
grids is presented in [11]. A case study of Singapore shows that grid congestion and voltage
drops are observed on the low voltage level while the high and medium voltage grid remain
unaﬀected.
In contrast to those mathematical approaches, we apply a nanoscopic city-scale traﬃc simulation to study the inﬂuence of diﬀerent charging behaviour on CS placement at existing petrol
stations and residential car park locations in Singapore [30]. In this agent-based nanoscopic
traﬃc simulation, a driver-vehicle-unit (DVU) consists of driver model and vehicle model [33].
Advantages are that vehicles and drivers can be modelled in greater detail. Realistic vehicle
energy consumption can be simulated with individual driving and charging behaviour of the EV
driver. The emergence of collective dynamic from individual interactions between DVU agents
can be captured [22].
Application of an agent-based simulation to analyse how EV adoption could be aﬀected by
diﬀerent spatial deployment of CSs can be found in [27]. An agent-based traﬃc simulation
is used to provide input to a power simulation which determines the optimal charging proﬁle
for EVs [5]. Another work [18] applies agent-based simulation to maximize availability and
proﬁtability of CSs. The load curve generated by EV power demand is studied in [28] where
the agent can only charge at the origin or destination of a trip.
The major disadvantage of existing CS location optimisation work neglects the charging
behaviour of EV drivers or apply simple charging behaviour model. [6] assumes that a charging
event occurs when the SOC is below a threshold. Similarly, vehicles route to the nearest CS
when being low on energy before they continue their journey to the ﬁnal destination in [19].
Data analysis of 15 EVs over a course of 230 days to predict the probability of an EV deciding
for a charge event at a particular level of SOC is carried out in [20]. This simple stochastic
model only considers SOC as an input.
Looking from the charging behaviour perspective, [14] analyses the psychological dynamics
underlying charging behaviour of EV users assessing data in a EV ﬁeld study. The authors
attempt to understand how users cope with limited mobility resources and deﬁnes a comfortable
range as the lowest remaining battery SOC which is not allowed to fall below. This preferred
range safety margin is reserved against variations of energy consumption. They also ﬁnd that
user-battery interaction style plays a role in the decision when to start a charging event [15]. The
user battery interaction style is a qualitative classiﬁcation based on their tendency to charge. [13]
applies expected utility theory to model the charging behaviour of EV drivers considering cost,
charging duration, range, trip distance to be important when making charging decision.

3

Charging Behaviour Models

In this section, we describe the three charging behaviours in greater detail. Their diﬀerence is
the amount of information they consider for making charging decisions. The ﬁrst and simplest
model considers only a SOC threshold for routing to CSs like in other studies [6] and [19], the
337

Inﬂuence of Charging Behaviour given Charging Station Placement ...

Bi, Xiao, Viswanathan, Knoll

other two models consider trip length and CS locations to base their charging decisions. We also
apply the concept of a range safety margin as in [15]. Price for charging is another potentially
important factor; however, as it is not the subject of this study, we assume a ﬂat rate for
charging service. This is a fair assumption as it was used in the EV test-bed in Singapore [1].
We deﬁne the following preliminaries for all three models: 1) A charging event stops when
the battery SOC reaches 80% of its maximum capacity. This is the level at which a battery can
be charged without reducing charging power. 2) The driver takes every charging opportunity
at trip destination to charge if there is a CS available. 3) Estimation of energy consumption
for the next trip is made based on 150 Wh per kilometre. This value is the average energy
consumption generated from our agent-based traﬃc simulation. 4) When an EV breaks down
on the road network, it stays on the current road for 10 minutes and continues to the intended
destination with a full charge. This is to simulate a realistic break down scenario which might
cause traﬃc congestion due to the depleted EV.
Zero Estimation Model (ZEM). No energy consumption estimation is considered
before or during trips.
The driver seeks
the nearest CS (goToNearestCS) when its
current SOC (currentSOC) is below certain SOC threshold (SOCThreshold). Otherwise, the driver continues the current trip
(continueCurrentTrip).
Algorithm 2: Semi Estimation Model
For each agent at each trip start
if currentSOC >
estimateT ripConsumption +
saf etyM argin then
beginCurrentTrip
else
goToNearestCS
end
Full Estimation Model (FEM). Energy
consumption for the next trip together with
the energy to the nearest CS at destination
(energyToNearestCSAtD) is estimated before
a trip starts. The driver seeks to ﬁnd the nearest CS right after a trip starts when its current
SOC is not enough to cover the estimated energy consumption. CS locations at destination
is taken into account for this model.

4

Algorithm 1: Zero Estimation Model
For each agent at any time
if currentSOC < SOCT hreshold then
goToNearestCS
else
continueCurrentTrip
end

Semi Estimation Model (SEM). Energy
consumption for the next trip is estimated
before a trip starts. If the current SOC is
enough to complete the trip based on estimation (estimateTripConsumption) plus a
safety margin (safetyMargin), the driver
starts the trip to his intended destination
(beginCurrentTrip). Otherwise, the driver
seeks the nearest CS from the origin of his trip.
Algorithm 3: Full Estimation Model
For each agent at each trip start
if currentSOC >
estimateT ripConsumption +
energyT oN earestCSAtD then
beginCurrentTrip
else
goToNearestCS
end

Simulation Setup

For the analysis in this study, a simulation tool SEMSim Traﬃc[33] is used. It is a nanoscopic
agent-based traﬃc simulation with driver-vehicle units (DVUs) forming the basic unit of com338

Inﬂuence of Charging Behaviour given Charging Station Placement ...

Bi, Xiao, Viswanathan, Knoll

putation i.e. the agents. A DVU consists of a driver model and a vehicle model. In order to
be able to move on the road network, the driver model contains a car-following model and a
lane-changing model to simulate the traﬃc patterns realistically. [30] provides a more detailed
description of the SEMSim traﬃc models. In this paper, we describe the vehicle energy consumption model in greater detail. The energy consumption of components connected to the
battery can be calculated. By extending the car park model to a CS model, it is possible to
simulate the charging process of EVs. All of the above features make this platform well suited
for our simulation setup.
In this experiment, we utilise the Singapore road network data derived from Navteq 2009.
HITS 2012 travel survey data is used to initialise the traﬃc. This data is in the form of origindestination pairs showing a portion of travelling demands in Singapore for a typical whole day
period. Each agent has at least two origin-destination pairs. The origin of the ﬁrst pair and
destination of the last pair is always the same location, ensuring that the agent is returning to
the starting point of the simulation day. Extrapolation is thus imposed to simulate the realistic
traﬃc scope of Singapore [30]. We run the simulation with 21500 agents for a 24 hour period.
The number of agents equals the number of charging lots.

4.1

Vehicle Energy Consumption Model

The vehicle battery of 20kW h maximum capacity provides power to the motor, air-conditioner
and auxiliary components in the EV. In this experiment, we take vehicle parameters of an
electric vehicle called EVA which is exclusively designed by TUM CREATE for tropical megacities [2].
The motor power Pmotor is a function of velocity and force. The eﬃciency factor floss
reﬂects losses in the drive train. Depending on the direction of the power ﬂow, Pmotor is either
weighted with floss when the motor delivers power back to the battery due to regenerative
braking, or with its inverse when the motor requires power from the battery as in Equation 1.
Fmotor is the force provided by the motor and is needed to overcome resistances forces, such as
air- (Fair ), rolling- (Froll ) and inertia- (Finertia ) resistance as in Equation 2 and 3.
⎧
⎨
Pmotor =

1

Fmotor v
floss
⎩
floss Fmotor v

when Fmotor > 0

(1)

when Fmotor ≤ 0

Fmotor = Fair + Froll + Finertia

(2)

1
ρAf Cd v 2 ;
Froll = fr mcar g;
Finertia = (1 + λ)mcar a
(3)
2
where v is the velocity in m/s. The parameters in Equation 1 and 3 are shown in Table 1.
Air conditioning is necessary for vehicles in tropical cities like Singapore. Its power is set
to 800W as suggested by EVA speciﬁcation. Other on-board auxiliary components consist
of lights, engine control unit, infotainment system etc. We assume a power of 750W that is
required to operate these components.
Fair =

4.2

Charging Station Model

We retrieve petrol station locations from the website [4]. Residential car park locations which
are open to public are provided by Singapore Land Transport Authority [3]. In total, we identify
339

Inﬂuence of Charging Behaviour given Charging Station Placement ...

Parameter Description
Acceleration of
g
gravity
fr
Rolling coeﬃcient
Drag coeﬃcient
Cd
ρ
Air density

Value
9.81m/s

2

0.01
0.4
1.13kg/m3

Bi, Xiao, Viswanathan, Knoll

Parameter Description
Percentage of equivalent
λ
mass of rotating parts
mcar
Car weight
floss
Losses in the drive train
Af
Car frontal area

Value
0.13
1500kg
0.9
2.24m2

Table 1: Vehicle energy consumption parameters
2150 CS locations. The spatial distribution of these CSs is illustrated in Fig 1. It is assumed
that each CS can have a queue of inﬁnite length. We assume 10 charging lots at each CS
location. It is simulated that each charging lot is installed with 19.2 kW of charging power as
per SAE J1722 Level 2 standard (240V/80A) [12].

Figure 1: Distribution of charging stations on Singapore road network. Charging stations are
indicated in red dots.

5

Results

In this section, we present the results from our simulation. Section 5.1 highlights ﬁndings in a
base scenario. In this base scenario, we analyse the inﬂuence of the three charging behaviours
with ﬁxed model parameters on the eﬀectiveness of CS placement as described in Section 4.2.
Section 5.2 discuss the sensitivity of diﬀerent charging behaviour model parameters with the
base scenario as reference.

5.1

Base Scenario

In the base scenario, we analyse the inﬂuence of the three charging behaviours on the eﬀectiveness of CS placement at existing petrol stations and residential car park locations in Singapore.
For the SOCThreshold in ZEM and safetyMargin in SEM, we implement that both parameters
take 20% of the total battery capacity. Regarding estimation of energy consumption, either
340

Inﬂuence of Charging Behaviour given Charging Station Placement ...

Bi, Xiao, Viswanathan, Knoll

energyToNearestCSAtD in FEM or estimateTripConsumption in SEM and FEM, we model a
20% increase in energy consumption estimation than the average 150 Wh per kilometre. This
is to account for a conservative energy consumption estimation from the driver’s perspective.
We further assume that all EVs start with 50% of their battery capacity at the beginning of
the simulation.
We compute the average SOC, charging event count and charging energy per agent for these
three charging behaviours as in Fig 2. The SEM scenario shows a higher value of average SOC,
charging event count as well as charging energy per agent than the other two charging behaviour
models. This can be explained by the safetyMargin that this behaviour model contains. This
20% safetyMargin of the SEM leads to earlier charging compared to ZEM with 20% SOCThreshold and FEM without safetyMargin in the context of this CS placement scenario. In
particular, the FEM shows a notably smaller number of charging event count and charging
energy per agent. There is no agent break down event in the simulation.

Figure 2: Average SOC, charging event count and charging energy per agent for the three
charging behaviours
Looking at the CS occupancy, the results in Fig 3 suggest that although some CSs reach
a 80% occupancy at some time in the simulation, the mean occupancy for all three charging
behaviour models is very low. The mean occupancy is calculated as the area under the occupied
charging lots over time ﬁgure divided by the 24h simulation period. The number of unused CS
locations are high across all three behaviours. This may serve as an indicator that the current
CS placement is not eﬃcient.

Figure 3: CS count with more than 80% occupancy, mean occupancy and number of unused
CS locations for the three charging behaviours
In general, the results suggest that the FEM diﬀers from the ZEM and SEM due to the
lack of a SOCThreshold or safetyMargin. This allows the FEM to better utilise the battery
capacity.
341

Inﬂuence of Charging Behaviour given Charging Station Placement ...

5.2

Bi, Xiao, Viswanathan, Knoll

Sensitivity of Charging Behaviour Model Parameters

In this section, we investigate how the diﬀerent model parameters for each of the three behaviour
models inﬂuence the outcome of the simulation. For the ZEM, we increase the SOCThreshold to 30% and 40% of battery capacity. Concerning energy consumption estimation as in
estimateTripConsumption and energyToNearestCSAtD, we look at a 40% and 60% increase
compared to the 20% in the base scenario. At the beginning of the simulation, all EVs start
with 50% of their battery capacity.
The results are presented in Table 2. As the SOCThreshold in ZEM increases from 20%
to 40%, there are signiﬁcantly more charging events occurring. The average SOC and charging
energy per agent also shows the same trend. For SEM and FEM, although we increase the
energy consumption estimation by 40% and 60% compared to the base 150W h per kilometre,
the increase in average SOC, charging event count and charging energy is moderate. As a result,
the CS occupancy in ZEM grows faster than in SEM and FEM.
Average SOC
Model
per Agent
Parameters
in kWh
ZEM 20
9.39
ZEM 30
9.9
ZEM 40
11.22
SEM 20
9.52
SEM 40
9.69
SEM 60
9.88
FEM 20
9.15
FEM 40
9.17
FEM 60
9.23

Charging
Event Count
per Agent
0.27
0.49
0.83
0.32
0.38
0.43
0.17
0.18
0.19

Charging Energy
per Agent
in kWh
2.48
4.42
6.46
2.54
2.82
3.07
1.28
1.38
1.49

CS Count with
more than 80%
occupancy
7
35
49
12
9
9
2
3
1

Mean
Occupancy
in %
0.83
1.37
1.9
0.82
0.88
0.92
0.53
0.55
0.56

Unused CS
Location
Count
664
537
446
607
555
502
930
890
834

Table 2: Sensitivity of the three charging behaviour model parameters. The numbers in the
model parameters column indicate the paramter value for the respective model in %

6

Discussion and Outlook

EVs are the key to a more sustainable transportation system. The charging infrastructure
supporting the adoption of EVs are crucial and the locations of CS directly inﬂuence the
eﬀectiveness of the electriﬁed system. In this paper, we show that charging behaviour is an
important factor to consider besides others. In particular, we apply ZEM, SEM and FEM in
our simulation. Results suggest that especially the FEM diﬀers from the other two behaviour
models due to the lack of a SOCThreshold or safetyMargin. This allows the FEM to better
utilise the battery capacity. Our ﬁndings also suggest that not only the diﬀerent charging
behaviour models impact the simulation outcome, but variations in model parameter values
inﬂuence the simulation as well. The sensitivity of diﬀerent model parameters is surely an
important factor to consider. It is to note that a ﬁxed initial SOC is assumed for all EVs in our
experiments. A more realistic distribution of the initial SOC can be obtained by simulating for
several days until the agents reach a steady state in terms of their SOC.
Despite our charging behaviour modelling eﬀort, there are still many input variables that
can be considered to further improve the model. Information about categories of locations
can be integrated to account for the purpose of the trip being for work, leisure or simply
returning home. Based on these intentions the agent can exhibit diﬀerent charging behaviours.
342

Inﬂuence of Charging Behaviour given Charging Station Placement ...

Bi, Xiao, Viswanathan, Knoll

In addition, these location categories can also be used for CS placement, especially deciding on
the charging power of each CS to be installed. Although the cost of charging an EV is relatively
low compared to fossil fuel, the price sensitivity of the user can be an important factor to shift
the charging demand in order to avoid bottle necks in the system. EV users can be incentivised
to change their tempo-spacial charging behaviour for the beneﬁt of a more eﬃcient system.
Another factor is the battery user interaction style which is assumed that the agent charges at
every destination if there is a CS available in this study. This behaviour can be valid for CSs
equipped with wireless charging lots, but might not hold true when manually a cable has to be
plugged in. All these factors mentioned can have an inﬂuence on the eﬃciency of the system.

References
[1]
[2]
[3]
[4]
[5]

[6]
[7]
[8]

[9]

[10]

[11]

[12]
[13]

[14]

[15]
[16]

Bosch e-mobility service. https://www.bosch-emobility.sg, Jan 2016.
Eva taxi. http://www.eva-taxi.sg, Jan 2016.
My transport sg. http://www.mytransport.sg, Jan 2016.
Sg car mart. http://www.sgcarmart.sg, Jan 2016.
S. Acha, K.H. van Dam, and N. Shah. Modelling spatial and temporal agent travel patterns for
optimal charging of electric vehicles in low carbon networks. In Power and Energy Society General
Meeting, 2012 IEEE, pages 1–8, July 2012.
Yongjun Ahn and Hwasoo Yeo. An analytical planning model to estimate the optimal density of
charging stations for electric vehicles. PLoS ONE, 10(11):e0141307, 11 2015.
Matthew Andrews, Mustafa K Dogru, John D Hobby, Yue Jin, and Gabriel H Tucci. Modeling
and optimization for electric vehicle charging infrastructure.
Fouad Baouche, Romain BILLOT, Rochdi Trigui, and Nour-Eddin EL FAOUZI. Electric Vehicle
Charging Stations Allocation Model. In ROADEF - 15`eme congr`es annuel de la Soci´et´e fran¸caise
de recherche op´erationnelle et d’aide `
a la d´ecision, Bordeaux, France, February 2014. Soci´et´e
fran¸caise de recherche op´erationnelle et d’aide `
a la d´ecision.
Hua Cai, Xiaoping Jia, Anthony S.F. Chiu, Xiaojun Hu, and Ming Xu. Siting public electric vehicle
charging stations in beijing using big-data informed travel patterns of the taxi ﬂeet. Transportation
Research Part D: Transport and Environment, 33:39 – 46, 2014.
T Chen, Kara Kockelman, and Moby Khan. Locating electric vehicle charging stations: Parkingbased assignment method for seattle, washington. Transportation Research Record: Journal of the
Transportation Research Board, (2385):28–36, 2013.
David Ciechanowicz, Dominik Pelzer, and Alois Knoll. Simulation-based approach for investigating
the impact of electric vehicles on power grids. In Proceedings of IEEE PES Asia-Paciﬁc Power
and Energy Engineering Conference 2015, 2015.
Hybrid Committee et al. Sae electric vehicle and plug in hybrid electric vehicle conductive charge
coupler. SAE international, Detroit, Michigan, standard J, 1772, 2010.
Nicolo’ Daina, Aruna Sivakumar, and John Polak. Modelling the eﬀects of driving range uncertainty on electric vehicle users charging behaviour. International Choice Modelling Conference,
2013.
Thomas Franke, Madlen Gnther, Maria Trantow, Nadine Rauh, and Josef F. Krems. Range
comfort zone of electric vehicle users concept and assessment. IET Intelligent Transport Systems,
9:740–745(5), September 2015.
Thomas Franke and Josef F. Krems. Understanding charging behaviour of electric vehicle users.
Transportation Research Part F: Traﬃc Psychology and Behaviour, 21:75 – 89, 2013.
Diego A. Gimnez-Gaydou, Anabela S. N. Ribeiro, Javier Gutirrez, and Antnio Pais Antunes.
Optimal location of battery electric vehicle charging stations in urban areas: A new approach.
International Journal of Sustainable Transportation, 0(ja):null, 2014.

343

Inﬂuence of Charging Behaviour given Charging Station Placement ...

Bi, Xiao, Viswanathan, Knoll

[17] Jairo Gonzalez, Roberto Alvaro, Carlos Gamallo, Manuel Fuentes, Jess Fraile-Ardanuy, Luk
Knapen, and Davy Janssens. Determining electric vehicle charging point locations considering
drivers daily activities. Procedia Computer Science, 32:647 – 654, 2014. The 4th International
Conference on Sustainable Energy Information Technology (SEIT-2014).
[18] Qi Han, de B Bauke Vries, and Geert Kanters. An agent-based multi-objective optimization model
for allocating public charging stations for electric vehicles. 2015.
[19] Andrea Hess, Francesco Malandrino, Moritz Bastian Reinhardt, Claudio Casetti, Karin Anna
Hummel, and Jose M. Barcel´
o-Ordinas. Optimal deployment of charging stations for electric
vehicular networks. In Proceedings of the First Workshop on Urban Networking, UrbaNe ’12,
pages 1–6, New York, NY, USA, 2012. ACM.
[20] G. Hill, P.T. Blythe, Y. Hubner, M. Neaimeh, C. Higgins, and V. Suresh. Monitoring and predicting charging behaviour for electric vehicles. In Intelligent Vehicles Symposium (IV), 2012 IEEE,
pages 914–919, June 2012.
[21] Frade I., Ribeiro A., Gonalves G., and Antunes A. Optimal location of charging stations for electric
vehicles in a neighborhood in lisbon, portugal. Transportation Research Record, (2252):91–98, 2011.
[22] A. Kesting, M. Treiber, and D. Helbing. Agents for Traﬃc Simulation. ArXiv e-prints, May 2008.
[23] Albert Y. S. Lam, Yiu-Wing Leung, and Xiaowen Chu. Electric vehicle charging station placement:
Formulation, complexity, and solutions. CoRR, abs/1310.6925, 2013.
[24] Yanhua Li, Jun Luo, Chi-Yin Chow, Kam-Lam Chan, Ye Ding, and Fan Zhang. Growing the
charging station network for electric vehicles with trajectory data analytics. In Data Engineering
(ICDE), 2015 IEEE 31st International Conference on, pages 1376–1387, April 2015.
[25] Hidrue M.K., Parsons G.R., Kempton W., and Gardner M.P. Willingness to pay for electric
vehicles and their attributes. Resource and Energy Economics, 33(3):686–705, 2011.
[26] M.T. Sebastiani, R. Luders, and K.V.O. Fonseca. Allocation of charging stations in an electric
vehicle network using simulation optimization. In Simulation Conference (WSC), 2014 Winter,
pages 1073–1083, Dec 2014.
[27] T. Sweda and D. Klabjan. An agent-based decision support system for electric vehicle charging
infrastructure deployment. In Vehicle Power and Propulsion Conference (VPPC), 2011 IEEE,
pages 1–5, Sept 2011.
[28] S. Torres, O. Barambones, J.M. Gonzalez de Durana, F. Marzabal, E. Kremers, and J. Wirges.
Agent-based modelling of electric vehicle driving and charging behavior. In Control and Automation (MED), 2015 23th Mediterranean Conference on, pages 459–464, June 2015.
[29] Mohammad M. Vazifeh, Hongmou Zhang, Paolo Santi, and Carlo Ratti. Optimizing the deployment of electric vehicle charging stations using pervasive mobility data. CoRR, abs/1511.00615,
2015.
[30] Vaisagh Viswanathan, Daniel Zehe, Jordan Ivanchev, Dominik Pelzer, Alois Knoll, and Heiko
Aydt. Simulation-assisted exploration of charging infrastructure requirements for electric vehicles
in urban environments. Journal of Computational Science, 12:1 – 10, 2016.
[31] Xiaomin Xi, Ramteen Sioshansi, and Vincenzo Marano. Simulationoptimization model for location
of a public electric vehicle charging infrastructure. Transportation Research Part D: Transport and
Environment, 22:60 – 69, 2013.
[32] Xiong Y., Gan J., An B., Miao C., and Bazzan A.L.C. Optimal electric vehicle charging station
placement. volume 2015-January, pages 2662–2668, 2015.
[33] Xu Y., Aydt H., and Lees M. Semsim: A distributed architecture for multi-scale traﬃc simulation.
In Proceedings - 2012 ACM/IEEE/SCS 26th Workshop on Principles of Advanced and Distributed
Simulation, PADS 2012, pages 178–180, 2012.
[34] Liu Z., Wen F., and Ledwich G. Optimal planning of electric-vehicle charging stations in distribution systems. IEEE Transactions on Power Delivery, 28(1):102–110, 2013.

344

