Procedia Computer Science
Volume 80, 2016, Pages 2119–2127
ICCS 2016. The International Conference on Computational
Science

Short-term Multiagent Simulation-based Prediction in
Mass Gatherings Decision Support
Vladislav Karbovskii1, Karsakov Andrey1,
Dmitry Rybokonenko1, Daniil Voloshin1
1

ITMO University, Saint-Petersburg, Russia
vladislav.k.work@gmail.com, kapc3d@gmail.com,
dmitry.rybokonenko@gmail.com, achoched@gmail.com

Abstract
Mass gatherings emerging both for specific occasions and spontaneously, are naturally associated with
the risk of stampedes and crowd clashes that may trigger dramatic consequences in shorter or longer
term perspectives. In order to address such issues the present paper suggests the application of the agentbased modeling approach to short-term predictions of future states of large congregates of people. The
latter is of prime value for practitioners who seek to identify the potentially dangerous areas where the
risk of stampede-induced injuries is assumed the highest based on the estimations of the crowd pressure
at a given spot. In this paper, we outline the algorithm for generating forecasts and on its basis, propose
a system of decision support. The test of system applicability has been performed based on the 2018
World Football Championship stadium use case. The object under investigation is expected to be put
into operation in 2018.
Keywords: mass gatherings, agent-based modelling, prediction modelling, decision support

1 Introduction
Despite the fact that large-scale human gatherings (both converging for civil and wartime occasions)
have been emerging throughout history, only recently have they become a subject of a distinguishable
multidisciplinary domain of research and practice. The reasons for that may be that mass gatherings
have grown in frequency and scale (due to the development of transportation, infrastructure and
communication technologies). Though initially being events at the local level, gatherings have
transferred to the national and subsequently, the international level. Following an increase in the number
of participants, the number of accidents has risen as well, increasing the overall risks associated with
mass gatherings. According to some sources, during the last decades in the incidents, caused by the
stampedes at mass gatherings, at least 7 thousand people lost their lives and around twice as many were
injured [1]. Such estimations are at times imprecise, since there is a tendency to understate the casualties

Selection and peer-review under responsibility of the Scientiﬁc Programme Committee of ICCS 2016
c The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V.

doi:10.1016/j.procs.2016.05.531

2119

Multiagent Simulation for Mass Gatherings Decision Support System

V. Karbovskii et al

found in the literature that facilitates the demand for new methods of tracking mass gatherings that end
in disasters.
Though the term “mass gathering” is commonly applied to events that draw together significant
numbers of people, it requires formal clarification in the context of this paper. Today there are numerous
alternating views on interpreting the expression. The key difference between the approaches to defining
and assorting the mass events lies in the estimation of the number of participants [2] - in different
instances, the lower limit can drift between hundreds and thousands of participants. For instance, in [3]
authors propose a typology in which among the gatherings of the lower range that attract less than 1000
people, sport races and small musical concerts can be found, whereas the upper range events are
represented by religious pilgrimages that can gather as many as 5 million people at the same time.
Molloy et al [4] offer a more detailed classification: despite the potential number of people that certain
types of events can attract, mass gatherings are defined based on the resources and time required for
proper organization of the event. The lower range is set to 200 participants (mass gathering) and the
upper range denotes events that exceed 1 million participants (mega mass gatherings).
The rest of the paper is structured as follows: Section 2 elaborates upon the existing literature
dedicated to the investigation of mass gatherings pedestrian safety maintenance. Then, a general outline
of the study is presented in Section 3, followed by the results of the experiments. Finally, the paper is
culminated by the discussion of results, limitations of the described approach and directions for future
studies.

2 Related Works
Researchers and practitioners from the public health domain highlight another perspective of mass
gatherings – that regardless of whether they are managed or not, they essentially burden the capacities
of the hosting community or local officials [5]. More specifically, these events can be characterized by
conditions in which the delivery of medical services may be hindered [6]. Taking into account the fact
that mass events are naturally different, such tasks as allocation of resources and estimation of risks
strongly depend on the identification of a particular event in the range of the existing classifications of
mass gatherings. For these reasons, classifications of mass gatherings are developed for the needs of
practitioners in charge. For instance, the World Health Organization (WHO) proposes a classification
[7] based on the repetitiveness (both temporal and spatial) and spontaneity of the events.
Some classifications are based on the purpose of gathering and the relevant characteristics that shall
be taken into account when planning and maintaining security measures – composition of visitors,
injuries and disorder risk factors etc. [7]. Other authors, for instance, Turris et al [8] divide mass
gatherings into categories based on the spatial characteristics of the gathering venue – openness of space,
number of spots that key events of the gathering occupy etc.
Despite the fact that mass gatherings perform important social, political, and cultural functions and
facilitate the maintenance of participants’ identity [9], they are still naturally associated with a number
of risks participants and organizers might face. Today two basic categories of risks are highlighted in
the literature: communicable and non-communicable ones. Recently there has been a substantial lag
towards the studies concentrated on the first group of risks – namely, the prevention of the dissemination
of the contagious disease, which is of increasing importance due to the rising numbers of visiting
participants of mass events and associated risks of transferring contagious diseases across borders
especially during the outbreaks. Steffen et al [10] among the non-communicable risk associated with
mass gatherings highlight stampedes and clashes, air temperature impacts, emotional stress, injuries,
exacerbation of existing disease in participants, malicious acts, and others.
In the present paper, we will address the issue of assisting security of those mass gatherings that lend
themselves to prior organization and planning efforts (thus excluding the spontaneous throngs) and bring

2120

Multiagent Simulation for Mass Gatherings Decision Support System

V. Karbovskii et al

together congregations of numerical strength sufficient for creating conditions for injuries and casualties
among the participants.
Nowadays the key issue associated with mass gatherings is the risk of injuries among the visitors in
stampedes and pedestrian crashes. As prior research results suggest [1], the majority of casualties and
injuries that occur during large events are associated with trauma, asphyxia and the related
complications, along with heat-inflicted damage. The very mechanism of stampede emergence is, for
the most part, understudied today, which hinders the development of the effective measures and
technologies for casualty prevention. As it is assumed in [11], the majority of data on the causes of death
of people in stampedes is not systematic: its sources are sporadic, since every stampede is a unique event
that results from the interplay of different factors. However, there are attempts of systematizing the
existing factors that contribute to the probability of stampede occurring [12], including misinformation,
collapse of infrastructure, competitive behavior of visitors, environmental factors rand others.
As mentioned above, religious mass events are among the most problematic events from the
pedestrian security point of view [12]. That is the main reason why those countries that host most
frequent and large-scale pilgrimage events have major experience in both coping with pedestrian
accidents and preventing them. Today India and Saudi Arabia might be distinguished as leading hosts
of immense religious celebrations. So far the governments of both states have come up with a number
of measures to address the issue of frequent pedestrian disasters caused by stampedes and other issues.
First, in order to assist the organizers and authorities in charge of maintaining the security of mass
events, committees put forward recommendations on standard procedures aimed at minimizing the risk
of accidents of various kinds. These are being prepared by governmental institutions and research
agencies: for instance, the government of India [13] and researchers [14] issue reports on both the factors
that shall be taken into account when organizing an event and best and worst practices that exist. In
order to address analogous concerns, in 1975 Hajj Research Center emerged in Saudi Arabia, later
reorganized and renamed “Custodian of the Two Holy Mosques Institute of Hajj Research”, which aims
to study and assist the events associated with pilgrimage.
Hajj pilgrimages have a rich history of stampede accidents [10]. Some of them have resulted in
organizational changes in the very procedure of pilgrimage [15] as well as the modernization of the
Jamarat bridge (considered to be the site of the most frequent stampede occurrence [16]) reconstruction
attempts. The design of the bridge have been informed by the results of pedestrian agent-based
simulation. Measures included the extension of the number and the capacity of emergency exit passages
and footbridges. Moreover, the number of officers overlooking the safety of the pilgrims has increased.
After the 2006 stampede in Mecca, the government of the hosting state decided to include interactive
analytical systems – for instance, the one produced by CrowdVision [17] into the complex of pedestrian
security measures. Despite the efforts, the goal of preventing stampedes during the Hajj is yet to be
achieved, as in 2015 Mecca has once again experienced a stampede-related tragedy (in 2015 the tragedy
unfolded in the area that is not covered by surveillance cameras [18]).
Almost the same situation is developing in India – where smaller and larger scale religious events
are sometimes marked with casualties caused by the stampedes [12]. For instance, during the Kumbh
Mela festival in 2013, held in Allahabad (one of the 4 traditional locations for the event that brings
together millions of pilgrims), at least 30 people died in the stampede. In order to secure the visitors, a
number of measures have been taken: an information support system (including a detailed map of the
festival area) for visitors has been deployed, the territory of the festival has been divided into areas that
have been provided with all the necessary elements of the infrastructure, all the roads and passages have
been cleared of obstacles. Eventually, even with all those measures incorporated, casualties have marred
the latest pilgrimages.

2121

Multiagent Simulation for Mass Gatherings Decision Support System

V. Karbovskii et al

3 Prediction modelling
The records of the latest pedestrian disasters show that annual mass gatherings and other events of
recurring nature, especially religious festivals that attract increasing numbers of devotees on a regular
basis require new methods for both passive and active prevention of stampedes. A number of approaches
to the development of management frameworks have been proposed in recent decades [13]. Advances
in the sphere of analytic tools have led to the introduction of a field of decision-support systems designed
monitoring the pedestrian flows and elaborating situation-aware strategies for the mitigation of the risks
of mass casualties. Some of the proposed components of systems (for instance, RFID marks used for
tracking pilgrims [19]) have been tested during actual mass gatherings, however, for the most part, the
solutions found in the literature are prototypes, and despite rare examples, [20] mass gatherings are
administered through crowd management strategies used for many decades which are only enforced by
the concentration of larger amounts of resources. However, in order to reproduce and test the possible
scenarios and identify potentially dangerous areas, prediction methods should be used.
The development of prediction methods is complex scientific research requiring deep analysis of
cause-and-effect relationships between predictable processes, objects and elements, or the factors
determining them. This is also connected to the significant variability of the processes in time and space.
Thus, the method of predicting the behavior of a complex nonlinear system including crowd behavior
is associated with modelling. Such modelling can be divided into two classes: (a) prediction of the
behavior of the crowd at a specified time interval from the current moment and (b) scenario modelling,
i.e. predictions based on some initial conditions (for example the class of “if-else” scenario).
In order to perform the study, an experimental method of short-term prediction of the dynamics of a
crowd leaving a large stadium was developed. The method is adapted to the specific (currently under
construction) "Zenit Arena" stadium, which is located on Krestovsky Island in St. Petersburg. The
method uses Social Force [21] model implementation within the PULSE framework [22]. The total
short-term forecasting algorithm is shown in Fig. 1.
Start prediction
Sampling of input data

Scenario creation
A

Model initialization

S

Environment
initialization

Update agent
generators

Parallel agent update
Update agent scheduler

Creation of initial agent
population

Update environment

Update interactive
objects
C

Continue
simulation?

yes

S

Update extentions

Update decision tree
Update movement
models

Update extentions
no

A

Output data collection
Prediction

C
Prediction result
evaluation
End

Figure 1: Algorithm of crowd simulation-based short-term prediction

2122

Multiagent Simulation for Mass Gatherings Decision Support System

V. Karbovskii et al

For the purpose of the evaluation and analysis of prediction results density, speed and flow can be
used (elements of fundamental diagram [23]) and relative “crowd pressure”. For the purpose of
evaluation and analysis of prediction results density, speed and flow can be used (elements of
fundamental diagram [23]) and relative “crowd pressure”. To assess the impact of surrounding agents
normalized dimensionless value was introduced depending on: (a) current pressure; (b) limit pressure
for the current settings defined in the simulation environment parameters (repulsiveAgent,
repulsiveAgentFactor). The current pressure on the agent is according to the formula.

‫ ݌‬ൌ σ௜ ȁ݂௜ҧ ȁ

(1)

In this expression ݂௜ҧ is the total repulsive effect of other pedestrians. Pressure limit value was
determined according to the following formula

‫݌‬௠௔௫ ൌ

௥௘௣௨௟௦௜௩௘஺௚௘௡௧‫כ‬௥௘௣௨௟௦௜௩௘஺௚௘௡௧ி௔௖௧௢௥‫כ‬ሺଵ଴‫כ‬௥௘௣௨௟௦௜௩௘஺௚௘௡௧ሻమ ‫כ‬ଷ
ସ଴

(2)

The normalized pressure is according to the expression
௣

݂݅‫ ݌‬൏  ‫݌‬௠௔௫
‫݌‬ᇱ ൌ ቊ௣೘ೌೣ
ͳ‫݁ݏ݅ݓݎ݄݁ݐ݋‬

(3)

The scheme of simulated area was reconstructed with open data and current plans for the
organization of the territory and infrastructure objects on it (Fig. 2).

(a)
(b)
Figure 2: Krestovsky Island model scheme (a) general view, (b) stadium area
Where 1 – pedestrian bridge (under construction), 2 – metro station Novokrestovskaya (under
construction), 3 – stadium (under construction), 4 – aquabus stop (under construction), 5 – bus stop, 6 –
bridge, 7 – metro station Krestovsky Island, 8 – metro station entrances, 9 – metro station exit, 10 –
stadium gates, 11 – stairs.

4 Experimental Research
One of the traits of applying multiagent modeling to predict the states of pedestrian crowds is the
uncertainty that affects the resulting forecasts. In order to assess the sensitivity of the method, a number
of experiments have been carried out. The spatial setting for the experiment has been limited to the
20x20 square meters (Fig. 3b), where two crowd flows merge. The choice of the setting is motivated by
the scenario to be reproduced in the experiment, namely, the variation in the flow characteristics of

2123

Multiagent Simulation for Mass Gatherings Decision Support System

V. Karbovskii et al

pedestrian flow at one of the entrances to the stadium. Each of the experiment runs has been performed
for 20 minutes of model time. The results of the simulation are presented in the Fig. 4.

(a)

(b)

Figure 3: (a) Mass gathering crowd dynamics forecast result visualization, (b) agent flow estimation
zone – inside the square are the agents approaching the exit from the area surrounding the stadium
The metrics that have been used for quantifying the effect of the alteration of input values are the
mean number of agents inside the square (Fig 4a), mean crowd pressure (Fig 4b) and the average speed
(Fig 5a) of agents at the given part of the route (Fig. 3b) leading outside the stadium.

(a)
(b)
Figure 4: Statistical ensemble of dependencies between the overall simulation time and (a) mean
agent counts, (b) mean crowd pressure
The results of calculations show that the rate of crowd pressure depends on the number of people
per given square. The average speed falls: remarkable situation when agents with the highest rate of
time to elapse before a crowd of Education, while the agents with the lowest rate of still leave the
territory in the process of reduction of the crowd (Fig. 5a).

2124

Multiagent Simulation for Mass Gatherings Decision Support System

V. Karbovskii et al

(b)
(a)
Figure 5: Statistical ensemble of dependencies between the overall simulation time and (a) the
mean speed inside the given area, (b) mean crowd pressure during the sudden increase of speed (i.e.
due to rain)
In addition, we consider the problem of the influence of some random factors on the prediction result:
the individuals in the crowd trying to speed up the movement due to external causes, such as the
occurrence of rain (Fig. 5b). This is modeled and simulated as an external event, which (on the 300th
second) leads to a slight increase of speed. From Fig. 5b it is clear that on the test site when the speed
increases due to the rain (300th second), crowd pressure is also increased. However, during a 20-50
returns to the original value.

5 Discussion & Conclusion
In conclusion, in order to choose the optimal strategy for crowd management at different stages of mass
gathering organization, decision makers might be assisted not only with the help of the real-time
monitoring systems which are indispensable, but with short-term predictions of future states of the
crowd produced through agent-based models. The latter can supply data on density, unidirectional speed
of pedestrians, and flow metrics (e.g. fundamental diagram) of the crowd in the runtime. Moreover, the
realization of the Social Force used in this research allows one to acquire the crowd pressure variable
values interactively by updating the force components.
However, we assume herein that the use of crowd density as a predictor of stampedes shall be
revised. On the one hand, crowd density is undoubtedly linked to the risk of injuries especially in
physically limited spaces, and in terms of planning, it suggests the basis for comparison of different
crowd management strategies. On the other hand, there are other factors, including the confounding
ones, that risk being overlooked – for instance, the effects of air temperature, weather conditions,
information available to participants, substance use during mass gatherings etc.
Apart from the purely practical use case described herein, we are looking forward to applying the
system to answering more fundamental research questions (which is, in return, expected to improve the
reliability of pragmatic forecasts). For instance, the issue of pedestrians applying different (sometimes
conflicting) navigation and obstacle avoidance strategies to different contexts might have substantial
impact on the precision and reliability of predictions. Moreover, identification of conditions that might
facilitate stampedes rather than just situations where the density of the crowd is increased can be
beneficial. Today there is no consensus in the literature on the works of stampede mechanics: thus
different assumptions, related to balance, environmental factors and physical characteristics of venues

2125

Multiagent Simulation for Mass Gatherings Decision Support System

V. Karbovskii et al

may be tested in the virtual space in order to later enrich decision support and elaborate upon
recommendations for organizers of mass gatherings.
Acknowledgments. This paper is financially supported by The Russian Scientific Foundation,
Agreement #14-21-00137 (15.08.2014).

References
[1]

[2]

[3]

[4]
[5]
[6]
[7]
[8]

[9]
[10]
[11]
[12]

[13]
[14]
[15]

[16]
[17]
[18]

2126

R. Steffen, A. Bouchama, A. Johansson, J. Dvorak, N. Isla, C. Smallwood, and Z. A. Memish,
“Non-communicable health risks during mass gatherings,” Lancet Infect. Dis., vol. 12, no. 2,
pp. 142–149, 2012.
K. M. Ngai, W. Y. Lee, A. Madan, S. Sanyal, N. Roy, F. M. Burkle Jr, and E. B. Hsu,
“Comparing two epidemiologic surveillance methods to assess underestimation of human
stampedes in India,” PLoS Curr., vol. 5, 2013.
S. A. Turris, A. Lund, A. Hutton, R. Bowles, E. Ellerson, M. Steenkamp, J. Ranse, and P. Arbon,
“Mass-gathering health research foundational theory: Part 2-event modeling for mass
gatherings,” Prehosp. Disaster Med., vol. 29, no. 6, pp. 655–663, 2014.
M. Molloy, A. Sherif, S. Natin, and J. McDonnell, “Management of Mass Gatherings,” Koenig
Schultz’s Disaster Med. Compr. Princ. Pract., pp. 228–253, 2009.
W. H. Organization and others, “Communicable disease alert and response for mass gatherings:
key considerations,” Geneva WHO, pp. 32–33, 2008.
P. Arbon, “Mass-gathering medicine: a review of the evidence and future directions for
research,” Prehosp. Disaster Med., vol. 22, no. 02, pp. 131–135, 2007.
W. H. Organization and others, “Public Health for Mass Gatherings: Key Considerations,” 2015.
S. A. Turris, A. Lund, and R. R. Bowles, “An analysis of mass casualty incidents in the setting
of mass gatherings and special events,” Disaster Med. Public Health Prep., vol. 8, no. 02, pp.
143–149, 2014.
C. N. Buzinde, J. M. Kalavar, N. Kohli, and D. Manuel-Navarrete, “Emic understandings of
Kumbh Mela pilgrimage experiences,” Ann. Tour. Res., vol. 49, pp. 1–18, 2014.
Z. A. Memish, G. M. Stephens, R. Steffen, and Q. A. Ahmed, “Emergence of medicine for mass
gatherings: lessons from the Hajj,” Lancet Infect. Dis., vol. 12, no. 1, pp. 56–65, 2012.
National Disaster Management Authority, “Managing Crowd - National Disaster Management
Authority,” Managing Crowd - National Disaster Management Authority, 2014. .
F. T. Illiyas, S. K. Mani, A. P. Pradeepkumar, and K. Mohan, “Human stampedes during
religious festivals: A comparative review of mass gathering emergencies in India,” Int. J.
Disaster Risk Reduct., vol. 5, pp. 10–18, 2013.
M. Yamin, “A Framework For Improved Hajj Management And Future Research,” ENTIC Bull,
vol. 2, no. 08, 2008.
A. Prasun and P. Dixit, “Stampede Management For Religious Events In India.”
M. Mohandes, M. A. Haleem, A. Abul-Hussain, and K. Balakrishnan, “Pilgrims Tracking Using
Wireless Sensor Network,” in Advanced Information Networking and Applications (WAINA),
2011 IEEE Workshops of International Conference on, 2011, pp. 325–328.
Q. A. Ahmed, Y. M. Arabi, and Z. A. Memish, “Health risks at the Hajj,” Lancet, vol. 367, no.
9515, pp. 1008–1015, 2006.
J. Wakefield, “Can Technology Help Avoid Stampedes?,” Can Technology Help Avoid
Stampedes?, 2013.
S. P. and D. W. Sarah Almukhtar, Larry Buchanan, Josh Keller, Alicia Parlapiano, “How the

Multiagent Simulation for Mass Gatherings Decision Support System

[19]
[20]
[21]
[22]

[23]

V. Karbovskii et al

Hajj Stampede Unfolded,” 2015.
K. S. Ravi, M. A. Aziz, and B. V. Ramana, “Pilgrims Tracking and Identification Using RFID
Technology,” Adv. Electr. Eng. Syst., vol. 1, no. 2, pp. 96–105, 2012.
A. Johansson and D. Helbing, “Pedestrian flow optimization with a genetic algorithm based on
boolean grids,” in Pedestrian and evacuation dynamics 2005, Springer, 2007, pp. 267–272.
D. Helbing and P. Molnar, “Social force model for pedestrian dynamics,” Phys. Rev. E, vol. 51,
no. 5, p. 4282, 1995.
V. Karbovskii, D. Voloshin, A. Karsakov, A. Bezgodov, and A. Zagarskikh, “Multiscale Agentbased Simulation in Large City Areas: Emergency Evacuation use Case,” Procedia Comput.
Sci., vol. 51, pp. 2367–2376, 2015.
N. Geroliminis and C. F. Daganzo, “Existence of urban-scale macroscopic fundamental
diagrams: Some experimental findings,” Transp. Res. Part B Methodol., vol. 42, no. 9, pp. 759–
770, 2008.

2127

