Procedia Computer Science
Volume 80, 2016, Pages 1416–1417
ICCS 2016. The International Conference on Computational
Science

Workshop on Large Scale Computational Physics
LSCP 2016
O. Olagbemi1, E. de Doncker1 and F. Yuasa2
1

Western Michigan University, Kalamazoo MI 49008, U. S. A.
omofolakunmiel.olagbemi@wmich.edu, elise.dedoncker@wmich.edu
2
High Energy Accelerator Research Organization (KEK), Tsukuba, Ibaraki, 305-0801, Japan
fukuko.yuasa@kek.jp

Abstract

The LSCP workshop focuses on symbolic and numerical methods and simulations,
algorithms and tools (software and hardware) for developing and running large-scale
computations in physical sciences. Special attention goes to parallelism, scalability
and high numerical precision. System architectures are also of interest as long as they
are supporting physics-related calculations, such as: massively parallel systems,
GPUs, many-integrated-cores, distributed (cluster, grid/cloud) computing, and hybrid
systems. Topics this year are from theoretical physics (high energy physics and
lattice gauge theory/QCD). The effects of transformations in obtaining numerical
results for Feynman loop integrals, and the deployment of a novel architecture to
achieve large computational power with low electric power consumption are
presented.
Keywords: Preface, Workshop overview, Workshop organization, Large Scale Computational Physics

Preface
The LSCP Workshop has been held under the ICCS conference since 2011. In LSCP 2016, the
following papers are presented:
–

“First application of lattice QCD to Pezy-SC processor”, Tatsumi Aoyama, Ken-Ichi Ishikawa,
Yasuyuki Kimura, Hideo Matsufuru, Atsushi Sato, Tomohiro Suzuki and Sunao Torii
[AIKMSST16]

1416

Selection and peer-review under responsibility of the Scientiﬁc Programme Committee of ICCS 2016
c The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V.

doi:10.1016/j.procs.2016.05.452

Preface LSCP 2016 workshop

–

O. Olagbemi, E. de Doncker and F. Yuasa

“Adaptive Integration and Singular Boundary Transformations”, Elise de Doncker, Fukuko
Yuasa, Tadashi Ishikawa, John Kapenga and Fola Olagbemi [dDYIKO16]

In the first paper, the Pezy-SC processor, a novel architecture developed by Pezy Computing
K. K. is used on a hybrid parallel system (Suiren) in the simulation of lattice QCD. In varying
scenarios, the sustained performance is measured for matrix multiplications and a BiCGStab solver.
An attractive feature of the Pezy-SC processor (an accelerator device similar to GPGPUs) is the
desirable combination of large computational power and low electric power consumption by the
processor. The authors examine how the data access patterns affect the performance of the processor,
and present their results along with their observations pertaining to the Pezy-SC processor.
The second paper applies multivariate adaptive integration combined with a variety of
transformations to integrals plagued with singularities at the boundaries of the integration domain. The
transformations are compared with respect to their acceleration of convergence and the resulting
computation time. The integration is performed with the ParInt parallel software package, which is
written in C and layered over MPI. In addition, the effects of using higher precision are presented for
double and long double precision. An application is given to Feynman loop integrals.

Acknowledgements
The LSCP chairs appreciate the help of the Workshop Program Committee, all reviewers of the LSCP
papers, and the organizers of the ICCS conference. We also acknowledge the support of the National
Science Foundation under Award Number 1126438, and of Grant-in-Aid for Scientific Research
(24540292 and 25400284) of JSPS, and the Large Scale Simulation Program No. 14/15-06, No. 15/1606, No. 14/15-T01 and No. 15/16-T01 of KEK.

References
[AIKMSST16]

Tatsumi Aoyama, Ken-Ichi Ishikawa, Yasuyuki Kimura, Hideo Matsufuru,
Atsushi Sato, Tomohiro Suzuki and Sunao Torii. First application of lattice
QCD to Pezy-SC processor. Procedia Computer Science, 2016. Workshop
on Large Scale Computational Physics (LSCP), ICCS 2016.

[dDYIKO16]

Elise de Doncker, Fukuko Yuasa, Tadashi Ishikawa, John Kapenga and
Fola Olagbemi. Adaptive Integration and Singular Boundary
Transformations. Procedia Computer Science, 2016. Workshop on Large
Scale Computational Physics (LSCP), ICCS 2016.

1417

