Procedia Computer Science
Volume 80, 2016, Pages 2327–2331
ICCS 2016. The International Conference on Computational
Science

Motion Deblurring for Space-Based Imaging on Sandroid
CubeSats Using Improved Genetic Algorithm
Xiaoqiang, Wu1,2,3 , Fengge, Wu2,3 , and Junsuo, Zhao2,3
1

3

University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100190, China
xiaoqiang2014@iscas.ac.cn
2
Institute of Software, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100190, China
fengge@iscas.ac.cn
National Key Laboratory of Science and Technology on Integrated Information Systems
Technology, Beijing 100190, China
junsuo@iscas.ac.cn

Abstract
NanoSats have become viable alternative to larger spacecraft that focuses on providing the end
user with access to space and similar functionality to mainstream missions. However, motion
blur ruins the images captured under the situation that NanoSats work in low-earth orbit at
high speeds. In this paper, we address the problem of deblurring images degraded due to
space-based imaging system shaking or movements of observing targets. We propose a motion
deblurring strategy relying on the powerful on-board computing capability of our Sandroid
CubeSats, a member of NanoSats, to compensate for the functional inadequacy of hardware.
We use Improved Genetic Algorithm within the strategy to obtain a better linear motion blur
kernel and then perform non-blind deconvolution on a single image taken by the space-based
imaging system on our Sandroid CubeSats to produce a deblurred result. Experimental results
demonstrate the eﬀectiveness of proposed strategy.
Keywords: Sandroid CubeSats, Space-Based Imaging, Motion Deblurring, Improved Genetic Algorithm

1

Brief Introduction

NanoSats have developed rapidly in the recent years due to its low-cost, short development
cycle, regular launch opportunities and high ﬂexibility. Facts as of 22 January 2016, NanoSats
launched in total is 491, about 55% of NanoSats are launched in 2014 and 2015 [1], which is
far more than conventional satellites. NanoSats work in low-earth orbit could, for instance, be
used to track environmental conditions, illegal tree-felling or changes in the course of rivers.
However, when we inspect the images collected from space-based imaging simulation system
for our Sandroid CubeSats, we ﬁnd motion blur in some images.
Motion blur is inevitable when NanoSats work in low-earth orbit at high speeds, and onorbit image pre-processing becomes an essential procedure. The main cause of motion blur is
Selection and peer-review under responsibility of the Scientiﬁc Programme Committee of ICCS 2016
c The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V.

doi:10.1016/j.procs.2016.05.431

2327

Motion Deblurring for Space-Based Imaging on Sandroid CubeSats . . .

Wu, Wu and Zhao

the result of averaging of image intensities due to relative motion between the imaging system
and a scene during exposure time. As we mentioned above, ﬁrstly, NanoSats usually work in
low-earth orbit with orbit height from 400 to 800 km, they move at extremely high speeds and
are not ﬁxed in space in relation to the earth. Pointing accuracy of NanoSats is an order of
magnitude larger and around 2◦ [2] due to the limitation of size and capacity, which is more
likely to yield motion blur during exposure time. Secondly, in order to reduce the mass weight
and the cost of NanoSats, the function and quality of imaging system on them are relatively
simple, meanwhile, the communication bandwidth is limited, which means it is not possible to
downstream all the captured images to the ground station for post-processing. Although there
are plenty of sophisticated algorithms and systems [3] aiming at restoring degraded nature
images emerging in large numbers in the past few decades, there is still lack of eﬀort for
handling motion blur of space-based images, especially on Sandroid CubeSats.
Hence, we proposed a strategy as the pre-processing procedure to deal with motion blur for
the imaging system of our Sandroid CubeSats. Our Sandroid CubeSats take full advantage of
the mobile device cluster as the main computing resources and they have a superior on-board
computing capability to ensure that the proposed strategy is feasible. We separate the proposed
strategy into four steps, which are image capturing, image pre-processing, motion blur kernel
or Point Spread Function (PSF) estimation and non-blind deconvolution. In motion blur kernel
estimation, we applied an Improved Genetic Algorithm (IGA) with a properly designed ﬁtness
function to obtain motion blur kernels. In addition, we implemented the proposed strategy in
two modes on our Sandroid CubeSats, which are ready for launch in this year.

2

Problem Formulation

According to the simulation system settings of our space-based imaging system on Sandroid
CubeSats, the PSF of the imaging system can be treated as linear, in both uniform and nonuniform situation. To remove linear motion blur, two parameters are needed: the length and
the direction of the blur kernel. In uniform motion deblurring, the whole image shares a same
linear motion blur kernel. In non-uniform motion blur situation, although the blur kernels
are various in diﬀerent patches of an image, but they are all linear. Hence, motion blur of
space-based imaging system on our Sandroid CubeSats can be modeled as a linearly ﬁltered
version of the latent sharp image, with a blur kernel that describes the imaging system motion
during exposure time. If we take image noise, image color saturation and other errors into
consideration, motion blur can be modeled as the following ﬂexible form
b=l⊗f +n

(1)

where b, l and f denote the observed blurred image, latent sharp image, and the PSF or blur
kernel, respectively. Moreover, n represents errors in the blurred image, which we call additive
image noise in general. ⊗ is the convolution operator.
While we are using the general Genetic Algorithms (GAs) to achieve parameter optimization
in motion deblurring, we ﬁnd general GAs always fall into local minima. If an evolution fallen
into local minima, the following iteration will be invalid. The way of our proposed strategy
works on to avoid this local minima problem is to generally improve the diversity of GA’s
population.
2328

Motion Deblurring for Space-Based Imaging on Sandroid CubeSats . . .

3

Wu, Wu and Zhao

Proposed Strategy (NS-Strategy)

Our Sandroid CubeSat is a three-unit CubeSat, which includes an imaging system, a power
module, a communication module and an attitude control system etc. In addition, there is
a Nubia Z7 mainboard on each side of our Sandroid CubeSat. All of the four smartphone
mainboards run Sandroid Operating System, which is a customized Android Operating System
for space mission usage. The four smartphone mainboards are connected with each other
through high-speed communication cable, such as a USB hub, which forms a small but powerful
and reliable cluster. The smartphones in the cluster are technically called nodes. The imaging
system is also connected to the cluster through System Integration Unit using CubeSat Space
Protocol (CSP).
In proposed strategy, we divide the whole deblurring task into four parts and each node
of the cluster deals with one part. The four parts are corresponding to four Sandroid APPs,
which are Scapture.apk for taking images, Spreprocess.apk for pre-processing degraded images,
SPSF.apk for PSF estimation and Sdeblur.apk for non-blind deconvolution. There are mainly
two modes to execute the task. Mode A treats the deblurring task as a whole and only a single
node will handle the task when the task is relatively simple, and Mode B divides the task into
several parts for four nodes to accomplish.
In the process of PSF estimation, the length and direction of PSF are treated as chromosomes of an individual, every chromosome is encoded with a binary sequence, and each bit
represents a gene, the combination of diﬀerent genes forms a chromosome, and the two chromosomes form an individual, many individuals form the population. To choose the best individual
from the whole population, we designed a ﬁtness function. In the ﬁtness function, we simply
minimize an energy function which is written as
min = Φ(l ⊗ f − b) + λ
l

l

2

(2)

where Φ is a distance function, a common deﬁnition is Φ(·) = · 2 , representing the L2-norm
of all elements. l 2 is a Tikhonov regularization term to enforce the smoothness on image
values. Weight λ is typically a small value. In this paper, we set λ to 0.005.
As presented in Algorithm 1, evolution starts from initially generated population. It processes iteration by iteration to produce new better chromosome until pre-speciﬁed stopping
criteria is satisﬁed and we get the PSF. Finally, for non-blind deconvolution, Sdeblur.apk uses
Richardson-Lucy method, other methods are also compared. See Algorithm 2.

4

Results Analysis

Having introduced our method, we tested it in a controlled setup where the ground truth is
known and images are synthetically blurred to inspect how image motion blur kernel length and
direction inﬂuence the performance of proposed strategy. We use these images to simulate the
space-based imaging system and were subject to motion blur due to the shaking or movements
of the imaging system on our Sandroid CubeSats.
We implement the proposed approach in both Python and Java. We create a database
for linear motion blurry space-based images. Space-based images of size 1440*810 are blurred
synthetically with diﬀerent lengths and directions. The proposed strategy produces diﬀerent
but close results for the same input image, so we execute 5 times and then take the average as
the output of blur kernel parameters. The running time depends on number of generations and
the size of population. It costs about 10 minutes to converge when we set generation to 20 and
choose the size 100 of population.
2329

Motion Deblurring for Space-Based Imaging on Sandroid CubeSats . . .

Wu, Wu and Zhao

Algorithm 1: IGA Improved Genetic Algorithm
Input: Population p, population size p sz, chromosome length chrom len, crossover rate
CR, mutation rate M R, generation gen.
Output: A blur kernel with length len and direction theta.
1 Set the bit number of gene according to the range and accuracy of chosen parameters len
and theta.
2 i ← 1.
3 Initialize the population p(i) according to the population size p sz with random ﬁtness
value and set CR, M R to 0.01 for GA’s population.
4 Evaluate the ﬁtness value of p(i).
5 repeat
6
Use Stochastic Uniform method to select parents from p(i).
7
Test the value of the standard deviation of CR and M R.
8
if the value of the standard deviation is lower than a pre-deﬁned value then
9
Update CR and M R by adding a random number taken from a Gaussian
distribution with mean 0 which is adaptive with respect to the last successful or
unsuccessful generation. The random number satisﬁes bounds and linear
constraints.
10
Execute Scattered crossover on parents creating p(i + 1).
11
Perform Adaptive Feasible mutation of p(i + 1).
12
Evaluate the ﬁtness value of p(i + 1).
13 until i ≥ gen or already get a satisﬁed parameter pair.
14 Generate blur kernel f with length len and direction theta.
15 return blur kernel f .
Algorithm 2: Deblur deblurring for space-based images using IGA
Input: Initial blur space-based image b.
Output: A latent sharp space-based image l.
1 Perform gamma correction, shock ﬁlter, bilateral ﬁlter and edge taper on b.
2 Perform Algorithm 1 IGA to estimate blur kernel f .
3 Perform Wiener Deconvolution (and other non-blind deconvolution methods) with
estimated blur kernel f on b.

Table 1 shows the average error in PSF and average Peak Signal to Noise Ratio (PSNR)
of the deblurred result. Figure 1 shows the result of proposed strategy and other methods
on controlled setup. Compared to complex motion deblurring algorithms, both the running
time and the deblurring results of proposed strategy is reasonable. In addition, the proposed
approach is not restrained by the input image size, which is superior to other algorithms.

5

Conclusion and Future Work

In this paper, we proposed a strategy for deblurring a single input space-based linear motion
blurry image from our Sandroid CubeSats, using IGA, relying on the strong computing power
of our Sandroid CubeSats. Results of proposed strategy are comparable to other algorithms,
and the running time is reasonable compared to other complex motion deblurring algorithms
2330

Motion Deblurring for Space-Based Imaging on Sandroid CubeSats . . .

(a)

(b)

(c)

Wu, Wu and Zhao

(d)

Figure 1: Deblur space-based images. (a) Represents the original space-based image blurred
with length 150 and direction 100◦ . (b) is deblurred with R-L method with estimated PSF using
proposed strategy. (c) Represents the restored result with [4]. (d) Represents the deblurred
result using blind deconvolution without PSF by proposed strategy.
True PSF
Angle Length
5
12
7
15
9
20
11
30
20
50
100
150

Angle
4.728
6.900
8.904
11.134
19.998
99.806

Length
12.774
16.606
20.505
30.278
50.086
149.982

IGA Result
PSNR Ag Error
41.667
0.0544
40.650
0.0143
40.000
0.0107
39.370
0.0122
38.000
0.0001
32.258
0.0019

Lt Error
0.0645
0.0671
0.0253
0.0093
0.0017
0.0001

Fast Motion Deblur [4]
PSNR
Cpr Error
35.9019
-0.1606
36.3203
-0.1192
39.1363
-0.0221
38.7527
-0.0159
37.0266
-0.0263
30.8089
-0.0470

Table 1: The average error of PSFs and average PSNR of the results of proposed strategy
and [4]. Ag Error, Lt Error and Cpr Error represent angle error, length error, and the PSNR
Error between proposed strategy and [4], respectively.
or to other GAs, which can take hours to converge to a reasonable solution. Our proposed
strategy does not depend on the input image size, which is an advantage over other algorithms.
For our future work, we are going to improve the ﬁtness function by introduce novel image
quality measure approach that reduce the running time for searching best PSF. In addition,
considering that we may need to process a large amount of images in a single mission, we are
designing a scheme to enhance the eﬃciency of the current proposed strategy, which connects
our Sandroid CubeSats and the ground station to work together to balance the computational
complexity between on-board computing and ground station computing.

5.1

Acknowledgments

This research was ﬁnancially supported by National Natural Science Foundation of China under
Grant No.61202218.

References
[1] Nanosatellite Database. Nanosatellite database, 2016.
[2] Mission Design Division Staﬀ. Small Spacecraft Technology State of the Art. 1 edition, 2014.
[3] AN Rajagopalan and Rama Chellappa. Motion Deblurring: Algorithms and Systems. Cambridge
University Press, 2014.
[4] Sunghyun Cho and Seungyong Lee. Fast motion deblurring. In ACM Transactions on Graphics
(TOG), volume 28, page 145. ACM, 2009.

2331

