Procedia Computer Science
Volume 80, 2016, Pages 2372–2376
ICCS 2016. The International Conference on Computational
Science

Random Neural Network based Intelligent Intrusion
Detection for Wireless Sensor Networks
Ahmed Saeed1 , Ali Ahmadinia2∗, Abbas Javed1 , and Hadi Larijani1
1

2

Glasgow Caledonian University, Glasgow, UK
California State University San Marcos, San Marcos, California, USA
aahmadinia@csusm.edu

Abstract
Security and privacy of data are one of the prime concerns in today’s embedded devices. Primitive security techniques like signature-based detection of malware and regular update of signature database are not feasible solutions as they cannot secure such systems, having limited
resources, eﬀectively. Furthermore, energy eﬃcient wireless sensor modes running on batteries
cannot aﬀord the implementation of cryptography algorithms as such techniques have signiﬁcant
impact on the system power consumption. Therefore, in order to operate wireless embedded
devices in a secure manner, the system must be able to detect and prevent any kind of intrusions before the network (i.e. sensor nodes and base station) is destabilized by the attackers. In
this paper, we have presented an intrusion detection mechanism by implementing an intelligent
security architecture using Random Neural Networks (RNN). To validate the feasibility of the
proposed security solution, it is implemented for an existing wireless sensor network system and
its functionality is practically demonstrated by successfully detecting the presence of any suspicious sensor node and anomalous activity in the base station with high accuracy and minimal
performance overhead.
Keywords: Intrusion detection, low-power embedded devices, illegal accesses, random neural networks

1

Introduction

The availability of low-cost typical components has changed the world of embedded systems
and it has enabled designers to connect devices, including but not limited to industrial sensors,
smart phones, medical devices, household appliances, cars and other vehicles to the Internet.
There are two key characteristics that make such systems prone to the security attacks. Firstly,
the simpliﬁed processing capabilities and limited power resources expose them to a number of
possible security attacks. Secondly, the network connectivity to the outside world, without any
inbuilt protection, also leaves such systems vulnerable to security attacks. In a typical embedded
∗ Corresponding

2372

Author

Selection and peer-review under responsibility of the Scientiﬁc Programme Committee of ICCS 2016
c The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V.

doi:10.1016/j.procs.2016.05.453

RNN based Intelligent Intrusion Detection for WSNs

Saeed, Ahmadinia, Javed and Larijani

system, these vulnerabilities can be exploited by an attacker to steal private data, drain the
power supply, destroy the system, or modify the system behavior for other than its designed
purpose. Furthermore, advancements in communication technology has also resulted in direct
communication for example in smart electric meters, remote controlled devices and wireless
sensor nodes. As system components are interconnected and also accessible via Internet, they
are at increased risk of security attacks. Therefore, security-awareness is becoming a primary
design objective.
Most of existing sensor nodes are micro-controller based embedded devices relying on batteries where reducing energy consumption is a top priority. Normally such devices have zero
security due to limited resources and therefore cannot aﬀord security solutions like anti-virus
and cryptography [7]. In such embedded devices, the information transmitted by the nodes can
be interfered and the application running on the micro-controller can also be compromised. In
this way, at least the application data will be corrupted which results in its incorrect execution.
We will demonstrate in our case study that without proper security mechanism, the wireless
sensor nodes can be manipulated and the base station can be compromised easily if the attacker
is familiar with the communication protocol and hardware architecture.
In this paper, a fast and eﬀective anomaly based intrusion detection mechanism (IDM)
is presented to detect a wide range of data integrity and performance degradation attacks in
the low-power wireless sensor network systems. It is based on learning normal behavior of
the system using RNN taking diverse dataset, covering both valid and invalid cases, as input
parameters. The trained RNN model is then embedded in the base station of the system to detect any anomalous behavior and prevent its propagation. The proposed solution eﬀectiveness
and performance overhead is measured for an existing system consisting of sensor nodes transmitting data to a base station. Through experimental setup it is shown that without proper
security mechanism it is possible to intrude into the application running on the base station.
Furthermore, it is also demonstrated that the base station successfully detected the presence of
the malicious sensor node when the given system is enabled with the proposed IDM.

2

Related Work

Intrusion detection has been studied widely in the perspective of computer networks as they
have been the prime target of security attacks. It is also becoming one of the key research areas
in the ﬁeld of embedded systems due to their increasing functionality and connectivity. Diﬀerent
solutions have been proposed to detect and prevent security attacks either through dedicated
hardware modules or software-based mechanisms. Currently, various security techniques have
been presented in the literature such as reference monitors, cryptography and neural network
based intrusion detection solutions.
Most of the reference monitor related solutions are based on scanning processor-executed
code by comparing it to a predeﬁned model and the security subsystem operates in parallel
with each processor [4]. The hardware-assisted security monitors [5, 9] are based on the
concept of sensing deviation in program execution at run-time by comparing behavior against
a static model for the purpose of detecting code modiﬁcation attacks. Mao and Wolf [5] have
used hash-based patterns for basic blocks comprising of fewer instructions. Similarly, Yoon et
al. [9] presented a security solution for multi-core systems that is based on running monitoring
program on a dedicated core.
Security attacks that target conﬁdentiality and integrity of the data can be avoided by
encrypting the data. However, such techniques are not realistic for low-power embedded devices
due to resource constraints and large power consumption overheads.
2373

RNN based Intelligent Intrusion Detection for WSNs

Saeed, Ahmadinia, Javed and Larijani

Diﬀerent anomaly based intrusion detection techniques have been proposed in the literature based on machine-learning techniques by learning a model, depicting both normal and
anomalous behavior of the system. Viera et al. [8] have used ANN in the cloud environment
for anomaly based intrusion detection. They have used a large feature vector for training the
model and presented that the ANN can be used to detect intrusions more eﬀectively. The
detection accuracy of ANN based models is dependent on the input feature vector and number
of hidden layers used in the training phase. Furthermore, the detection phase of such intrusion
detection systems is computationally intensive and requires more time to detect any anomaly.
Gelenbe [1] proposed the new class of ANN as RNN which is based on concepts of probability
theory applied to Markovian queuing theory. RNN is easy to implement on hardware as its
neurons can be represented by simple counters [6]. Mohamed and Rubino [6] compared RNN
with ANN and showed that training time for RNN is greater than ANN, but RNN outperformed
ANN during run-time phase in total calculation time. They further showed that RNNs have
strong generalization capability for the patterns not covered in the training phase.
The existing neural networks based intrusion detection solutions are computationally intensive, rely on extensive proﬁling of the communication traﬃc and have been designed for systems
with ample resources where power consumption is not a design constraint. Therefore, such solution cannot be deployed for battery operated wireless sensor systems. On the other hand,
our proposed solution is based on a RNN model which is easy to implement, has low memory footprint, consumes minimal power and can detect any deviation in the system behavior
eﬀectively.

3

System Architecture

Detecting abnormality based on behavior analysis involves learning of the normal operation of
the system and identiﬁcation of any event that deviates from the previously learned model.
In this way, unknown security attacks can also be detected which normally left undetected by
the signature-based techniques. The proposed intrusion detection mechanism (IDM) uses the
Random Neural Network (RNN) to detect any abnormality in the behavior of the system. A
previously designed smart controller [3], as shown in Figure 1, has been used to implement the
proposed IDM. The system comprises of a base station, sensor nodes and a web server.

Figure 1: Smart Controller Wireless Sensor Network
This has been designed using multiple RNN models, which have been implemented on low
2374

RNN based Intelligent Intrusion Detection for WSNs

Saeed, Ahmadinia, Javed and Larijani

cost Arduino boards. The base station is developed on an Arduino Mega board and it is
connected with control panel of the environment chamber to turn on/oﬀ heater, cooler, and
ventilation. Each sensor node transmits the data to base station in the form of a string with
the following format [node ID, CO2, temperature, humidity, light, and intensity (optional)].
This smart controller is capable of detecting and estimating the number of occupants inside the
building in order to turn on/oﬀ the Heating, Ventilation and Air Conditioning (HVAC) control.
In addition, it can interact with occupants to maintain the occupant preferred set points for
heating and cooling. The application running on the base station processes data after receiving
it from the sensor nodes through a transceiver and further communicates with a web server
through a on-board WiFi module. The sensor nodes are battery operated and cannot aﬀord to
send data in encrypted form as it consume considerable amount of power.

4

Evaluation and Experimental Results

The eﬀectiveness and overheads are evaluated by implementing the proposed IDM within the
application running on the base station. In the ﬁrst step, a malicious node is introduced into
the system which compromises the base station and in the second step, it is shown that our
solution can successfully detect and prevent such attacks with minimum impact on the system
resources, performance and power consumption.
The proposed IDM is mainly responsible to detect performance degradation attacks such
as detection of invalid packets transmitted by a malicious sensor node with the aim to drain
battery and unnecessary utilization of system resources (i.e base station transceiver). Any data
corruption as the result of buﬀer overﬂow will also be detected by the proposed IDM as long
as the application’s data memory is intact and program instructions are executing. As the
sensor nodes are battery operated, the encryption support has been disabled to save the power.
The eﬀectiveness of the proposed solution has been tested under diﬀerent attack scenarios.
To practically evaluate these attack scenarios, we placed a malicious sensor node in the range
of base station. This malicious sensor node can transmit the packet containing more data as
intended to receive or even transmitting packets containing invalid data. The length and format
of data transmitted by valid sensor nodes is analyzed by placing another receiving node. Then
the attacker sensor node starts transmitting its own packet leading to performance degradation
and generating buﬀer overﬂow in the memory where the received data is being stored by the
base station. In this way, the base station fails to execute the code in the correct manner. On
the contrary, when the base station is protected with our proposed IDM, the security attacks
are detected successfully and an alarm signal is generated for further action.
Table 1: Overhead of the proposed Intrusion detection and prevention mechanism
Security Level

System

Power

Data

Dedicated

Packet

Execution

Consumption

Transfer

Hardware

Lengthβ

Time (ms)

(mW )

Rate (kbps)

Logic

(bytes)

–

255

YES

64

Baseline

8.584

72

31.69

AES Encrypted

8.623

86.90

31.54

+0.45%

+20.69%

-0.54%

Change∗
Proposed IDM

8.794
78.545
30.93
NO
255
+2.45%
+9.09%
-2.40%
1∗
Percentage change with respect to baseline,
β Maximum length of a packet that can be received/transmitted in a single event

Change∗

2375

RNN based Intelligent Intrusion Detection for WSNs

Saeed, Ahmadinia, Javed and Larijani

Beside verifying the eﬀectiveness of the proposed IDM, its impact on the system performance, power consumption, data transfer rate and hardware resources has been analyzed. Initially these values have been measured for the baseline application running on the base station
without encryption and IDM. Then these values are measured with encryption enabled and
ﬁnally for the proposed IDM. As shown in Table 1, the proposed IDM has minimal impact on
the system. The transceiver module on the base station has hardware 128-bit AES encryption
support whereas our IDM does not require any dedicated hardware. Although, the encryption
enabled base station has lower execution time but it has higher power consumption compared to
our proposed IDM. The encrypted communication also have a signiﬁcant impact on the sensor
nodes power consumption as each node has to transmit encrypted data, consuming more power
for each sensor node in the system. Moreover, this encryption is only supported to transmit/receive packets with maximum data length of 64 bytes [2]. Therefore, to transfer large packets,
the power consumption of the encryption enabled base station will increase. On the contrary,
our proposed IDM has no such restriction as it is not dependent on the packet data length.

5

Conclusion

In this work, we have presented an eﬀective intrusion detection mechanism for low-power wireless sensor networks. An intelligent anomaly detection model is learned using RNN to deal with
performance degradation attacks. The feasibility of the proposed solution is demonstrated for
a wireless sensor nodes based system, with the detection accuracy of 97.23%. The eﬀectiveness
of the proposed solution is further tested by adding attacker sensor node and generating different security attacks that are eventually detected by our solution. The proposed IDM does
not require dedicated hardware resources and presented negligible performance overhead with
10.45% increase in the power consumption.

References
[1] Erol Gelenbe. Random neural networks with negative and positive signals and product form solution. Neural computation, 1(4):502–510, 1989.
[2] HOPERF.
RFM69 ISM TRANSCEIVER MODULE.
http://www.hoperf.cn/upload/rf/
RFM69-V1.3.pdf, last viewed January 2016.
[3] A. Javed, H. Larijani, A. Ahmadinia, R. Emmanuel, D. Gibson, and C. Clark. Experimental
testing of a random neural network smart controller using a single zone test chamber. Networks,
IET, 4(6):350–358, 2015.
[4] Georgios Kornaros and Dionisios Pnevmatikatos. A survey and taxonomy of on-chip monitoring of
multicore systems-on-chip. ACM Trans. Des. Autom. Electron. Syst., 18(2):17:1–17:38, April 2013.
[5] Shufu Mao and T. Wolf. Hardware support for secure processing in embedded systems. Computers,
IEEE Transactions on, 59(6):847–854, 2010.
[6] S. Mohamed and G. Rubino. A study of real-time packet video quality using random neural
networks. Circuits and Systems for Video Technology, IEEE Tran. on, 12(12):1071–1083, 2002.
[7] W. Trappe, R. Howard, and R.S. Moore. Low-energy security: Limits and opportunities in the
internet of things. Security Privacy, IEEE, 13(1):14–21, Jan 2015.
[8] Kleber Vieira, Alexandre Schulter, Carlos Westphall, and Carla Westphall. Intrusion detection for
grid and cloud computing. IT Professional, 12(4):38–43, 2010.
[9] Man-Ki Yoon, S. Mohan, Jaesik Choi, Jung-Eun Kim, and Lui Sha. Securecore: A multicorebased intrusion detection architecture for real-time embedded systems. In Real-Time and Embedded
Technology and Applications Symposium (RTAS), 2013 IEEE 19th, pages 21–32, April 2013.

2376

