Procedia Computer Science
Volume 80, 2016, Pages 1242–1243
ICCS 2016. The International Conference on Computational
Science

Multiscale Modelling and Simulation, 13th International
Workshop
Derek Groen1,2 , Valeria Krzhizhanovskaya3,4,5 , Bartosz Bosak6 , Timothy
Scheibe7 , and Alfons Hoekstra3
1

7

Brunel University London, Uxbridge, United Kingdom
Derek.Groen@brunel.ac.uk
2
University College London, London, United Kingdom.
3
University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
4
ITMO University, Saint Petersburg, Russia.
5
Saint Petersburg Polytechnic University, Russia.
6
Poznan Supercomputing and Networking Center, Poznan, Poland.
Paciﬁc Northwest National Laboratories, Richland, Washington, United States of America.

Abstract
Multiscale Modelling and Simulation (MMS) is a cornerstone in the today’s research in computational science. Simulations containing multiple models, with each model operating at a
diﬀerent temporal or spatial scale, are a challenging setting that frequently require innovative
approaches in areas such as scale bridging, code deployment, error quantiﬁcation, and scientiﬁc
analysis. The aim of the MMS workshop is to encourage and consolidate the progress in this
multidisciplinary research ﬁeld, both in the areas of the scientiﬁc applications and the underlying infrastructures that enable these applications. Here we brieﬂy introduce the scope of the
workshop and highlight some of the key aspects of this year’s submissions.
Keywords: modelling,simulation,multiscale,multiphysics,coupling

1

Introduction to the workshop

Modelling and simulation of multiscale systems constitutes a grand challenge in computational
science, and is widely applied in ﬁelds ranging from the physical sciences and engineering to the
life science and the socio-economic domain. Most of the real-life systems encompass interactions
within and between a wide range of space and time scales, and/or on many separate levels
of organization. They require the development of sophisticated models and computational
techniques to accurately simulate the diversity and complexity of multiscale problems, and to
eﬀectively capture the wide range of relevant phenomena within these simulations.
Additionally, these multiscale models frequently need large scale computing capabilities as
well as dedicated software and services that enable the exploitation of existing and evolving
1242

Selection and peer-review under responsibility of the Scientiﬁc Programme Committee of ICCS 2016
c The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V.

doi:10.1016/j.procs.2016.05.494

Multiscale Modelling and Simulation, 13th International Workshop

Groen et al.

computational ecosystems. Through this workshop we aim to provide a forum for multiscale
application modellers, framework developers and experts from the distributed infrastructure
communities to identify and discuss challenges in, and possible solutions for, modelling and
simulating multiscale systems, as well as their execution on advanced computational resources
and their validation against experimental data.
The workshop is a successor of the series of workshops on Simulation of Multiphysics Multiscale Systems organized during 2002-2015 [1]. This year’s edition attracted 10 accepted presentations, covering a range of application domains, but also an unusually large fraction of
cross-disciplinary research on multiscale simulation.
These cross-disciplinary talks include a review of multiscale coupling tools to improve scientiﬁc productivity, a general-purpose computational framework for scale bridging in multiscale
simulations, and an software approach which helps automate the creation and execution of
complex multiscale applications. Given the nature of the workshop, we look forward to lively
discussions as the communities from diﬀerent disciplines will have the opportunity to exchange
ideas on general-purpose approaches from diﬀerent angles.
In addition, we are pleased to host a range of contributions on cutting-edge applications
of multiscale modelling, including multiscale models of organic electronics, stochastic slowfast dynamics, rolling-contact fatigue, small-scale plasticity, ground water-land surface-river
processes, laser propagation in optically active semiconductors, and electrokinetic transport in
porous media. With representation from leading institutations across three diﬀerent continents
present this year, the 13th workshop on multiscale modelling and simulation is indeed at the
forefront of computational science.
Acknowledgments
We are grateful to all the members of the Programme Committee for their help and support
in reviewing the submissions of this year’s workshop. This includes B. Boghosian, B. Chopard,
D. Coster, W. Dubitzky, V. Ervin, W. Funika, Y. Gorbachev, J. Harting, M. van der Hoef, J.
Jaros, E. Lorenz, S. Karabasov, G. Karniadakis, R. Krause, T. Kruger, K. Kurowski, H. Lee,
S. MacLachlan, R. Melnik, L. Mountrakis, J. Osborne, F. Rogier, F.-X. Roux, K.J. Rycerz, P.
Strand, T. Tautges, S. Zasada, and A. Zhmakin.

References
[1] VV Krzhizhanovskaya, D Groen, B Bosak, and AG Hoekstra. Multiscale modelling and simulation
workshop: 12 years of inspiration. Procedia Computer Science, 51:1082–1087, 2015.

1243

