Procedia Computer Science
Volume 80, 2016, Pages 2019–2029
ICCS 2016. The International Conference on Computational
Science

Information Dynamics in Transportation Systems with
Traﬃc Lights Control
Sorina Costache Litescu1 ,Vaisagh Viswanathan1 ,Heiko Aydt2 ,Alois Knoll3 ,
1

TUM CREATE sorina.litescu@tum-create.edu.sg
2
Singapore-ETH Centre
3
Technical University of Munich (TUM)

Abstract
Due to recent advanced communication possibilities between traﬃc infrastructure, vehicles
and drivers, the optimization of traﬃc lights control can be approached in novel ways. At
the same time, this may introduce new unexpected dynamics in transportation systems. Our
research aims to determine how drivers and traﬃc lights systems interact and inﬂuence each
other when they are informed one about another’s behaviour. In order to study this, we
developed an agent based model to simulate transportation systems with static and dynamic
traﬃc lights and drivers using information about the traﬃc lights behaviour. Experiments reveal
that the system’s performance improves when a bigger share of drivers receive information for
both static and dynamic traﬃc lights systems. This performance improvement is due to drivers
managing to avoid stopping at red light rather them adapting their speed to diﬀerent distances
to the traﬃc lights systems. Additionally, it is demonstrated that the duration of the ﬁxed
phases also inﬂuences the performance when drivers use speed recommendations. Moreover,
the results show that dynamic traﬃc lights can produce positive eﬀects for roads with high
speed limits and high traﬃc intensity, while in the rest of the cases static control is better. Our
ﬁndings can be used for building more eﬃcient traﬃc lights systems.
Keywords: Information propagation; Dynamical information; Traﬃc dynamics; Transportation systems; Traﬃc lights; Traﬃc control; Human complex systems;

1

Introduction

Understanding and controlling complex systems is a very hard goal in natural or man made
systems [17]. There are two independent factors that make the controlling diﬃcult: the system’s
architecture, represented by the physical network, and the dynamical rules that capture the
time-dependent interactions between the network components [17]. Complex transportation
systems face a major challenge regarding the eﬃciency of the traﬃc ﬂow. With an increasing
This work was ﬁnancially supported by the Singapore National Research Foundation under its Campus for
Research Excellence And Technological Enterprise (CREATE) programme.
Selection and peer-review under responsibility of the Scientiﬁc Programme Committee of ICCS 2016
c The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V.

doi:10.1016/j.procs.2016.05.522

2019

Information Dynamics with Traﬃc Lights Control

Costache Litescu, Viswanathan, Aydt, Knoll

urbanization, the amount of cars is growing as well, this causing numerous traﬃc problems. One
way of steering the traﬃc is by creating an eﬃcient traﬃc lights control systems. Nevertheless,
traﬃc lights can cause discomfort to drivers. Surveys state that there are cases when drivers
prefer to change their routes to avoid stopping to multiple traﬃc lights on the way [4] [20].
With the recent advancements in communication networks, computers, and sensor technologies, there is an increasing interest in developing optimized traﬃc lights control systems.
On the one hand, new technological developments such as real time responsive traﬃc lights
are implemented in major cities [26]. On the other hand, Dedicated Short-Range Communication (DSRC) systems, navigation devices or smart phone applications communicate and assist
drivers in their trips. DSRC systems have already been installed on many roadways by the US
Department of Transportation [22] and are expected become ubiquitous in the future [1]. For
example EnLighten [8] is a smart phone application that connects to the traﬃc signal network
and predicts the behaviour of traﬃc lights by communicating to DSRC systems on the roads.
Using such technology, BMW drivers are informed when a stoplight changes [22].
The interaction of these new technologies not only oﬀer new possibilities for improving the
traﬃc but at the same time may introduce new unexpected complex dynamics. Receiving
information about the next traﬃc light can have many advantages, mostly in terms of safety,
but also convenience. The drivers are less surprised by sudden change to red color and they try
less to accelerate so that they catch green light before it turns red. However, it is interesting to
understand what is the eﬀect on the traﬃc performance when a massive amount of drivers react
simultaneously to information about the traﬃc lights. Also, how the overall traﬃc situation is
aﬀected by the traﬃc lights adapting to the traﬃc ﬂow.
In this study we use an agent-based simulation of a transportation system to analyse how
drivers and traﬃc lights systems interact and inﬂuence each other when they are informed
one about another’s behaviour. The drivers receive information about how to adapt the speed
to avoid stopping for the red color when possible. Generally, traﬃc lights have two types of
control: static, with a ﬁxed phase duration and dynamic or traﬃc responsive, optimised the
phase duration to prioritise directions for larger groups of cars [19]. We evaluate how the the
overall traﬃc performance is impacted by the responsiveness of the dynamic traﬃc lights and the
usage of speed recommendation simultaneously, by diﬀerent shares of the traﬃc participants.
The current paper is organised as it follows: Sections 2 introduce the related work done on
the traﬃc lights control strategies and how traﬃc recommendations have been used to steer
traﬃc. Sections 3 and 4 describe the computational model, the experimental set-up and our
results. Section 5 presents the signiﬁcance and the conclusions of our study.

2

Related Work

The concept of traﬃc lights appeared in ancient times, during the Roman Empire when citizens
noticed a conﬂict between pedestrian and equine travellers. Not until 1860s a practical solution
was implemented in London in the form of a traﬃc control device with arms to command drivers
at intersections. The modern traﬃc light was invented in America. New York had a three color
system in 1918 manually operated from a tower in the middle of the street. In 1926 the ﬁrst
automatic signals, activated by a timer, were installed in London [2]. The control of traﬃc
lights made a big turn with the use of computers (the ﬁrst analogue computers in Denver in
1952 [18] and the ﬁrst digital computers in 1959, in Toronto [26]). Nowadays, in many cities the
controllers operate in real-time by applying a control action in response to the current traﬃc
state. However, there are still numerous statical traﬃc lights control in operation [19].
In this paper, similar to other studies [19], we categorise the traﬃc light control as static
2020

Information Dynamics with Traﬃc Lights Control

Costache Litescu, Viswanathan, Aydt, Knoll

and dynamic. Usually, for static traﬃc lights, the phases have a ﬁxed duration based on
historical traﬃc data. The green time can be varied between pre-timed minimum and maximum
lengths depending on ﬂows. The ﬁxed timing of the phases is optimised by ﬁne-tuning a set
of intersections along the arterial road but there are a few attempts of optimising the timing
by looking at a broader scale. For example in case of the city of Lausanne, signal times at
intersections are distributed across the entire city, improving the traﬃc globally. For dynamic
control, a traﬃc-actuated controller operates based on traﬃc demands as registered by the
actuation of vehicle and/or pedestrian detectors [19].
Lately, the traﬃc responsive solutions have gathered more attention while the ﬁxed-time
strategies are used more for understanding the traﬃc conditions. There are studies where ﬁxedtime strategies are proposed as robust control solutions or used directly or indirectly to derive
the real-time strategies [19]. The real-time responsive optimization is achieved by extending
the capabilities of basic traﬃc lights to either communicate with each other or communicate
with vehicles. Traﬃc lights control systems can be centralised (i.e., SCOOT [25], an adaptive
system based on information on traﬃc ﬂow from detectors) or decentralised (i.e., [12] [10] [5]).
Modern traﬃc lights based on self organization seem to perform better than the traditional
methods [12]. In this study, the authors use short sighted anticipation of vehicle ﬂows and
platoons. A decentralized emergent coordination based on local interactions traﬃc lights control
is achieved that manifested in a reduction of the average travel time and the emergence of greenwaves. In [10] and [5] the self-organization is achieved as well by probabilistic formation of car
platoons. In turn, the platoons aﬀect the behaviour of traﬃc lights, prompting them to turn
green before they have reached the intersection. These methods are based on local rules and no
communication between traﬃc lights which means that the decentralized coordination is based
on local interactions of traﬃc lights control and the traﬃc ﬂow. The cars that have been waiting
longer and larger groups of cars are prioritised to cross the intersection. In this case, the traﬃc
lights control is considered rather an adaptation problem than an optimization problem.
In [6] the authors use micro-auctions as the organizing principle for incorporating local
induction loop information. When a phase change is permitted, each light conducts a decentralized, weighted, micro-auction to determine the next phase. Other studies deal with the
prediction of traﬃc signals enabling innovative functionalities such as Green Light Optimal
Speed Advisory (GLOSA) or eﬃcient start-stop control [23].
Unlike the current research, this study proposes a systematic analysis of the interaction
between drivers and traﬃc lights systems. Each type of traﬃc lights control is described in more
details in Section 3. We evaluate how dynamic traﬃc lights systems perform in comparison
to static traﬃc lights systems. At the same time, we investigate how the fact that drivers use
information about the traﬃc lights behaviour and interact with responsive and static traﬃc
lights can impact the overall performance.
Next, we present the existing work done on the eﬀect of traﬃc information disseminated
in transportation systems. The traﬃc lights system coexist with drivers accessing information
about the traﬃc state. Surveys show that, in most cases, traﬃc participants trust and follow
the navigation recommendations [9]. Systems for traﬃc planning in the presence of congestion
have been researched by [3, 13, 14, 15] by controlling the information given to each participant
(proposing certain routes) to achieve individual or global social optimum performance [3]. The
studies done in [21] and [24] analyse the traﬃc performance when information about congestion,
containing either local details about the neighbouring nodes or global details about the traﬃc
networks, is disseminated according to a model of information dissemination. The authors
showed that the best performance is achieved when limited local knowledge is used.
In [16], the authors show how traﬃc is aﬀected by the amount of drivers receiving information
2021

Information Dynamics with Traﬃc Lights Control

Costache Litescu, Viswanathan, Aydt, Knoll

about the traﬃc situation. Moreover, in this case the information provides details about what
routes the drivers should take to avoid congestion. Providing inappropriate information to the
traﬃc participants sometimes leads to undesirable situations such as one-sided congestion [11].
Other study have investigated methods to facilitate network coordination by disseminating
knowledge about the network that may poss less risk than modifying network structure [7].
In contrast to the previous research, we investigate how the global traﬃc performance is
aﬀected by the fact that both drivers and traﬃc lights systems adapt to the traﬃc situation at
the same time, by using certain traﬃc information. In our study, the drivers receive information
about what speeds they need to use to avoid stopping for the red light. Additionally, we evaluate
how diﬀerent shares of drivers being informed can impact the overall traﬃc state for both cases
of static and dynamic traﬃc lights systems.

3

Computational model

Planning eﬃcient traﬃc lights systems requires ﬁrst an analysis on how the responsiveness of
the traﬃc lights can impact the global traﬃc state. Moreover, it is important to understand the
eﬀect of a massive amount of drivers using speed recommendations. Microscopic agent based
simulations are suitable computational tools for simulating such scenarios. The simulation
(SEMSim) consists of the road network (road lanes, traﬃc lights) and agents (driver-vehicle
units). By simulating individual agents that drive on roads and interact with the traﬃc lights
systems, new interesting emergent traﬃc patterns can be observed. SEMSim is described in
more details in [27], here we give a brief overview of the relevant parts.
At the beginning of the simulation, each agent is assigned an itinerary generated by a
probabilistic routing technique. The origins of trips are peripheral lanes, without predecessors.
A route is generated based on the turning probability for each intersection (equally distributed in
our case). When the vehicle reaches a lane without successors, this link is marked as destination
and the vehicle is removed from the simulation. We vary the traﬃc intensity by changing the
inter-arrival time of generation agents (IAtime ) and the total number of agents (Ntotal ).

3.1

Road Network Model

A road Y from the road network, is characterised by a tuple with road length, number of lanes,
minimum speed and maximum speed: RoadY =< vYmin , vYmax , NLanes , LengthY >. We vary
the speed range vYmin and vYmax to evaluate the impact of the agents adjusting the speed.

Lane A

Lane B

Vehicle n
vn
xn
L

vd
xn+L
Gap distance

Vehicle n+1
vn+1
xn+1

Figure 1: In an IDM scenario, a vehicle i is characterised by the current position xi and the current speed vi . Dgap is the gap distance between vehicles. The road is characterised by minimum
and maximum speed, length and desired speed vd : RoadY =< vYmin , vYmax , NLanes , LengthY >.

2022

Information Dynamics with Traﬃc Lights Control

3.2

Costache Litescu, Viswanathan, Aydt, Knoll

Driver Vehicle Unit Model

The agents (Drive-Vehicle Unit) move on roads with an acceleration and deceleration using IDM
and lane-changing models. A vehicle i follows the car in front vehicle i + 1 at a speed less than
the desired speed of the road vd , which is a value between v min and v max . The current speed of
car i, vi is adapted to the speed of car i + 1, vi+1 to maintain a gap distance greater than Dgap .
Where Dgap is a parameter of the IDM model that speciﬁes the preferred distance between cars
[16]. IDM calculates a instantaneous acceleration (or deceleration) and displacement of vehicle
i for a time step δt by considering its current speed and position (vi and xi ), the desired speed
(vd ), the current speed and the position of the car in front (vi+1 and xi+1 ). There are also
parameters that specify vehicle length (Lvehicle ), time headway (th ) for safe acceleration and
deceleration, and maximum acceleration and deceleration (amax , dmax ). There are two type
of agents: informed and uninformed. The informed diﬀer from the uninformed ones as they
receive information about the speed they need to use to avoid stopping at the red light.
To capture a more realistic traﬃc behaviour a lane changing model is also implemented.
There are a few situations when vehicles need to change the lanes: when vehicles need to turn
to follow their route itinerary, or when faster vehicles need to overtake the slower vehicles by
shifting to faster lanes. In our case, the agents can use two lanes available on each road as seen
in Fig. 1.

3.3

Traﬃc lights control systems

(a) Road network. Each road has 4 lanes(2 in each
direction), a ﬁxed LengthY = 900m and a maximum
max with diﬀerent values(for each scenario).
speed vY

(b) Traﬃc lights intersection of RoadA and RoadB .
Lanes L1 , L2 , L3 and L4 are associated to P hase1
and L5 ,L6 ,L7 and L8 are associated to P hase2 .

Figure 2: Traﬃc lights systems placement on roads
Traﬃc lights systems are simulated as part of the road network infrastructure being located
at certain intersection of roads. They contain lanes that are called links. Links are special roads
that connect two road sections in an intersection. The links can be either active or inactive.
A traﬃc lights system consists of a set of mutually compatible phases. The green or red color
of phases are simulated by controlling the accessibility of the links. A cycle of the traﬃc lights
systems contains all the phases associated with the intersection active at least once. A phase is
characterised by duration and a set of links (lanes) P hasex =< δ phase , Lanes >. For example,
Fig. 2b illustrates a traﬃc lights intersection with two roads RoadA and RoadB . Lanes L1 ,
L2 , L3 , L4 are associated to P hase1 (red light) and L5 ,L6 ,L7 , L8 to P hase2 (green light).
2023

Information Dynamics with Traﬃc Lights Control

IAtime
Ntotal
v max
p
DAdj
δ P hase

Costache Litescu, Viswanathan, Aydt, Knoll

parameter description

min value

max value

incremental step

Inter-arrival time
Total number of agents
Roads speed range
Percentage of informed agents
Adjustment distance
Phase duration

1[s]
500[agents]
15[m/s]
0%
0[m]
11[s]

5[s]
2500[agents]
20[m/s]
100%
900[m]
135[s]

1[s]
1000[agents]
5[m/s]
10%
100[m]
1[s]

Table 1: Main parameters used in the experiments.
Traﬃc lights systems can be static or dynamic, depending on how we determine the phase
duration δ P hase . Static traﬃc lights have the active phase duration ﬁxed at the start of the simulation δ P hase = k. Dynamic traﬃc lights have a variable duration, determined each timestep
based on the number of cars that pass trough the local intersection link. The phase weight
(wP hase ) considers the number of cars passing the link at the current time. All the phases in
the of a cycle are taken into consideration and each duration is a ratio of the weight from the
sum of total weights of phases of a cycle (wT otal ): δ P hase = wP hase /wT otal .
The informed agents receive speed recommendations to avoid stopping at the red light.
Only the agents situated at a distance smaller than the adjustment distance (DAdj ) can receive
information. The recommended speed is higher then half of vYmin .

4

Experimental setup

The purpose of the experiments is two-fold: We analyse how the traﬃc performance is aﬀected
by traﬃc lights being responsive to the traﬃc situation. At the same time, we investigate how
the fact that drivers use speed recommendations can impact the performance. For this, we
identify three case studies. First, we use dynamic traﬃc lights that react to the traﬃc situation
but the drivers are not informed. In the second case, all drivers receive traﬃc lights information
but the traﬃc lights are static. In the third case, both the drivers and the traﬃc lights have
information about each other and react accordingly. The main parameters used for this study
are deﬁned in Table 1.
For our experiments we use a simpliﬁed scenario of the road network and traﬃc lights
described in Fig. 2a and 2b. Each road is characterised by the next attributes: RoadY =<
0.9 ∗ vYmax , vYmax , 2[lanes], 900[m] >. Low traﬃc intensity is generated for IAtime = 5[s] and
Ntotal = 500[agents], medium traﬃc intensity is generated for IAtime = 3[s] and Ntotal =
1500[agents] and high traﬃc intensity is generated for IAtime = 1[s] and Ntotal = 2500[agents].
Next we deﬁne the global performance indicator, where ti is the trip duration and di is the
trip distance of an agent i. Nc is the total number of agents to complete their trip.
IP =

4.1

1
Nc

Nc
i=0

di
,
ti

(1)

Dynamic traﬃc lights are responsive to the traﬃc situation

In the ﬁrst study we aim to determine how the real-time traﬃc responsiveness of the traﬃc
lights can impact the overall traﬃc performance (IP deﬁned in Eq. 1). The agents are not
2024

Information Dynamics with Traﬃc Lights Control

Costache Litescu, Viswanathan, Aydt, Knoll

informed (p = 0%), DAdj = 900[m], v max = 20[m/s], δ P hase = 45[s]. For this we deﬁne the
responsiveness indicator IR that shows the impact on IP of the dynamic traﬃc lights control
in comparison to the static one for each level of traﬃc intensity low, medium and high:
IR = (IPDynamic − IPStatic )/IPStatic

(2)

where IPStatic is the reference performance indicator.
Fig. 3 shows that dynamic traﬃc lights control produces a worse eﬀect on the traﬃc than the
static one for lower levels of traﬃc intensity. However, there are cases when the dynamic traﬃc
lights control outperforms the static one for high traﬃc and high speed roads (v max = 20[m/s]).

0.10

0.10

0.05

0.05

0.10
0.05

0.00

0.00

0.00

− 0.05

− 0.05

− 0.05

− 0.10

− 0.10

− 0.10

− 0.15

− 0.15

− 0.15

− 0.20

− 0.20

− 0.20

− 0.25

− 0.25

− 0.25

Traffic intensity

(a)

v max

= 10m/s

Traffic intensity

(b)

v max

= 15m/s

Traffic intensity

(c)

v max

= 20m/s

Figure 3: Illustration of the he eﬀect of dynamic traﬃc lights in the traﬃc using responsiveness
indicator IR (deﬁned in Eq. 2). None of the agents have information (p = 0%), only the traﬃc
lights are responsive to the traﬃc situation for roads with diﬀerent v max .

4.2

Drivers adapt their speeds based on navigation recommendations

In the second study we analyse what is the eﬀect on the overall traﬃc when a massive amount
of drivers are using speeds recommendations. In this case the traﬃc lights are static and all the
agents are informed (p = 100%, δ P hase = 45[s], v max = 20[m/s]). It is important to note that
our scenario implies that traﬃc is generated symmetrically in both directions (north-south/
south-north and east-west/ west-east). The waiting time in one direction is compensated by
the fact that more cars are going on the green wave in the other direction.
First we investigate how the adjustment distance DAdj inﬂuences the traﬃc. We deﬁne:
IAdj = (IPD

Adj

− IP0 )/(IP0 ),

(3)

is the performance indicator deﬁned in Eq. 1 and IP0 is the performance indicator
where IPD
for the reference case of DAdj = 0[m]
Fig. 4a illustrates the eﬀect of drivers using speed recommendations for diﬀerent values of
DAdj . The adjustment distance indicator IAdj , deﬁned in Eq. 3, is aﬀected even by small values
of the DAdj = 100[m]. Nevertheless, for higher DAdj , IAdj does not have a signiﬁcant variation.
This eﬀect is explained by observing how much time the drivers stop at the traﬃc lights. Even
for small DAdj , some drivers manage to avoid stopping at the red light when using the speed
recommendation. Fig. 4b shows how much the cars stop at the red light by using the waiting
indicator IW , which shows the total number of timesteps when agents are stopped. We notice
Adj

2025

Information Dynamics with Traﬃc Lights Control

Costache Litescu, Viswanathan, Aydt, Knoll

that IW is improved even for small values of DAdj ( DAdj = 100[m]). It is important to note
that, the fact that agents adapt their speed does not cause a signiﬁcant diﬀerence on the traﬃc
performance IP but rather the fact that they avoid stopping at the red light.

0.40

1500
Low Traffic
M edium Traffic
H igh Traffic

0.35
0.30

1450

0.25

1400

0.20

1350

0.15

1300

0.10
1250

0.05
0.00
0

200
400
600
800
Adjustm ent distance [m ]

(a) IAdj (Eq. 3) for low, medium and
high traﬃc intensity

1200
0

200
400
600
800
Adjustm ent distance [m ]

(b) Waiting Indicator IW (number of
timesteps) for medium traﬃc intensity

Figure 4: Illustration of the eﬀect of drivers adapting their speed for diﬀerent values of the
adjustment distance DAdj for static traﬃc lights.

20

2500
Low traffic
M edium traffic
H igh traffic

18
16
14

2000
1500

12
10

1000

8
6

500

4
2
0

20

40
60
80 100 120
Phase duration [s]

(a) IP expressed in m/s (Eq. 1) for
low, medium and high traﬃc intensity

0
0

20

40 60 80 100 120
Phase duration [s]

(b) Waiting Indicator IW (number of
timesteps) for medium traﬃc intensity

Figure 5: Illustration of the he eﬀect of drivers using speed recommendations for diﬀerent phase
durations δ P hases of static traﬃc lights.

Further, we analyse how the phase duration inﬂuences the traﬃc situation. Fig. 5a illustrates the eﬀect of drivers using speed recommendations for diﬀerent phase duration δ P hase .
In this case DAdj = 900[m] and v max = 20[m]. IP , deﬁned in Eq. 1, has better values for
smaller δ P hase (< 11s). For high values, δ P hase does not have a signiﬁcant impact on the traﬃc
performance. This eﬀect is explained in Fig. 5b using the waiting indicator IW that shows the
total number of timesteps when the agents are stopped. It can be observed that, for higher
δ P hase , IW increases.
2026

Information Dynamics with Traﬃc Lights Control

4.3

Costache Litescu, Viswanathan, Aydt, Knoll

Both drivers and the traﬃc lights adapt to traﬃc

In the third study, diﬀerent shares of agents receive navigation recommendations about how
to adapt their speed in order to avoid stopping for the red light (p ∈ [0, 100]%, DAdj = 900m,
δ P hase = 45[s], v max = 20[m]). For this we deﬁne the information indicator as it follows:
IInf o = (IPp − IP0 )/(IP0 ),

(4)
IP0

IPp

is the performance indicator deﬁned in Eq. 1 and
is the performance indicator
where
for the reference case of p = 0%.
In Fig. 6a and 6b we notice that the traﬃc is improved when more agents are using
information both in the case of static and dynamic traﬃc lights. For static traﬃc lights the
reference IP0 for low, medium and high traﬃc intensity have the following values : 10.1m/s,
7.4m/s and 4.2m/s. For dynamic traﬃc lights IP0 are 9.8m/s, 6.1m/s and 4.4m/s. Therefore,
the reference cases for static and dynamic traﬃc lights have similar values. The increase rate is
smaller for dynamic traﬃc lights because, in this case, the instability of the system is growing
when more agents receive speed recommendations. This eﬀect is shown in Fig. 6c by the
coeﬃcient of variation of the average speeds on roads: CV = σμ is deﬁned as the ratio of the
standard deviation and the mean of the total speed on roads. In conclusion, informing more
agents is beneﬁcial for both static and dynamic traﬃc lights systems. Nevertheless, in the case
of dynamic control, the transportation system is aﬀected by a higher level on instability.

0.30
0.25
0.20

0.30
Low Traffic
M edium Traffic
H igh Traffic

0.25
0.20

0.15

0.15

0.10

0.10

0.05

0.05

Low Traffic
M edium Traffic
H igh Traffic

0.00

0.00

− 0.05

− 0.05

− 0.10
0
20
40
60
80
100
Percentage of inform ed agents (p% )

− 0.10
0
20
40
60
80
100
Percentage of inform ed agents (p% )

(a) IInf o (deﬁned in Eq. 4) for
static traﬃc lights.

(b) IInf o (deﬁned in Eq. 4) for
dynamic traﬃc lights.

0.044

Static traffic light
D ynam ic traffic light

0.042
0.040
0.038
0.036
0.034
0
20
40
60
80
100
Percentage of inform ed agents (p% )

(c) Coeﬃcient of variation of the
average speeds on roads CV for
medium traﬃc

Figure 6: The eﬀect of diﬀerent shares of drives using speed recommendations

5

Conclusions

We presented our experimental results involving traﬃc lights control and information dissemination in transportation systems. In this study we considered two types of traﬃc lights: static
and dynamic. The static traﬃc lights have a pre-deﬁned ﬁx phase duration. The dynamic
traﬃc lights have smarter adaptive mechanisms for reacting to the traﬃc situation. Our model
of disseminating information consists of selecting diﬀerent shares of drivers to receive speed
recommendations. The drivers use the recommendations only if they are closer than a speciﬁed adjustment distance to the traﬃc light. It was assumed that all agents are rational and
follow the recommendations. Future work will aim to extend the existing models of the real
time traﬃc responsive traﬃc lights by considering more details when determining the phase
2027

Information Dynamics with Traﬃc Lights Control

Costache Litescu, Viswanathan, Aydt, Knoll

duration. In addition, we plan to use more realistic city networks and human behaviour models
to determine how agents decide to use the real time speed recommendations.
The experimental results show that the system’s performance is aﬀected by the level of
responsiveness of the traﬃc lights. Dynamic traﬃc lights perform worse than the static ones
for roads with smaller speeds limits. However, for rapid roads with high traﬃc intensity, the responsive traﬃc lights control can produce positive eﬀects. When all drivers receive information,
the distance to the traﬃc lights system within they adapt their speeds does not inﬂuence significantly the performance. Generally, the fact that cars do not wait for the red light decreases the
travel time even for low values of adjustment distance. For ﬁxed phase duration smaller than
11s, drivers adapting speeds produces a bigger eﬀect on traﬃc than for higher phase duration.
Moreover, diﬀerent shares of drivers that receive information about the traﬃc lights behaviour
produce diﬀerent eﬀects on the traﬃc performance for both static and dynamic traﬃc lights
control. More drivers receiving information is beneﬁcial for the overall traﬃc performance.
Our ﬁndings are relevant in the context of information based solutions for ITS [28], involving
traﬃc lights control, information processing, advanced communication and sensing. It is useful
to anticipate what impact can have the fact that a massive amount of drivers use real time
information about the traﬃc lights behaviour. At the same time, it is important to explore the
eﬀect of the real time traﬃc responsiveness of the traﬃc lights under diﬀerent circumstances.
The main challenge in optimising the traﬃc lights control consists in minimising the time spent
in the network by agents [19]. This means determining the most eﬃcient proportion of green
allocated to each phase. A practical solution to improve traﬃc should take into consideration
not only the travel time but also the comfort and safety of the drivers while approaching a traﬃc
lights. For planning eﬃcient traﬃc lights systems in the context of future ITS, it is necessary to
consider the negative and the positive eﬀects that real time traﬃc responsiveness of the traﬃc
lights control combined with a massive number of drivers using speed recommendations.

References
[1] Transportation Research Board Of The National Academies. Review of the status of the dedicated short-range communications technology and applications [draft] report to congress. [online],
2015. Available at http://onlinepubs.trb.org/onlinepubs/reports/DSRC_April_28_2015.pdf;
Accessed 01-April-2016.
[2] Azrulnor Ahmad. Development of traﬃc light control system using programmable logic controller.
PhD thesis, Universiti Malaysia Pahang, 2007.
[3] Javed Aslam, Sejoon Lim, and Daniela Rus. Congestion-aware traﬃc routing system using sensor
data. In Intelligent Transportation Systems (ITSC), 2012 15th International IEEE Conference on,
pages 1006–1013. IEEE, 2012.
[4] Shlomo Bekhor, Moshe E Ben-Akiva, and M Scott Ramming. Evaluation of choice set generation
algorithms for route choice models. Annals of Operations Research, 144(1):235–247, 2006.
[5] Seung-Bae Cools, Carlos Gershenson, and Bart DHooghe. Self-organizing traﬃc lights: A realistic
simulation. In Advances in applied self-organizing systems, pages 41–50. Springer, 2008.
[6] Michele Covell, Shumeet Baluja, and Rahul Sukthankar. Micro-auction-based traﬃc-light control:
Responsive, local decision making. In IEEE Intelligent Transportation Systems Conference (ITSC2015), 2015.
[7] Daniel Enemark, Mathew D McCubbins, and Nicholas Weller. Knowledge and networks: An
experimental test of how network knowledge aﬀects coordination. Social Networks, 36:122–133,
2014.
[8] EnLighten. Connected signals. [online], 2015. Available at https://connectedsignals.com/
enlighten.php; Accessed 01-April-2016.

2028

Information Dynamics with Traﬃc Lights Control

Costache Litescu, Viswanathan, Aydt, Knoll

[9] Verena Franken and Transportation Research Board. Use of navigation systems and consequences
for travel behaviour . In ECTRI-FEHRL-FERSI Young Researcher Seminar, Brno, Czech Republic, 2007.
[10] Carlos Gershenson. Design and control of self-organizing systems. CopIt Arxives, 2007.
[11] Takeaki Imai and Katsuhiro Nishinari. Optimal information provision for maximizing ﬂow in a
forked lattice. Physical Review E, 91(6):062818, 2015.
[12] Stefan L¨
ammer and Dirk Helbing. Self-control of traﬃc lights and vehicle ﬂows in urban road
networks. Journal of Statistical Mechanics: Theory and Experiment, 2008(04):P04019, 2008.
[13] Sejoon Lim, Hari Balakrishnan, David Giﬀord, Samuel Madden, and Daniela Rus. Stochastic
motion planning and applications to traﬃc. In Algorithmic Foundation of Robotics VIII, pages
483–500. Springer, 2009.
[14] Sejoon Lim and Daniela Rus. Stochastic motion planning with path constraints and application
to optimal agent, resource, and route planning. In Robotics and Automation (ICRA), 2012 IEEE
International Conference on, pages 4814–4821. IEEE, 2012.
[15] Sejoon Lim and Daniela Rus. Congestion-aware multi-agent path planning: distributed algorithm
and applications. The Computer Journal, page bxt067, 2013.
[16] Sorina Litescu, Vaisagh Viswanathan, Michael Lees, Alois Knoll, and Heiko Aydt. Information
impact on transportation systems. Journal of Computational Science, 9:88–93, 2015.
[17] Yang-Yu Liu, Jean-Jacques Slotine, and Albert-L´
aszl´
o Barab´
asi. Controllability of complex networks. Nature, 473(7346):167–173, 2011.
[18] Neng-Chao Lv, Xin-Ping Yan, and Chao-Zhong Wu. A novel urban traﬃc control approach considering travelers’ intentions. In CICTP 2012@ sMultimodal Transportation SystemsConvenient,
Safe, Cost-Eﬀective, Eﬃcient, pages 1318–1326. ASCE, 2012.
[19] Carolina Osorio and Michel Bierlaire. A multiple model approach for traﬃc signal optimization
in the city of lausanne. In Swiss Transport Research Conference, number TRANSP-OR-CONF2006-078, 2008.
[20] Dominik Papinski, Darren M Scott, and Sean T Doherty. Exploring the route choice decisionmaking process: A comparison of planned and observed routes obtained using person-based gps.
Transportation research part F: traﬃc psychology and behaviour, 12(4):347–358, 2009.
[21] Giovanni Petri, H Jeldtoft Jensen, and John W Polak. Global and local information in traﬃc
congestion. EPL (Europhysics Letters), 88(2):20010, 2009.
[22] Plant.
Bmws
nifty
new
enlighten
app
predicts
traﬃc
light
changes.
[online],
2015.
Available
at
http://www.plant.ca/general/
bmws-nifty-new-enlighten-app-predicts-traffic-light-changes-video-150476/; Accessed
01-April-2016.
[23] Valentin Protschky, Kevin Wiesner, and Stefan Feit. Adaptive traﬃc light prediction via kalman
ﬁltering. In Intelligent Vehicles Symposium Proceedings, 2014 IEEE, pages 151–157. IEEE, 2014.
[24] Salvatore Scellato, Luigi Fortuna, Mattia Frasca, Jes´
us G´
omez-Garde˜
nes, and Vito Latora. Traﬃc
optimization in transport networks based on local routing. The European Physical Journal BCondensed Matter and Complex Systems, 73(2):303–308, 2010.
[25] Scoot. Spilt cycle oﬀset optimisation technique. [online], 2016. Available at www.scoot-utc.com;
Accessed 04-April-2016.
[26] Ronald Theodoor Van Katwijk. Multi-agent look-ahead traﬃc-adaptive control. TU Delft, Delft
University of Technology, 2008.
[27] Vaisagh Viswanathan, Daniel Zehe, Jordan Ivanchev, Dominik Pelzer, Alois Knoll, and Heiko
Aydt. Simulation-assisted exploration of charging infrastructure requirements for electric vehicles
in urban environments. Journal of Computational Science, 12:1–10, 2016.
[28] Thomas A. Dingus Woodrow Barﬁeld. Human factors in intelligent transportation systems. Psychology Press, 2014.

2029

