Procedia Computer Science
Volume 80, 2016, Pages 1777–1779
ICCS 2016. The International Conference on Computational
Science

Bridging the HPC Talent Gap with Computational
Science Research Methods
BRIDGE Workshop at ICCS 2016
Nia Alexandrov1
1

Barcelona Supercomputing Centre, Barcelona, Spain
nia.alexandrov@bsc

Abstract

Computational Science, an interdisciplinary field that melds basic sciences, mathematical
modelling, quantitative analysis techniques and High-performance Computing (HPC)
techniques, is proving integral in addressing the big problems in industries ranging from
manufacturing and aerospace, to drug design and risk management. With the advances in HPC
and with the advent of Data Science there is a clear and recognized need of researchers and scientists
to further develop their skills and in particular: mathematical skills, problem solving and analytical
skills.
Keywords: Computational Science, Data Science, University education, Research Skills, Talent Gap

The BRIDGE workshop focuses on tackling the HPC and Computational Science talent gap, since,
according to IDC and our latest studies, in EU, USA, Japan as well as in the BRICS and Latin
America this gap appears to be similar in gravity and subject areas. On the other hand we observe
mathematics led innovation both in EU and USA, with critical demand for Computational Science
Research Methods to bridge the above gap. Thus the focus of the workshop is on the overall
environment and how the needed research skills for the changing HPC ecosystem can be built into the
university courses and professional development training programs.
Computational Science and High-Performance Computing (HPC) are key strategic assets for the
EU and its innovative capacity (COM EC, 2012) and (Joseph, E. et al, 2010, September). Large scale
computing in science and industry has become an indispensable way to tackle societal and scientific
grand challenges, and to address the needs of industry to innovate in products and services.

Selection and peer-review under responsibility of the Scientiﬁc Programme Committee of ICCS 2016
c The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V.

doi:10.1016/j.procs.2016.05.536

1777

Preface BRIDGE Workshop at ICCS 2016

Nia Alexandrov

Computational approaches to scientific grand challenge problems such as the detection and treatment
of diseases like cancer, modelling of the human brain, and climate forecasting are beginning to bear
fruit. Computational Science, an interdisciplinary field that melds basic sciences, mathematical
modelling, quantitative analysis techniques and HPC techniques, is proving integral in addressing the
big problems in industries ranging from manufacturing and aerospace, to drug design and risk
management.
With the advances in HPC and with the advent of Data Science there is a clear and recognized
need of researchers and scientists to further develop their skills: mathematical skills, problem solving
and algorithmic skills. In addition data analytic skills together with the integration of data visualisation
become an indispensable component of scientific inquiry. Therefore key research methods and
approaches for Data and Compute Intensive Science, ranging from theory creating and theory testing
approaches to conceptual-analytical approaches and experimental ones are very important in order for
the researchers to be able to analyse and solve such problems efficiently.
The aim of the workshop is to provide forum for discussion highlighting not just the single
instances on lesson level but rather the means to affect change by increasing Computational Science
visibility at curricula and degree levels. This year the selected papers reflect the effort to integrate
computational and data science in the university studies in a manner benefiting wide range of science
and engineering students. The workshop papers and presentations are:
Using Ontology Engineering Methods to Improve Computer Science and Data Science Skills,
Svetlana Chuprina, Vassil Alexandrov and Nia Alexandrov
The paper focuses on the ontology construction process, Computing Classification System and
Data Science domain ontology all used to help IT-students and specialists from industry and academia
to address the Big Data and Data Science skills gap. The methodological aspects of ontology design
process and enriching of existing free accessible ontologies are presented as tools for students in their
research work and in real world projects.
The Bilingual Semantic Network of Computing Concepts, Evgeniy Khenner and Olfa Nasraoui
The talk describes the construction of a bilingual (English-Russian /Russian-English) semantic
network covering basic concepts of computing. The Computing Curricular series created during 20002015 under the aegis of ACM and IEEE and the current standards of IT specialists training in Russia
were used to construct the semantic network. The network can be used as the basic component in an
intelligent information system that allows processing bilingual search requests while considering their
semantics and to translate academic texts from one language into the other using intelligent data
analysis methods such as data mining.
Biomedical Big Data Training Collaborative (BBDTC): An effort to bridge the talent gap in
biomedical science and research, Shweta Purawat, Charles Cowart, Rommie Amaro and Ilkay
Altintas.
The BBDTC (https://biobigdata.ucsd.edu) is a community-oriented platform to encourage highquality knowledge dissemination with the aim of growing a well-informed biomedical big data
community through collaborative efforts on training and education. The BBDTC collaborative is an elearning platform that supports the biomedical community to access, develop and deploy open training
materials. The BBDTC supports Big Data skill training for biomedical scientists at all levels, and from
varied backgrounds. The natural hierarchy of courses allows them to be broken into and handled as
modules.
Ontology Based Data Access Methods to Teach Students to Transform Traditional Information
Systems and Simplify Decision Making Process, Svetlana Chuprina and Igor Postanogov.

1778

Preface BRIDGE Workshop at ICCS 2016

Nia Alexandrov

The paper describes a service-based approach for the provision of a natural language interface to
legacy information systems built on top of relational database management systems, which aims to
make data analysis easily approachable by a wider range of users for a diverse range of purposes and
to simplify the decision making process. The concept and development of ontology-driven webservice named Reply, which transforms traditional information systems into intelligent systems with
natural language interface, is discussed.
The Impact of Learning Activities on the Final Grade in Engineering Education, Raul RamirezVelarde, Nia Alexandrov, Miguel Sanhueza-Olave and Raul Perez-Cazares
The paper presents an interesting example of learning analytics. A principal component analysis is
carried out on the undergraduate level “Stochastic Models” course. The authors determine that the first
principal component has a positive correlation with the score of the final written cumulative exam.
This could possibly mean that the final exam could be eliminated from engineering curricula, but the
variability is significant as measured by the correlation R statistic. With the gathering of a much larger
sample was found that the variability increased, indicating changes in the course and students
emphasis in learning activities. Therefore the conclusion is, that the evidence presented does not
justify eliminating written cumulative final exams.

References
COM EC (2012). Communication from the Commission to the European Parliament, The Council,
The European Economic and Social Committee and the Committee of the Regions. High-Performance
Computing: Europe's place in a Global Race. European Commission. Brussels, 15.2.2012
COM(2012) 45 final.
Joseph, E. et al. (2010, September), A Strategic Agenda for European Leadership in
Supercomputing: HPC2020 – IDC Final Report of the HPC Study for the DG Information Society of
the European Commission. IDC. Hey,T., Tansley, S. and Tolle, K. (2009). The Fourth Paradigm:
Data-Intensive Scientific Discovery. Microsoft Corporation, October 2009. ISBN 978-0-9825442-0-4
[Online]. Available: http://research.microsoft.com/en-us/collaboration/fourthparadigm/ [Accessed:
July 2015].

1779

