Procedia Computer Science
Volume 80, 2016, Pages 2246–2250
ICCS 2016. The International Conference on Computational
Science

A training engine for automatic quantiﬁcation of left
ventricular trabeculation from cardiac MRI
Gregorio Bernab´e1 , Javier Cuenca1 , Domingo Gim´enez1 , and Josefa
Gonz´alez-Carrillo2
1
University of Murcia, Spain
{gbernabe,javiercm}@ditec.um.es, domingo@um.es
2
Hospital Virgen de la Arrixaca, Murcia (Spain)
josegonca.alarcon@gmail.com

Abstract
Based on a software tool proposed for the automatic quantiﬁcation of the exact hypertrabeculation degree in the left ventricle myocardium, where the trabecular and the compacted
zones are detected, we have designed, developed and tested a training engine for an automatic
adjustment of the threshold to identify the trabecular zones and the intensity of the black zone
in order to determine the external layer of the compacted zone.
Keywords: non-compacted cardiomyopathy, trabecules, automatic quantiﬁcation, training engine

1

Introduction

In the last few years, the important technological development in the main cardiologic image
techniques, like echocardiography (EC), magnetic resonance (MR) and the multi-slice Computed Tomography (CT) [4], has increased the interest of cardiologists in non-compacted cardiomyopathy, which is characterized by the presence of multiple trabecules in the left ventricle
myocardium, associated to multiple inter-trabecular recesses communicated with the ventricular
cavity [5][8].
Up to now, there is no ﬁrm consensus in the medical community for quantifying and valuing
this cardiopathy. Jacquier et al. [7] describe a pioneer work to computationally quantify the
trabeculated mass by endocardium delineation. However, the proposed method was applied to
a very small number of patients and the classiﬁcation shown is based on the variables deﬁned
previously by the same method.
In [1] we proposed the ﬁrst automatic software tool based on medical experience that accurately quantiﬁes the LV hyper-trabeculation degree (QLVT), using the cardiac images obtained
by magnetic resonance.
Following the same scheme used in previous works [2, 3], the software is improved with
the inclusion of a training engine for an automatic selection of the thresholds to identify the
2246

Selection and peer-review under responsibility of the Scientiﬁc Programme Committee of ICCS 2016
c The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V.

doi:10.1016/j.procs.2016.05.399

A training engine for automatic quantiﬁcation

Bernab´e, Cuenca Gim´enez and Gonz´
alez-Carrillo

trabecular zones and the intensity of the black zone in order to determine the external layer
of the compacted zone. Therefore, the time needed to complete the process by cardiologists is
reduced considerably with respect to the software proposed in [1]. Thus, the training engine
provides cardiologists with a support tool for diagnosis that does important work.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 analyses the development of a
training engine for QLVT. Experiments to validate the training engine are discussed in Section
3. Finally, Section 4 summarizes and introduces future work.

2

A training engine for QLVT

We propose a training engine for the automatic selection of two essential parameters for the
QLVT software: the intensity of the black zone to determine the external layer of the compacted
zone, called the intensity threshold (IT), and the threshold to identify the trabecular zones in
QLVT, called the trabecular threshold (TT). These two parameters constitute the keys to obtain
a successful output that can be accepted by cardiologists in a subjective evaluation to validate
the proposed method.
The computing method presented in [1] was applied to 74 cardiac images obtained by magnetic resonance in a population of 11 patients (identiﬁed from P1 to P11) with previously
diagnosed non-compacted cardiomyopathy and to two control groups of 6 and 5 patients: the
ﬁrst is formed by people with magnetic resonance studies due to other cardiomyopathies, and
the second by people with magnetic resonance studies thanks to familiar screening who have
been diagnosed as healthy, and so genetically prove negativity. We have classiﬁed patients into
three groups based on medical experience: Contrast, Darkness and Normal depending on the
intensity of the pixels in the LV cavity.
We have built a classiﬁer to determine the group of each input image. In order to perform this
classiﬁcation automatically, for each input image, the classiﬁer computes the Otsu threshold1
of the whole image and the Otsu threshold of the pixels inside the LV cavity. Both thresholds
classify all input images of a patient in one of the three groups. If two classiﬁcations of one
input image of a patient are equal, this image is classiﬁed in the corresponding output. Given
a patient, if there is any slice where the two classiﬁcations are not the same, the classiﬁcation
for this image is established by the most output obtained in the rest of slices.
Up to now, for each input image, cardiologists established IT and TT, analyzing the cardiac
image several times and adjusting the two thresholds. In this work, we built two theoretical
models to accurately obtain the thresholds automatically.
To model the IT, we have developed the theoretical model based on equation:
IT = α1 ∗ M + α2 ∗ (M ∗ N ) + α3 , where M is the average of gray scale pixels contained
between the left ventricle cavity and the external layer of an input image, as we observe in
z

gray scale pixeli

, where z is the number of total pixels in this zone, and N
equation: M =
z
M
) of the pixels in this zone, classiﬁed in values from
the normalized average (equation N = 255
0 to 255 of gray scale.
The values of the coeﬃcients α1 , α2 and α3 are obtained with a least-square adjustment.
For the Normal and Contrast groups, α1 is equal to 0, α2 is equal to 1 and α3 is equal to
70. For those groups, the combination of the product of M and N and the addition of the
constant α3 obtains a value that represents a close approximation to the thresholds established
i=1

1 Otsu’s algorithm assumes that the image contains two classes of pixels following bi-modal histogram, it
then calculates the optimum threshold separating the two classes so that their combined spread is minimal [9].

2247

A training engine for automatic quantiﬁcation

Bernab´e, Cuenca Gim´enez and Gonz´
alez-Carrillo

by cardiologists. For the Darkness group, α1 and α2 are equal to 0 and α3 is equal to 80.
Therefore, the value of the threshold is ﬁxed to 80 because most of the Darkness images use
this value.
In a similar way, when modeling the TT, the theoretical model is based on equation:
T T = β ∗ O, where O is the Otsu threshold of the pixels inside the LV cavity of an input image.
The value of the coeﬃcient β, is obtained with least-square adjustment. The Otsu threshold
can model a parameter that distinguishes trabecular zones composed of grayish or black zones.
β is equal to 0.98, 0.90 and 0.88 for the Darkness, Normal and Contrast group, respectively.
The three models are needed because the Otsu threshold is normally very close to 255 for the
Contrast group, a value close to the average of pixels in the left ventricle cavity for the Normal
group and a value near to 0 for the Darkness group.

3

Experiments

Once 74 cardiac images of 11 patients, presented in the previous section, had been used to build
a model, we applied the training engine of QLVT to 46 cardiac images obtained by magnetic
resonance to 7 patients (identiﬁed from P12 to P18).
All slices of patients P12, P13, P16 and P17 has been classiﬁed as Contrast, P14 and P18 as
Normal, and P15 as Darkness. Therefore, the classiﬁer obtains a hit rate of 100% and does not
commit any errors. For example, for patient P14, 5 slices have the same output classiﬁcation
and for 2 the classiﬁcation diﬀers, but the number of same classiﬁcations is higher than that of
diﬀerent ones and all the slices are classiﬁed as Normal.
Figure 1 shows the thresholds established by cardiologists and the modeled values of TT and
IT obtained by the training engine of QLVT, for several slices of patients from P12 to P18. Most
of modeled values are very close to optimal thresholds. In particular, as shown in Figure 1a,
all slices of patients P15, P16 and P18 obtain modeled values to identify the trabecular zones
identical to real thresholds. For patients P12, P14 and P17 the modeled thresholds are lower
than the real values for the trabecular thresholds, and, consequently, for these slices a lower
number of trabecular zones is identiﬁed. Finally, patient P13 presents modeled values lower or
higher than the real values for diﬀerent slices, with mass of trabecular zones lower or higher than
real outputs. In the same way, as observed in Figure 1b, the tuned values for patient P15 to
determine the intensity threshold are identical to the values established by the cardiologist. For
patient P14 the modeled thresholds are lower than the real values, implying an identiﬁcation
of the external layer of the compacted zone not so far away from the left ventricle cavity. The
rest of the patients obtain modeled thresholds lower or higher than the thresholds established
by cardiologists. However, the diﬀerences between the real and the modeled thresholds are not
important or signiﬁcant for a visual inspection of cardiologists.
In Figure 2, the area of compacted zone (ACZ) and the area of trabecular zone (ATZ)
obtained by QLVT (represented by ACZ-Real and ATZ-Real) and the training engine of QLVT
(showed by ACZ-Model and ATZ-Model) are presented for slices of patients from P12 to P18.
As we observe in Figure 2a, the ACZ real and modeled are almost identical for all slices of the
diﬀerent patients. Regarding the ATZ, Figure 2b shows that the modeled output is identical to
the real values for patient P15 and very similar for patients P14 and P18. For the rest of the
patients, the general trend is very similar although in a small number of slices there are some
diﬀerences. Therefore, the percentage quantiﬁcation of the trabecular zone modeled is identical
or very similar to the real values in all the slices of diﬀerent patients.
To assess the performance of the training engine of QLVT, a subjective evaluation on the
output image with the identiﬁed zones was performed by two skilled cardiologists. The images
2248

A training engine for automatic quantiﬁcation

(a)

Bernab´e, Cuenca Gim´enez and Gonz´
alez-Carrillo

(b)

Figure 1: (a) Comparison of the real and modelized values for the parameter TT. (b) Comparison
of the real and modelized values for the parameter IT.

(a)

(b)

Figure 2: (a) Area of compacted zone (ACZ) computed by QLVT and training engine of QLVT
for diﬀerent slices of patients. (b) Area of trabecular zone (ATZ) computed by QLVT and
training engine of QLVT for diﬀerent slices of patients.

were graded by specialists, using the scale proposed in [6]. For the modeled slices, cardiologists
were able to detect the presence of diagnostic features clearly in 76.1% of the evaluated images.
In these slices, cardiologists scored with a value greater than or equal to 3.5, which means there
is no noticeable diﬀerence for diagnosis. Therefore, the training engine of QLVT can obtain
very good results without the expert vision of the specialist. Moreover, 10.87% of the modeled
outputs were scored at 3, which is very close to an acceptable output by cardiologists. The two
modeled thresholds can be adjusted very quickly to obtain a satisfactory output.
The experiments with diﬀerent types of images reveal that the training engine is capable of
detecting and measuring the diﬀerent zones in diﬀerent situations, by adjusting the thresholds
to detect the trabecular zones and the intensity of the black zone to determine the external layer
of the compacted zone. The time needed to obtain the ﬁnal outputs is less than 2 seconds per
image. This time is insigniﬁcant compared with the application of QLVT helped by cardiologists
or the manual process traditionally used, where cardiologists need from 2 up to 25 minutes per
image, to delimit, measure and compute the quotient of the thickness between the trabecular
area and the compacted zone.
2249

A training engine for automatic quantiﬁcation

4

Bernab´e, Cuenca Gim´enez and Gonz´
alez-Carrillo

Conclusions and future work

In this work, we have improved the ﬁrst automatic software tool based on medical experience
that accurately quantiﬁes the LV hyper-trabeculation degree [1]. We have added the automatic
determination of two thresholds to obtain the external layer of the compacted zone and to
identify the trabecular zones. Therefore, we proposed a training engine for QLVT, and signiﬁcant improvements are obtained with respect to the automatic software tool, so saving valuable
diagnosis time of cardiologists.
The time needed to obtain the automatic outputs is less than 2 seconds for each image,
obtaining speedups in the range of 60 to 750 with respect to the application of QLVT assisted
by cardiologists and manual process traditionally used by specialists.
The training engine is going to be used to quantify the trabeculated mass in 1, 150 patients
of a project supported by the Spanish TV3 Marathon Foundation.

Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the Spanish MINECO, as well as by European Commission FEDER
funds, under grant TIN2015-66972-C5-3-R.

References
[1] Gregorio Bernab´e, Javier Cuenca, Pedro E L´
opez de Teruel, Domingo Gim´enez, and Josefa
Gonz´
alez-Carrillo. A software tool for the automatic quantiﬁcation of the left ventricle myocardium
hyper-trabeculation degree. In International Conference on Computational Science, June 2015.
[2] Gregorio Bernab´e, Javier Cuenca, Luis-Pedro Garc´ıa, and Domingo Gim´enez. Tuning basic linear
algebra routines for hybrid CPU+GPU platforms. Procedia Computer Science, 29:30 – 39, 2014.
[3] Gregorio Bernab´e, Javier Cuenca, and Domingo Gim´enez. Optimization techniques for 3D-FWT
on systems with manycore GPUs and multicore CPUs. Procedia Computer Science, 18:319 – 328,
2013.
[4] Thomas K Chin, Joseph K Perloﬀ, Roberta G Williams, Kenneth Jue, and Renee Mohrmann.
Isolated noncompaction of left ventricular myocardium. A study of eight cases. Circulation,
82(2):507513, August 1990.
[5] Rolf Engberding and Franz Bender. Identiﬁcation of a rare congenital anomaly of the myocardium
by two-dimensional echocardiography: persistence of isolated myocardial sinusoids. American Journal of Cardiology, 53:17331734, 1984.
[6] David Gibson, Michael Spann, and Sandra I Woolley. A wavelet-based region of interest encoder
for the compression of angiogram video sequences. Information Technology in Biomedicine, IEEE
Transactions on, 8(2):103–113, June 2004.
[7] Alexis Jacquier, Franck Thuny, Bertrand Jop, Roch Giorgi, Frederic Cohen, Jean-Yves Gaubert,
Vincent Vidal, Jean Michel Bartoli, Gilbert Habib, and Guy Moulin. Measurement of trabeculated
left ventricular mass using cardiac magnetic resonance imaging in the diagnosis of left ventricular
non-compaction. European Heart Journal, 31:10981104, 2010.
[8] Rolf Jenni, Norbert Goebel, Roberto Tartini, Jakob Schneider, Urs Arbenz, and Oswald Oelz.
Persisting myocardial sinusoids of both ventricles as an isolated anomaly: Echocardiographic,
angiographic, and pathologic anatomical ﬁndings. CardioVascular and Interventional Radiology,
9(3):127–131, 1986.
[9] Nobuyuki Otsu. A threshold selection method from gray-level histograms. IEEE Transactions on
Systems, Man and Cybernetics, 9(1):62 – 66, 1979.

2250

