Procedia Computer Science
Volume 80, 2016, Pages 1940–1946
ICCS 2016. The International Conference on Computational
Science

Enhancing Computational Science Curriculum at
Liberal Arts Institutions: A Case Study in the Context
of Cybersecurity
Paul Y. Cao1, 2 and Iyad A. Ajwa2
1

University of California San Diego, San Diego, CA, U.S.A.
2
Ashland University, Ashland, OH 44805, U.S.A.
yic242@eng.ucsd.edu, iajwa@ashland.edu

Abstract
Computational science curriculum developments and enhancements in liberal arts
colleges can face unique challenges compared with larger institutions. We present a case
study of computational science curriculum development at a medium sized liberal arts
university in the context of cybersecurity. Three approaches, namely a cybersecurity
minor, content infusion into existing courses, and a public forum are proposed to enrich
the current computational science curriculum with cybersecurity contents.
Keywords: Computational Science, Cybersecurity, Liberal Arts, Curriculum Enhancement

1 Introduction
Computational Science is a very dynamic field spanning across many disciplines. Cybersecurity is
a computing-based field that aligns network resources, human resources, and processes to ensure
“assured operation” in the presence of adversaries and risks [1]. This area has become one of the most
serious economic and national security challenges. The number of cyber-attacks continues to grow each
year, and cyber threats are becoming more diverse, disruptive, and damaging. With several initiatives
attempting to address critical cybersecurity workforce development, an expansion of cybersecurity
related education is one of the most important steps to secure the cyberspace. A rigorous technical
training and certification process should be an integral part for students majoring in technical fields such
as computer science or information systems. A framework to develop and retain talents should also be
a necessary aspect in workforce development. Also, fundamental training on cybersecurity topics would
be extremely valuable to students who may become personnel with non-technical roles in the
cybersecurity industry, or who may work with information systems in government or business [2, 3].
Many universities and colleges have responded to the unprecedented demand by implementing
courses, programs and tracks in cybersecurity or information assurance [1]. Curriculum development

1940

Selection and peer-review under responsibility of the Scientiﬁc Programme Committee of ICCS 2016
c The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V.

doi:10.1016/j.procs.2016.05.510

Enhancing Computational Science Curriculum at Liberal Arts Institutions

P. Cao and I. Ajwa

usually involves in new course developments and security content infusion [4]. Institutions with
significant human and financial resources can build up a cybersecurity program relatively fast. Smaller
liberal art institutions usually lack the expertise in cybersecurity, have limited resources, and need to
deliver content in a short timeframe. Thus, liberal arts colleges usually start with one or two new courses
in information assurance, hacking, or network security. Ashland University offered courses on network
security and gray hat hacking in spring 2015 before a comprehensive minor was proposed [5]. This
strategy provides valuable leads into further program development and allows faculty members to gain
training and experience in offering a more comprehensive cybersecurity curriculum.
One potential pitfall of cybersecurity program development is the overwhelming focus on technical
training in specific courses and focus only on Information Systems or Computer Science majors. In
addition to educating technologically competent professionals in cybersecurity, we also need, for
example, managers with both knowledge of cybersecurity concepts and a useful framework for
developing an organizational culture that will rapidly identify and eliminate mistakes. Managers with a
cybersecurity training can make companies less vulnerable to cyber-attacks. Thus, a comprehensive
curriculum update involving related programs and departments should be implemented if possible.
Students in these related programs, such as business, criminal justice, and law, will benefit from
exposure to cybersecurity topics.
This paper is organized as follows. Section 2 discusses related work in cybersecurity curriculum
development. In Section 3, we present a case study of computational science curriculum enhancement
in the context of cybersecurity. Three major venues of curriculum enhancement: cybersecurity minor,
cybersecurity content integration, and cybersecurity awareness are discussed in details in this section.
In Section 4, we provide descriptions of newly created courses as well updates made to existing courses
related to cybersecurity. Section 5 concludes the paper.

2 Related Work
Cybersecurity related curriculum development has many focuses and variations. One group of work
focuses on a single aspect of the curriculum development. For example, Brown et al. [6] reported their
experience with the development of a single introductory cyber-security course in the US Naval
Academy. Their experience report covered many challenges with the development of a cybersecurity
course, such as the shortage of faculty expertise, technical content selection, and the need for short
turnaround time. Greenlaw et al. [7] discussed their experience in building a lab course in network
reconnaissance, attack and defense. Their work shares valuable curriculum development experiences
and contributes to an ever-increasing content pool necessary for any successful cybersecurity program.
However, their work lacks the global view on what a complete cybersecurity curriculum would be
composed of.
Another group of existing curriculum development efforts stresses on the integration of
cybersecurity topics into the overall CS curriculum. For example, Bratus et al. [8] integrated hacking
principles into the undergraduate curriculum at Dartmouth College. Authors in [9] proposed a system
approach that incorporates both hardware and software in cyber assurance education. The authors build
a complete Information Assurance B.S. curriculum at the University of South Alabama and the paper
included a comparison of two cybersecurity B.S. degrees at the University of Maryland University
College and at Louisiana Technical University. This group of work offers a complete curriculum
development experience, mostly on the technical contents of a cybersecurity degree. However, most of
the work lacks broader collaborations with other departments or programs.
Two existing experience reports focus on the development of a cybersecurity minor. Dardick et al.
[10] discussed a minor in digital forensics, and Katz [11, 12] shared experience in building up a
cybersecurity minor at the Armstrong Atlantic State University. A minor in cybersecurity requires fewer

1941

Enhancing Computational Science Curriculum at Liberal Arts Institutions

P. Cao and I. Ajwa

resources and may achieve targeted cybersecurity education goals through innovative curriculum design
and inter-program collaborations.

3 Enhanced Undergraduate Curriculum
This section addresses the enrichment of Ashland University’s computational science curriculum in
the context of cybersecurity. The primary goal of the enhancements we have made to our curriculum is
to formally train technical professionals in the area of cybersecurity. Another goal is to educate business
professionals about the risks involved in cybersecurity. To achieve these goals, we had identified three
objectives: establish a new cybersecurity minor, integrate cybersecurity content into existing courses,
and increase the awareness and understanding of cybersecurity on campus and in the local community.
Strategies we have followed to achieve these goals are detailed in the following sections.

3.1 Cyber Security Minor
The Cyber Security Minor at Ashland University integrates cybersecurity topics such as
fundamentals of computer security, computer networks, penetration testing, information and network
security, public-policy, security policy analysis and implementation, and law that are taught by various
programs including computer science, information systems, and criminal justice. The minor aims at
providing our students with formal training in a career path that is in high demand.
Our first strategy to develop the minor consisted of two steps. The first step was to identify existing
courses that are related to cybersecurity and taught by the above-mentioned programs. We also
examined and adopted existing courses taught by other programs such as accounting and supply chain
management. The second step was to identify topics relevant to cybersecurity that we do not have
courses for. As a result, several new courses had been developed and included in the minor. A list of
newly created courses and their contents is provided in Section 4.1. We then constructed a new minor
in cybersecurity following the traditional paradigm that consists of required and elective courses in
addition to a required internship.
The second strategy was to form and enhance partnerships with associate degree schools that
currently offer programs in cybersecurity or related areas. Ashland University has existing articulation
agreements with three such schools. Moreover, there are only a few community colleges in Ohio that
offer a degree in cybersecurity [14]. Our next goal is to partner with these community colleges so that
we could provide a clear education path for associate-degree cybersecurity students to bachelor degree
professionals. Their BS education in computer science focuses knowledge and expertise on how to
protect and defend our information from malicious cyber-threats. It will further enhance their critical
thinking skills, technical skills, and business management skills. We believe this strategy on one hand
will significantly benefit society by producing students capable of contributing to the improvement of
information security in their government and business organizations [18]. On the other hand, graduates
from this program, equipped with a strong skill set in both technical and managerial areas, will be very
attractive candidates for employment.
Our third strategy has been the establishment of relevant internship opportunities. As mentioned
above, students enrolled in the cybersecurity minor are required to complete an internship or a work
experience relevant to cybersecurity. Ashland University has established an articulation agreement with
a private firm on security in Ohio where our students can complete the required internship.
We believe our new minor enjoys several features and has several benefits to offer. The new minor
is interdisciplinary and, as such, it creates a powerful learning experience for the students and
emphasizes critical thinking through integrative learning. In addition, the new minor provides computer
science students with key coverage of business applications and concepts. Moreover, it provides
business students with essential knowledge and skills to better understand the importance of protecting

1942

Enhancing Computational Science Curriculum at Liberal Arts Institutions

P. Cao and I. Ajwa

key information system assets with cybersecurity techniques. Furthermore, the internship agreement
provides students enrolled in our program a guaranteed opportunity to complete a real-world work
experience relevant to cybersecurity.

3.2 Cybersecurity Content Integration
We have adopted the philosophy that security issues should be addressed in all aspects of
computational education curriculum. Security components to be included in our existing computer
science courses had been identified and are being infused. These courses include introductory
programming, web programming, computer algorithms, computer architecture, operating systems,
computer networks, and software development. Detailed cybersecurity content integration into these
courses is provided in Section 4.2.
The cybersecurity content infusion also focuses on courses from other majors such as business. For
example, the commercial Enterprise Resource Planning (ERP) software has been integrated into several
business courses at Ashland University providing students with hands-on experience to use the software,
including how to protect ERP systems from cyber-attacks [14].
In addition to the enhancements being made to courses, faculty knowledge and skills relevant to
cybersecurity needed to be enriched as well. Cybersecurity knowledge and skills of the faculty are
deepened through professional development activities. This will increase faculty capacity to deliver an
upgraded curriculum to a wide range of students, including multiple enhancements in existing courses
and programs. Professional development opportunities that our faculty have started pursuing include
attendance at national conference workshops (Association for Computing Machinery Conference
(ACM) on Computer and Communications Security and the IEEE Security and Privacy Conference) as
well as industry training (SANS Institute and COMPTIA).

3.3 Cybersecurity Awareness
Promoting the awareness and understanding of cybersecurity is very important in today’s world. To
achieve this goal, we have adopted the following strategies.
Students enrolled in our cybersecurity minor are encouraged to compete in cybersecurity contests
such as the Midwest Regional Collegiate Cyber Defense Competition. We believe that increased student
involvement in cybersecurity-related issues promotes awareness of cybersecurity, both within various
academic constituencies and within the local community. Participation in contests also promotes our
cybersecurity minor and supports our marketing and recruitment efforts [14].
We are in the process of forming a local chapter of a Network Defense Security club. The Network
Defense club will be established based on the model we currently utilize for the local student chapter of
the ACM. This new student-run organization will hold regular meetings of the club members, where
students have an opportunity to further develop cybersecurity skills beyond what is taught in formal
coursework. Topics to be explored during club meetings will include assembly of cybersecurity
hardware, hands-on experience in securing various network layers from malicious access, use of
software packages related to cybersecurity, minimizing human error as a contributing factor in cyberattacks, and career exploration in the field.
The establishment of a seminar series to promote awareness of cybersecurity on Ashland University
campus and in the local society of the City of Ashland is our next strategy. Guest speakers, who are
experts in cybersecurity topics, will be invited to talk about their field of expertise and state of the art
techniques used in securing computers and network infrastructure.
Our last strategy is to establish professional development opportunities for K-12 teachers in the area
to heighten their awareness and understanding of cybersecurity. We are planning to offer these teachers
the opportunity to participate in summer workshops. In addition, we plan to invite local high-school
students, counselors, mathematics and science teachers, and other interested K-12 constituencies, to

1943

Enhancing Computational Science Curriculum at Liberal Arts Institutions

P. Cao and I. Ajwa

participate in our seminar series. While seminar topics might be dealing with complex issues related to
cybersecurity, our plan is to make most presentations accessible to wider audiences.

4 Course Development and Update
This section provides details of newly created courses as well as updates made to several existing
courses related to cybersecurity curriculum development. We have developed these courses based upon
recommendations of the ACM-IEEE Task Force, who stated in their CS2013 Final Report that the
“importance of security concepts and topics has emerged as a core requirement in the Computer Science
discipline, much like the importance of performance concepts has been for many years” [13].

4.1 New Course Developments
The following is a list of new courses developed to incorporate cybersecurity in various programs
and departments. These courses introduce students to concepts where the depth is unique to information
security. Thus, these courses conform to ACM-IEEE Task Force curriculum guidelines for Group 1 of
the Information Assurance and Security Knowledge Area [13].






Penetration Testing and Ethical Hacking, a computer science course on commonly used
penetration testing techniques and tools. A focus is on exploiting and malware analysis.
Ethics and legal system in hacking are also covered. This course should be taken after
students have taken the existing computer networks course.
Foundations of Cybersecurity, a junior level computer science course. Topics taught in this
course include network security protocols and design principles, risk management and
incidence recovery, application and mobile security, and access control. This course is a
follow-up of the Penetration Testing and Ethical Hacking course. and prepares students to
pass security+ certification.
Cisco Networking. The purpose of this technical computer science course is to prepare
students to obtain Cisco CCNA certificate. Topics discussed in this course include LAN
and VLAN setup, IPv4 and IPv6 routing and services, and troubleshooting network. This
course will be a follow up course of the existing computer networks course.

4.2 Existing Curriculum Updates
In this section, we provide descriptions of cybersecurity components that are infused into existing
courses. Each of these courses incorporates information security topics that are integrated into other
knowledge areas that reflect naturally implied or specified topics with a strong role in security concepts
and topics. Thus, these courses conform to ACM-IEEE Task Force curriculum guidelines for Group 2
of the Information Assurance and Security Knowledge Area [14].




1944

Programming in Java: The current computer science curriculum has two courses in the
introductory programming sequence. Computer science majors take them in their first year.
Integrated cybersecurity components of these courses include input and output validations,
safer array indexes, canonical file path representations, safer random number generator, and
software testing.
Advanced Web Programming, a computer science elective course. It is a continuation of
another computer science course on Web Design and Programming. Cybersecurity
components that have been added to this course include best practices for securing dynamic
websites, SSL and its utilization, including SSL certificate and their installation, security
issues with user authorization, database security, OS security, and email security.

Enhancing Computational Science Curriculum at Liberal Arts Institutions












P. Cao and I. Ajwa

Computer Architecture, a sophomore level computer science course that requires students
to complete a data structure course and two courses in discrete mathematics. A unit
addressing hardware insecurity including chip vulnerability has been infused into this
course.
Operating Systems, a required senior level computer science course. Units on security and
protection have been incorporated.
Computer Networks, an elective junior/senior level computer science course. Components
of cryptography, symmetric-key and public key algorithms, and authentication protocols
have been infused.
Software Engineering, a required senior level computer science course where students
complete their capstone project. The course will address common software security
practices such as risk analysis, privilege issues, and sandboxing. Potential problems in
software design related to security will also be covered.
Forensic Accounting, a business course that will include coverage of how to detect and
prevent accounting fraud via information systems and networks.
Supply Chain Management, a business course that will enhance existing coverage of supply
chain security and risk management, particularly regarding the protection of critical
information systems infrastructure, and also risks specific to security in the cyber supply
chain.
ERP Systems, a business course that will include coverage of how to protect ERP systems
from cyber-attack.

The following chart illustrates the relationship between courses that are affected in the computer science
curriculum. Note that the data structures course is a prerequisite of almost all computer science courses.
Thus, it is listed in the figure below though it is not been infused with cybersecurity concepts.

Figure 1. Courses that are either updated or newly developed related to cybersecurity

1945

Enhancing Computational Science Curriculum at Liberal Arts Institutions

P. Cao and I. Ajwa

5 Conclusion and Future Work
This paper presents a case study on enhancing the computational science curriculum in a mediumsized liberal college in the context of cybersecurity. We presented the limitations of cybersecurity
curriculum development in liberal arts colleges and proposed three approaches to enhance the
curriculum. We provided a list of courses that are either newly proposed or with new security topics
infused. In the future, we will report on the assessment of the cybersecurity minor at Ashland University
including course enrollments, student responses, and industry feedback. We will also report on other
enhancements made to the program including the plan to expand the internship to a full semester (12
credit hours) instead of the current requirement of 3 credit hours.

References
[1]
[2]
[3]
[4]
[5]
[6]

[7]

[8]
[9]
[10]
[11]
[12]
[13]
[14]

1946

J. M. Richards and J. J. Ekstrom, “The Cyber Education Project and IT IAS Curriculum,” pp.
173–178, 2015.
A. Mcgettrick, “Toward curricular guidelines for cybersecurity: Report of a workshop on
cybersecurity education and training,” pp. 1–33, 2013.
D. Inserra and S. P. Bucci, “Cybersecurity Challenges and Cyber Supply Chain Security,” vol.
20002, no. 2880, 2014.
A. Siraj, B. Taylor, S. Kaza, and S. Ghafoor, “Integrating security in the computer science
curriculum,” ACM Inroads, vol. 6, no. 2, pp. 77–81, 2015.
“Ashland
University
Catalog.”
[Online].
Available:
https://www.ashland.edu/admissions/majors-programs/course-catalog.
C. Brown, S. Schall, J. Schultz, S. Simon, D. Stahl, S. Standard, F. Crabbe, R. Doerr, R.
Greenlaw, C. Hoffmeister, J. Monroe, D. Needham, A. Phillips, and A. Pollman, “Anatomy,
dissection, and mechanics of an introductory cyber-security course’s curriculum at the United
States naval academy,” Proc. 17th ACM Annu. Conf. Innov. Technol. Comput. Sci. Educ. ITiCSE ’12, p. 303, 2012.
R. Greenlaw, A. Phillips, J. Schultz, D. Stahl, and S. Standard, “Network reconnaissance, attack,
and defense laboratories for an introductory cyber-security course,” Proc. 51st ACM Southeast
Conf. - ACMSE ’13, vol. 4, no. 3, p. 1, 2013.
S. Bratus, A. Shubina, and M. E. Locasto, “Teaching the principles of the hacker curriculum to
undergraduates,” 41st ACM Tech. Symp. Comput. Sci. Educ., pp. 122–126, 2010.
T. R. Andel and J. T. McDonald, “A Systems Approach to Cyber Assurance Education,” Proc.
2013 InfoSecCD ’13 Inf. Secur. Curric. Dev. Conf. - InfoSecCD '13, pp. 13–19, 2013.
G. S. Dardick and L. K. Lau, “Interdisciplinary Minor in Digital Forensics, Security and Law,”
p. 371, 2005.
F. H. Katz, “Curriculum and pedagogical effects of the creation of a minor in cyber security,”
2010 Inf. Secur. Curric. Dev. Conf. - InfoSecCD ’10, p. 49, 2010.
F. H. Katz, “The creation of a minor in cyber security,” Proc. 2012 Inf. Secur. Curric. Dev.
Conf. - InfoSecCD ’12, pp. 75–81, 2012.
ACM-IEEE Joint Task Force, "Computer Science Curricula 2013, Final Report," December
2013.
I. Ajwa, R. Jacobs, P. Cao, and S. Lowes, "Integration, Collaboration & Partnerships: Building
a Multidisciplinary Cybersecurity Program", Ashland University, December 2014.

