Procedia Computer Science
Volume 80, 2016, Page 1670
ICCS 2016. The International Conference on Computational
Science

Workshop on Nonstationary Models of Pattern Recognition
and Classiﬁer Combinations
Michal Wo´zniak1 and Bartosz Krawczyk1
Department of Systems and Computer Networks, Faculty of Electronics
Wroclaw University of Science and Technology
e-mail: [michal.wozniak, bartosz.krawczyk]@pwr.edu.pl

The progress in information systems allowed many institutions to collected huge amounts of
data, analysis of which is impossible by human beings. Nowadays simple methods of data mining
are not suﬃcient for eﬃcient management of an average enterprise, since for smart decisions
the knowledge hidden in data is highly required. Additionally, the canonical algorithms assume
that statistical properties of the discovered concept are being unchanged, which can be seen
as their major limitation. Therefore designing data mining methods, especially classiﬁcation
ones for data streams with the presence of so-called concept drift is currently the focus of
intense research. On the other hand we can usually use a number of varied classiﬁers for each
of pattern recognition tasks. Therefore developing classiﬁer ensembles has been mentioned as
ones of the most promising trends in the contemporary pattern recognition which can exploit
unique elementary classiﬁer strengths and could adapt to the changes of classiﬁcation models.
Workshop Non-stationary Models of Pattern Recognition and Classiﬁer Combinations aims
to bring together researches and to provide an international forum for sharing, exchange, presentation and discussion of original research results in both methodological issues and diﬀerent
application areas of computational aspects of pattern recognition systems for streaming and
challenging problems.
The second edition of the workshop groups 6 carefully selected works focusing on diﬀerent
aspects of compound pattern recognition and eﬃcient computing platforms dedicated to the
mentioned above tasks. Unfortunately, several valuable works have not been accepted, because
the competition has been ﬁerce as only a limited number of presentations can be accommodated
to the workshop. During the workshop we will have a pleasure to participate in an extraordinary
keynote talk by Prof. Boguslaw Cyganek from AGH University of Science and Technology
(Poland) concentrated on Computational Aspects of Data Processing and Pattern Recognition
with Tensor Methods.
Organizers would like to thank all the authors which submitted their works to the workshop
and reviewers for their hard works and valuable comments. We also appreciate the help of
Organizers of International Conference of Computational Sciences (ICCS), which have given us
opportunity to organize this scientiﬁc event.
The special thanks go to ENGINE European Research Centre of Network Intelligence for
Innovation Enhancement (http://engine.pwr.edu.pl/) for the ﬁnancial and organizational support.
1670

Selection and peer-review under responsibility of the Scientiﬁc Programme Committee of ICCS 2016
c The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V.

doi:10.1016/j.procs.2016.05.506

