Procedia Computer Science
Volume 80, 2016, Pages 2251–2255
ICCS 2016. The International Conference on Computational
Science

Simulating Refugee Movements: where would you go?
Derek Groen1,2
1

Department of Computer Science, Brunel University London, Uxbridge, Middlesex, UK
Derek.Groen@brunel.ac.uk
2
Centre for Computational Science, University College London, London, UK.

Abstract
The challenge of understanding refugee movements is huge and aﬀects countries worldwide
on a daily basis. Yet, in terms of simulation, the challenge appears to have been largely
ignored. I argue that we as researchers can, and should, harness our computational skills to
better understand and predict refugee movements. I reﬂect on the computational challenges
of modelling refugees, and present a simulation case study example focused on the Northern
Mali Conﬂict in 2012. Compared to UNHCR data, the simulation predicts fewer refugees
moving towards Mauritania, and more refugees moving towards Niger. This outcome aligns
with UNHCR reports, which mention that unregistered refugees were known to reside outside
of the oﬃcial camps, though further investigations are required to rule out competing theories.
Keywords: modelling,simulation,refugees,migration,agent-based modelling

1

Introduction

People ﬂee their homeland for very good reasons. Yet the macroscopic phenomenon of large
inﬂuxes of refugees severely concerns both governments and members of the public. Some
countries open their borders, and attempt to set up adequate facilities, whereas other countries
close their borders, in an attempt to redirect the refugees. These decisions carry strong moral
importance but the exact impact often remains unknown. What is clear, however, is that
the area of impact exceeds that of single countries, and that a solution implemented by one
country could result in major diﬃculties for another. Indeed, the challenge of understanding
the movements of refugees is huge, global, and as a society we are confronted with it on a daily
basis. Yet, in terms of simulation, the challenge appears to have been largely ignored. I argue
that we as researchers can, and should, harness our computational skills to try and address it for
three reasons: First, through the use of simulations, I believe we can estimate what would have
been diﬀerent if governments had chosen to apply diﬀerent border and/or immigration policies,
and help inform governments (as well as the general public) about the possible consquences of
their decisions. Second, simulations could help predict where refugees are likely to go when a
conﬂict erupts, allowing support organizations to make advance preparations. Third, most of
Selection and peer-review under responsibility of the Scientiﬁc Programme Committee of ICCS 2016
c The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V.

doi:10.1016/j.procs.2016.05.400

2251

Simulating Refugee Movements: where would you go?

(a) Characteristic spatial and temporal scales of evacuation models, refugee models, and migration models.

Groen

(b) Screenshot of the UNHCR data portal at
http://data.unhcr.org.

the empirical data currently available about refugees is incomplete; here simulations can help
to ﬁnd gaps in the monitoring infrastructure, and to make predictions of refugee populations in
areas where little or no empirical information is available. Simulations have a particularly high
added value potential in refugee settings, both because refugee data is ill-suited for determining
causal inferences, and because running simulations does not carry the ethical burden that
hinders empirical experiments.
To my knowledge, few researchers have done computational studies on the movement of
refugees. However, extensive research has been done both on evacuation, which focuses on
smaller space and time scales, and migration modelling, which focuses on much larger time
scales. Within this literature, refugee modelling is a unique application domain because its
spatial scale can span up to half the globe (e.g., Syrian refugees are known to have reached
North Scandinavia), while its temporal scale can be as short as a matter of days, or even hours
(see Fig. 1(a)). Historically, Schmeidl et al. [6] argued that there are fundamental obstacles to
developing quantitative prediction models for refugee movements. However, their fundamental
concern on the lack of data availability arguably becomes less important now as the UNHCR
has made refugee data publicly available, and refugees themselves increasingly have access to
online platforms. On modelling refugees, Sokolowski et al. [8, 7] have proposed a detailed agentbased modelling (ABM) framework to model refugees and other factions in the Syrian city of
Aleppo, while Latek et al. [5] calibrated an ABM tool to model decision-making and dynamic
processes around refugees in Syria. Both models are primarily applied for sensitivity analysis,
and feature a relatively large number of free parameters. Anderson et al. [1] proposed an ABM
approach to model refugee communities. They focus on the interaction of refugees with other
stakeholders; models which could serve to inform policy decisions for governments and NGOs.
Lastly, Hailegiorgis et al. [4] modelled the spread of cholera within a refugee camp.
In this paper, I present a model on the 2012 Northern Mali Conﬂict and compare the
predictions from the model with data provided by the UNHCR (see Fig. 1(b)).

2

Case study: Northern Mali Conﬂict (2012)

As a case study example, I examine the Northern Mali Conﬂict in 2012. This conﬂict erupted on
January 16th 2012, when Touareg rebels began to conquer places in Northern Mali, starting a
civil war. I focus particularly on the refugee movements that occur in this conﬂict after February
29th, as little refugee data is available prior to that day. Through simulation I aim to explore
2252

Simulating Refugee Movements: where would you go?

Groen

the patterns of refugee movements, and to compare the simulation results with the UNHCR
data. For brevity, I abbreviate the neighbouring countries Mauretania (MAU), Burkina Faso
(BF), and Niger (NI).
I present my network-based ABM model, including its key parameters and assumptions, in
Fig. 1. The number of new refugees in my model is derived from the UNHCR-reported total
refugee count (data.unhcr.org), using linear interpolation between data points. Locations are
interconnected with paths and refugee agents are spawned in Kidal, and later in Timbuktu
and Gao. The refugee agents move with a probability of movechance to diﬀerent locations
(movechance equals 1.0 in source locations). I assume that the average refugee stays in a camp
for 1000 days, and I used UNHCR data from the ﬁrst 60 days in my model design. Note that
UNHCR registers refugees at the destination camps, while I use these numbers to populate
the source points. As a results, simulated refugees depart for their journeys at least one day
later than their real-life counterparts. I do not model any Internally Displaced People, as I
do not possess systematic data of their exact locations. When ﬂagged as moving, a refugee
chooses its destination using a weighted probability function, using weights equal to 1 divided
by the route length. I estimated travel distances between locations by using the shortest route
planned for cars in Bing Maps (maps.bing.com). In doing so, I assume that refugees stick to
major roads, and travel with (shared) vehicles. I assume all refugee movements take one day, as
I do not possess data on travel times for refugees. To run the simulations I developed a Python
toolkit, named Flee. I also use the Pandas library (pandas.pydata.org) in combination with
matplotlib to analyze the data. To verify the model, I compare my results with UNHCR data,
and calculate the sum of absolute diﬀerences in refugee counts for each camp as a proportion
of the total number of refugees,
E(t) =

x∈S

(|nx,t − mx,t |)
.
N

(1)

Here the number of refugees found in each camp x of the set of all camps S at time t is given
by nx,t based on the simulation predictions, and by mx,t based on the UNHCR data. The total
number of refugees reported in the UNHCR data is given by N .
Results: I provide a comparison of the simulation results to the UNHCR data in Fig. 2.
Here, organized refugee transfers from Fassala (MAU) cause a steep initial increase in refugee
count in Mbera, both in the data and in the simulation. Decreases in refugee counts after Day
150 in the data are caused by new, more thorough, UNHCR registration requirements, which
reduced refugee counts by as much as 68% after the “recount”. Compared to our simulation
predictions, the UNHCR data reports more refugees moving into Mauretania, and fewer of them
moving into Niger (with the exception of Niamey). This may be caused by the fact that refugee
tracking in Niger has not been as comprehensive as in Mauretania, or by the fact that the Niger
border only permits refugees to cross it on foot (which is not captured in the model, due to lack
of transportation data). The averaged diﬀerence E(t) remains below 0.5 throughout the run
(see bottom left panel in Fig. 2), and is severely aﬀected by the new registration requirements
after day 150. The total number of refugees in camps in the simulation (shown in the bottom
right) is slightly less than reported in the data, as a fraction of the refugee agents remain in
transit within Mali.

3

Discussion

I have presented a ﬁrst case study on simulating the movements of refugees during the early
stages of the North Mali conﬂict. The complex nature of civil wars and the lack of system2253

Simulating Refugee Movements: where would you go?

Groen

atic reports makes it challenging to accurately model refugee movements. However, with the
availability of UNHCR data and solid mapping platforms I have shown that it is possible to
construct, and validate, basic simulations of refugee movements. The ﬁrst results of my simulation allow for multiple interpretations, and give rise to a need for larger-scale investigations.
Nevertheless, this model can be already used to gain some clarity on how the ﬂow of refugees
could have changed if Burkina Faso and Niger had opened their borders from Day 1 of the
conﬂict, or if Mauretania has decided to shut them at a later point.
I this case study I used a simplistic ABM approach to explore the area of refugee modelling.
However, sophisticated ABM frameworks certainly do exist [9, 2], and I do intend to adopt
these as I move further towards more complicated and better informed refugee models. In
particular, RePast HPC [2] is interesting, as it scales well to 10,000s of cores and allows users
to use multiple ABM approaches concurrently. In future work I therefore aim to use RePast in
conjunction with FabSim [3], to perform systematic large-scale investigations on this topic.
Acknowledgments
I am grateful to my students Rohit Prashar, Neaman Doushouki and Gaveen Basra, who worked
in parallel with me on refugee modelling in diﬀerent areas. In addition, I thank Dr. Moqi
Groen-Xu, Dr. David Bell and Dr. Julie Eatock for their valuable feedback and constructive
discussions regarding this work.

References
[1] James Anderson, Alok Chaturvedi, and Mike Cibulskis. Simulation tools for developing policies for
complex systems: Modeling the health and safety of refugee communities. Health Care Management
Science, 10(4):331–339, 2007.
[2] Nicholson Collier and Michael North. Parallel agent-based simulation with repast for high performance computing. SIMULATION, 2012.
[3] D. Groen, A. Bhati, J. Suter, J. Hetherington, S. Zasada, and P. Coveney. FabSim: facilitating computational research through automation on large-scale and distributed e-infrastructures.
ArXiv:1512.02194, December 2015.
[4] Atesmachew Hailegiorgis and Andrew T Crooks. Agent-based modeling for humanitarian issues:
disease and refugee camps. In The Computational Social Science Society of America Conference,
Santa Fe, NM, 2012.
[5] M. M. Latek, S. M. M. Rizi, and A. Geller. Veriﬁcation through calibration: An approach and a
case study of a model of conﬂict in syria. In Simulation Conference (WSC), 2013 Winter, pages
1649–1660, Dec 2013.
[6] Susanne Schmeidl and J Craig Jenkins. Issues in quantitative modelling in the early warning of
refugee migration. Refuge: Canada’s Journal on Refugees, 15(4), 1996.
[7] John A. Sokolowski and Catherine M. Banks. A methodology for environment and agent development to model population displacement. In Proceedings of the 2014 Symposium on Agent Directed
Simulation, ADS ’14, pages 3:1–3:11, San Diego, CA, USA, 2014. Society for Computer Simulation
International.
[8] John A. Sokolowski, Catherine M. Banks, and Reginald L. Hayes. Modeling population displacement
in the syrian city of aleppo. In Proceedings of the 2014 Winter Simulation Conference, WSC ’14,
pages 252–263, Piscataway, NJ, USA, 2014. IEEE Press.
[9] Weihao Yin, Pamela Murray-Tuite, Satish V. Ukkusuri, and Hugh Gladwin. An agent-based modeling system for travel demand simulation for hurricane evacuation. Transportation Research Part
C: Emerging Technologies, 42:44 – 59, 2014.

2254

Simulating Refugee Movements: where would you go?

Groen

Figure 1: Overview of the simulation model.

Figure 2: (a-c) comparison of simulation and UNHCR data for the three largest camps, (a)
Mbera, (b) Abala and (c) Mentao (c). (d-h) Quick reference comparison for the other ﬁve camps.
(i) Relative diﬀerence E(t) averaged across locations, calculated using Eq. 1. (j) Number of
refugees residing in camps, based on the simulation results (red) and the interpolated UNHCR
data (blue).
2255

