Procedia Computer Science
Volume 80, 2016, Pages 2322–2326
ICCS 2016. The International Conference on Computational
Science

An Execution Framework for Grid-Clustering Methods
Erich Schikuta1 and Florian Fritz1
University of Vienna, Faculty of Computer Science, RG WST, Vienna, Austria
erich.schikuta@univie.ac.at, a0800640@unet.univie.ac.at

Abstract
Cluster analysis methods have proven extremely valuable for explorative data analysis and are
also fundamental for data mining methods. Goal of cluster analysis is to ﬁnd correlations of the
value space and to separate the data values into a priori unknown set of subgroups based on a
similarity metrics. In case of high dimensional data, i.e. data with a large number of describing
attributes, clustering can result into a very time consuming task, which often limits the number
of observations to be clustered in practice. To overcome this problem, Grid clustering methods
have been developed, which do not calculate similarity values between the data value each, but
organize the value space surrounding the data values, e.g. by speciﬁc data structure indices.
In this paper we present a framework which allows to evaluate diﬀerent data structures for
the generation of a multi-dimensional grid structure grouping the data values into blocks. The
values are then clustered by a topological neighbor search algorithm on the basis of the block
structure. As ﬁrst data structure to be evaluated we present the BANG ﬁle structure and show
its feasibility as clustering index. The developed framework is planned to be contributed as
package to the WEKA software.
Keywords: Cluster Algorithms, Dendrogram, Grid-based Methods

1

Introduction

Cluster analysis methods [3] are key for explorative data analysis in statistics and computer
science [9], but are also fundamental for data mining methods [1]. Goal of cluster analysis is to
ﬁnd correlations of the value space and to separate the data values into a priori unknown set
of subgroups based on a similarity metrics.
In the past a large number of diﬀerent clustering approaches have been presented, which are
classical [2] divided into hierarchical methods, as complete-linkage, single-linkage and partitional
methods, as ISODATA, K-MEANS.
Hierarchical clustering methods speciﬁcally aim for building a hierarchy of clusters, which
are represented by dendrograms. However, these methods are limited to only small numbers
of data values in practice. Classical methods compare all data values with each other and
calculate a (dis-)similarity matrix. A growing number of data values leads for most hierarchical
algorithms to non practical calculation and memory eﬀorts.
2322

Selection and peer-review under responsibility of the Scientiﬁc Programme Committee of ICCS 2016
c The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V.

doi:10.1016/j.procs.2016.05.430

An Execution Framework for Grid-Clustering Methods

Schikuta and Fritz

Speciﬁcally partitional methods, as K-MEANS, need as starting point a ”good guess” on
the positions and number of the initial cluster centers. Clustering of the remaining data values
is less resource consuming. However, if the initial decision was bad, also these methods become
very computation intensive by calculating new cluster centers.
To cope with these problems we follow a solution approach by shifting the problem to a
tractable solution space. We omit to look at each data value speciﬁcally but aggregate the data
values into disjoint sets and cluster the data values based on their sets. For building these sets
we use the index of a value space organizing multi-dimensional data structure.
Thus our general approach can be described basically by three steps:
1. Insert data values into a multi-dimensional data structure creating an index, which partitions value space into a set of boxes containing data values
2. Create density index of each box as ratio of number of data values to space volume of box
3. Cluster data values via their boxes by starting from box with highest density index and
continuously adding additional neighbouring boxes.
The hierarchical Grid-Clustering [5] and BANG-clustering algorithms [6, 7] are based on
this approach. Data values are inserted into a multi-dimensional data structure (the Grid ﬁle
and the BANG (Balanced And Nested Grid) ﬁle) respectively, which organize the value space
surrounding the data values into grid boxes by an index structure. Using this index structure
now starting with grid boxes of high density index, i.e. many data values in relation to covered
value space, these boxes are joined with other boxes based on their neighbour relation delivering
a hierarchical dendrogram. This algorithm outperforms conventional algorithms dramatically
in performance and memory usage.
In this paper we present a framework which allows to evaluate diﬀerent data structures for
the generation of a multi-dimensional grid structure grouping the data values into blocks. As
ﬁrst data structure to be evaluated we present the BANG ﬁle structure and show its feasibility
as clustering index. The developed framework will be contributed as package to the WEKA
software. WEKA (Waikato Environment for Knowledge Analysis) [8] is a well-known software
tool providing various machine learning and data mining techniques and methods.
The paper is organized as follows: In the next section 2 we present the BANG ﬁle clustering
method, which is the ﬁrst implemented approach in our framework. The overall architecture of
the envisioned framework and a justiﬁcation of the BANG ﬁle implementation as hierarchical
clustering method is delivered in section 3. The paper closes with the conclusion and a view on
future work.

2

BANG File Clustering

Many Grid-Clustering algorithms show some characteristic problems in few speciﬁc situations
(see [5]). These problems can be shortly summarized as
• for speciﬁc clusterings the memory requirements of the directory size increase overproportionally to the size of the data set, and
• the performance of the Grid-Clustering decreases with increasing dimensionality (number
of pattern attributes) of the data set.
2323

An Execution Framework for Grid-Clustering Methods

Schikuta and Fritz

To overcome these drawbacks we proposed the BANG-Structure [6, 7], which is derived
from the multi-dimensional BANG-File data structure [4]. This BANG-Structure shows not
only better behavior for the listed problems, but also adapts better to clusterings in the value
space.
Instead of comparing all data values with each other, the BANG-Structure organizes the
value space containing the patterns. The data values represent patterns in a k-dimensional
value space and are, in a ﬁrst step, inserted into the BANG-Structure. These patterns are
stored in the index preserving their topological distribution. In ﬁgure 1 a 2-dimensional value
space with 10000 patterns and 70% of data clustered in 3 centers and in ﬁgure 2 the respective
BANG index structure organizing the data values in a set of encasing rectangular blocks are
shown. A block is rectangularly shaped and contains up to a deﬁneable maximal number of
pmax patterns. X = (x1 , x2 , ..., xn ) is a set of n patterns and xi is a pattern consisting of a
tuple of k describing features (pi1 , pi2 , ..., pik ), where k is the number of dimensions. Using the
block information of the BANG-Structure the algorithm identiﬁes cluster center and clusters
the patterns by an iterative neighbour algorithm accordingly to their surrounding blocks.

Figure 1: 2-dimensional value space example

Figure 2: BANG partitioning

Figure 3: 2-dimensional pattern set - BANG clustered

3

Framework for Grid Clustering Methods

The BANG-Clustering algorithm was implemented in Java applying the MVC (Model-ViewController) paradigm, clearly separating the user interaction from the business logic and the
presentation. This allows to split the software package in concise but comprehensive components.
The general architecture of the Grid clustering framework consists of ﬁve software layers:
1. The Data Management layer administrates the data set for the clustering process. Hereby
several formats are supported, as CVS, and access to database system is provided via an
ODBC/JDBC interface.
2. The Index Structure layer allows to choose a speciﬁc data structure for the data space partitioning process. Until now only the BANG ﬁle is supported, but other data structure,as
the R-tree, will be provided soon.
2324

An Execution Framework for Grid-Clustering Methods

Schikuta and Fritz

3. The Clustering layer uses the grid partitioning of the Index Structure layer and performs
the agglomerative clustering by diﬀerent neighbour search approaches.
4. The Analysis layer allows to inspect the computed clusters and to compare the results of
clustering approaches using diﬀerent index structures.
5. The Presentation layer is for the output of the clustering results in human friendly form,
as dendrograms.

Figure 4: BANG system windows
In ﬁgure 4 the clustering approach is presented for a 3-dimensional data set consisting of
10000 patterns where 70% of data are grouped in 8 cluster centers. See Figure 5 for a 3D
view. In the left widow of the system the ﬁnal result in form of a dendrogram is shown. It can
be easily seen that all 8 cluster centers are identiﬁed. In the right window the BANG cluster
index is given, which shows the value space partitioning. This speciﬁc example is not easily
to be analyzed with conventional approaches, due to its size and the speciﬁc location of the
cluster centers. On the one hand due to the large number of data values classical hierarchical
methods are computationally hardly tractable, on the other hand for partitioning methods ﬁrst
approximations on the position and number of cluster centers are diﬃcult to ”guess”. Due to
the position of the centers they are hiding to the eye of a data scientists in a projected view,
as show in Figure 6.
The second version of the system is delivered as plugin package to be integrated into the
WEKA system. WEKA is written in Java and is freely available under the GNU software
license. WEKA is very common in the area of data mining. However it provides only limited
tools for cluster analysis, as the k-means algorithm. These reasons made WEKA the perfect
environment for our new method, which was realized as WEKA package. Thus, we chose Java
as coding language and we followed during the development of our BANG clustering method a
test-based approach to guarantee stability of our software.
2325

An Execution Framework for Grid-Clustering Methods

Schikuta and Fritz

Figure 5: 3-dimensional example pattern set Figure 6: Data set projected to 2 dimensions

4

Conclusion and Future Work

In this paper we presented a framework for Grid-based cluster algorithms. This system allows
to use and analyse diﬀerent multi-dimensional index structures as basis for the clustering algorithm, which generate a partitioning of the value space by their index structure. In a ﬁnal
version the user will have the possibility to compare and choose between various index structures. Until now the BANG ﬁle structure is implemented, as presented in this paper. Several
more multi-dimensional structures are in the focus of future research, as R-tree, kd-tree, etc.
The already implemented system will be available in two versions: a stand-alone version with
proprietary user interface and data manipulation and a plugin package, which integrates into
the WEKA environmant.

References
[1] Pavel Berkhin. A survey of clustering data mining techniques. In Grouping multidimensional data,
pages 25–71. Springer, 2006.
[2] R. Dubes and A.K. Jain. Clustering methodologies in exploratory data analysis, volume 19, pages
113–228. Academia Press, 1980.
[3] Benjamin S Duran and Patrick L Odell. Cluster analysis: a survey, volume 100. Springer Science
& Business Media, 2013.
[4] M.W. Freestone. The bang ﬁle: A new kind of grid ﬁle. In Proc. Special Interest Group on
Management of Data, pages 260–269. ACM, May 1987.
[5] E. Schikuta. Grid clustering: An eﬃcient hierarchical clustering method for very large data sets. In
Proc. 13th Int. Conf. on Pattern Recognition, volume 2, pages 101–105. IEEE Computer Society,
1996.
[6] Erich Schikuta and Martin Erhart. The bang-clustering system: Grid-based data analysis. In X Liu,
P. Cohen, and M. Berthold, editors, Advances in Intelligent Data Analysis. reasoning about Data,
Proc. Second International Symposium IDA-97, volume 1280 of LNCS, London, UK, August 1997.
Springer-Verlag.
[7] Erich Schikuta and Martin Erhart. Bang-clustering: A novel grid-clustering algorithm for huge
data sets. In Advances in Pattern Recognition, pages 867–874. Springer, 1998.
[8] Ian H Witten and Eibe Frank. Data Mining: Practical machine learning tools and techniques.
Morgan Kaufmann, 2005.
[9] Rui Xu, Donald Wunsch, et al. Survey of clustering algorithms. Neural Networks, IEEE Transactions on, 16(3):645–678, 2005.

2326

