Procedia Computer Science
Volume 80, 2016, Pages 792–803
ICCS 2016. The International Conference on Computational
Science

Hybridization of isogeometric ﬁnite element method and
evolutionary multi-agent system as a tool-set for
multiobjective optimization of liquid fossil fuel reserves
exploitation with minimizing groundwater contamination
Leszek Siwik1 , Marcin Los1 , Marek Kisiel-Dorohinicki1 , and Aleksander Byrski1
AGH University of Science and Technology, Department of Computer Science, Krakow, Poland
{siwik,los,doroh,olekb}@agh.edu.pl

Abstract
In the paper we consider the approach for solving the problem of extracting liquid fossil fuels respecting not only economical aspects but also the impact on natural environment. We
model the process of extracting of the oil/gas by pumping the chemical ﬂuid into the formation
with the use of IGA-FEM solver as non-stationary ﬂow of the non-linear ﬂuid in heterogeneous
media. The problem of extracting liquid fossil fuels is deﬁned as a multiobjective one with
two contradictory objectives: maximizing the amount of the oil/gas extracted and minimizing
the contamination of the groundwater. The goal of the paper is to check the performance
of a hybridized solver for multiobjective optimization of liquid fossil fuel extraction (LFFEP)
integrating population-based heuristic (i.e. evolutionary multi-agent system and NSGA-II algorithm for approaching the Pareto frontier) with isogeometric ﬁnite element method IGA-FEM.
The results of computational experiments illustrate how the considered techniques work for a
particular test scenario.
Keywords: multiobjective optimization, fossil fuels extraction, isogeometric ﬁnite element method

1

Introduction

In the real life almost any single decision has to deal with many contradictory objectives.
Multicriteria optimization in the Pareto sense means the determination of all so-called nondominated solutions in the problem space. This is diﬃcult for most traditional approaches,
and that is why for the last 25 years a variety of evolutionary multi-objective optimization
techniques have been proposed [1].
At the same time real-life problems often deal with so complex phenomena that complicated
expensive numerical methods, involving non-linear high order models are required. What is
more, when we solve diﬃcult inverse problems, we need not only a fast and accurate solver for
792

Selection and peer-review under responsibility of the Scientiﬁc Programme Committee of ICCS 2016
c The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V.

doi:10.1016/j.procs.2016.05.369

Multiobjective optimization of fossil fuel exploitation . . .

L. Siwik et al.

the primal problem, but also a sophisticated methodology for solving the inverse problem itself,
calling the primal problem many times to obtain the quality of solutions or gradient estimates.
Nowadays, any scientiﬁc and engineering research and works focused on reducing the humanbeing impact on the climate changes and reducing the greenhouse eﬀect in particular are in the
special attention.
One of the most important in this context is making the methods of natural resources and
minerals exploitation not so exhaustive and destroying.
Because of the economic and social impact, an eﬀective modeling, planing and optimizing environmental-friendly oil drilling procedures, not only maximizing the amount of the oil
extracted but reducing the negative eﬀects of the industry on our planet is the fundamental
aspect.
In presented research we are modeling one of exploitation methods of liquid fossil fuel
deposits consisting in pumping to the deposit of certain chemical solutions and ‘sucking out’
the fuel that is pushed out by the solution (so-called ‘fracking’). The crucial problem in this
context becomes correct placing of pumps injecting the chemical solutions to the deposit as well
as the pumps sucking out the fuel.
We modeled the process of extracting of the oil/gas by pumping the chemical ﬂuid into the
formation as a non-stationary ﬂow of the non-linear ﬂuid in heterogeneous media. Because of
the complexity of the model, a modern isogeometric ﬁnite element solver (IGA-FEM) was used
[10, 11]. We deﬁned the problem of extracting liquid fossil fuels as a multiobjetcive problem with
two contradictory objectives: maximizing the amount of the oil/gas extracted and minimizing
the contamination of the groundwater.
In [38] we have considered the ﬁrst approach for modeling liquid fossil fuel extraction respecting not only the amount of the oil extracted but also the level of natural environment
contamination. For preliminary experiments, as the inverse technique, stochastic populationbased multiobjective optimization state-of-the-art algorithm i.e. NSGA-II algorithm has been
used [38].
In this paper, further extended research on this topic is discussed including improved mathematical model and computational experiments for much more complicated and complex fossil
fuel deposit.
Additionally, here the approach based on evolutionary computations implemented within
evolutionary multi-agent system (EMAS) is evaluated. Agent-based techniques proved to be
an eﬀective alternative to classic techniques of evolutionary multi-objective optimization in a
variety of diﬀerent applications [31, 17].
Thus we are assessing the performance of EMAS-based reverse problem solver as a part of a
hybrid with IGA-FEM solver, and the paper reports the results of computational experiments
based on a well-deﬁned test case.
The structure of the paper is as follows. First, we describe the problem to be solved. Then
the foundations of the computing techniques, namely the evolutionary multi-agent system and
isogeometric ﬁnite element solver, are given. A report on conducted experiments together with
concluding remarks close the paper.

2

Problem formulation

The problem of extracting of the oil/gas by pumping the chemical ﬂuid into the formation can
be modeled as non-stationary ﬂow of the non-linear ﬂuid in heterogeneous media. The slightly
793

Multiobjective optimization of fossil fuel exploitation . . .

L. Siwik et al.

more general form of time dependent problem is given by:
∂u
− L(u) = f (x, t)
∂t

in Ω × [0, T ]

(1)

where L(u) and f are speciﬁed later. We assume some initial state u(x, 0) = u0 (x) and impose
ˆ = 0 for x ∈ ∂ Ω. The particular case of the
zero Neumann boundary conditions, i.e. ∇u · n
non-linear ﬂow in heterogeneous media, following [12] is given by:
∂u
− ∇ · (κ(x, u) ∇u) = h(x, t)
∂t

(2)

where u – pressure, κ – permeability of the medium, h – forcing arising from pumps and sinks,
domain Ω = [0, 1]3 . Permeability consists of two parts – static, depending on terrain properties,
and the other reﬂecting the inﬂuence of pressure:
κ(x, u) = Kq (x)b(u)

(3)

where Kq is the prescribed formation map, and b(u) is given by
b(u) = eμu

(4)

We transform the time dependent problem into weak form using standard method
υ,

∂u
∂t

Ω

+ B(υ, u) = (υ, f )Ω

(5)

where (s, t)Ω denotes standard scalar product in L2 (Ω), i.e.
(s, t)Ω =

s t dx

(6)

Ω

and
B(υ, u) = − (υ, L(u))Ω

(7)

We use diﬀerent methods for temporal and spatial discretization. Time is discretized using
forward Euler scheme:
∂u
ut+1 − ut
≈
(8)
∂t
Δt
which leads to:
ut+1 − ut
υ,
+ b(υ, u) = (υ, f )Ω
(9)
Δt
Ω
Explicit formula for the solution in the next time step is thus
(υ, ut+1 )Ω = (υ, ut )Ω + Δt ((υ, f )Ω − b(υ, u))

(10)

The problem (10) is equivalent to a sequence of isogeometric L2 -projection problems.
Pumps and sinks can be located arbitrarily inside the domain. Both pumps and sinks aﬀect
directly only a small region in their vicinity – pumps provide a constant increase of pressure,
while sinks decrease pressure proportionally to the current pressure. In more detail, pumps and
sinks deﬁne forcing h as follows. Let us deﬁne an auxiliary function
⎧
⎪
1
for t < r
⎪
⎨
2
2
t−r
t−r
θr,R (t) =
(11)
for r ≤ t ≤ R
R−r − 1
R−r + 1
⎪
⎪
⎩
0
for t > R
794

Multiobjective optimization of fossil fuel exploitation . . .

L. Siwik et al.

for some constants R, r (in our case, r = 0, R = 0.15 – let us denote θ = θ0,0.15 ). Function θ
assumes value 1 at t = 0 and falls smoothly to 0 at t = r. For each pump p ∈ P and sink s ∈ S
let xp and xs denote its position, respectively. Forcing h is computed as
θ ( x − xp ) −

h(x, t) =
p∈P

u(x, t) θ ( x − xs )

(12)

s∈S

that is, a pump or sink aﬀects area around it in a radius r, and sink draining strength depends
on pressure. The total amount D of drained liquid is calculated as a time integral of draining
part in the above equation, i.e.
T

D=
s∈S

0

u(x, t) θ ( x − xs ) dt

(13)

Groundwater region ΩG is deﬁned as:
ΩG = {x = (x, y, z) : z < 0.2}

(14)

Contamination is computed as an integral of u in that region at the end of the simulation, that
is
C=
u(x, T ) dx
(15)
ΩG

On a very high level, the problem undertaken can be formulated as follows: where the pumps
injecting the chemical solutions to the formation as well as where the pumps sucking the shale
gas should be located in the formation to ensure maximum volume of extracted fuel (maximum
gain) and minimum contamination of the groundwater (minimum lost).
We gain a classical multiobjective optimization problem with two contradictory objectives.
From the mathematical point of view, multi-objective (or multi-criteria) optimization problem (MOOP) is formulated as follows ([3, 2, 1]):
⎧
x), l = 1, 2 . . . , L
⎪
⎪ Min/Max: fl (¯
⎪
⎪
Taking
into
consideration:
⎨
gj (¯
x) ≥ 0, j = 1, 2 . . . , J
M OOP ≡
⎪
⎪
(¯
h
k x) = 0, k = 1, 2 . . . , K
⎪
⎪
⎩
(L)
(U )
xi ≤ xi ≤ xi , i = 1, 2 . . . , N
The set of constraints, both: equalities (hk (¯
x)), as well as inequalities (gj (¯
x)), and con(L)
(U )
straints related to the decision variables, i.e. lower bounds (xi ) and upper bounds (xi ),
deﬁne so called searching space—feasible alternatives (D).
In our case, the multiobjective optimization of Liquid Fossil Fuel Extraction Problem
(LFFEP) respecting the environmental impact can be formulated as follows:
⎧
T
Max: D = s∈S 0 u(x, t) φ ( x − xs ) dt (amount of drained liquid)
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎨ Min: C = ΩG u(x, T ) dx (contamination)
M OOP = LF F EP ≡
Taking into consideration:
⎪
⎪
⎪
D ≥ 0 and C(T ) ≥ 0
⎪
⎩
0 ≤ xi ≤ 1, i = 1, 2, 3
In the course of this paper multi-objective optimization in the Pareto sense is considered,
so solving deﬁned problem means determining of all feasible and non-dominated alternatives
from the set (D). Such deﬁned set is called Pareto set (P) and in objective space it forms so
called Pareto frontier (PF).
795

Multiobjective optimization of fossil fuel exploitation . . .

3

L. Siwik et al.

Evolutionary multi-agent system

Evolutionary computation has been successfully used for solving diﬃcult problems and are
particularly useful when classical computational methods prove ineﬀective. An evolutionary algorithm works properly if the population consists of fairly diﬀerent individuals, i.e. the so-called
diversity in the population is preserved. Loosing the population diversity limits the possibilities
of the application in some areas such as multi-objective or multi-modal optimisation.
The above-described situation is related to the fact that the model of evolution employed by
simple evolutionary algorithms lacks many important features observed in organic evolution [32].
This includes dynamically changing environmental conditions, neither global knowledge nor
generational synchronisation assumed, co-evolution of species, evolving genotype-fenotype mapping, etc. That is why many variations of classical evolutionary algorithms have been proposed,
introducing additional mechanisms following the most important phenomena in evolutionary
biology e.g. dedicated cooperation mechanisms [30], coevolutionary mechanisms [37, 36, 35, 39],
hierarchical approaches [23] or converting problems into multiobjective optimization problems
[33]. Yet still obtained results have been not satisfying in many cases.
One may notice that during last decades the concept of software agents have gained a lot
of attention [40]. This is because of intelligent interactions, which constitute the essence of
multi-agent systems (MAS), and thus multi-agent systems are ideally suited for representing
problems that have many solving methods, involve many perspectives and/or may be solved
by many entities. As a result, agents play a key role in the integration of diﬀerent techniques,
which often leads to hybrid design of modern intelligent systems [19].
Since evolutionary algorithms are distributed by nature and since agents are able to perform
many complex operations it was then natural that the idea of hybridization of evolutionary
computations with (multi)agent systems arouse. This kind of multi-agent systems would be a
computational rather then information system and requires diﬀerent approach to design and
implementation [20, 18]. In most such applications reported in literature (see e.g. [21] or [22]
for a review) an evolutionary algorithm is used by an agent to aid realisation of some of its
tasks.
But when we think about constituting a new hybrid evolutionary-agent computational
paradigm in fact two approaches are possible. In the ﬁrst one agents constitute a management infrastructure for a distributed realisation of an evolutionary algorithm [34]. In such an
approach each agent has the population of individuals inside of it, and this sub-population is
evolving according to one of (classical) evolutionary algorithm. Agents themselves can migrate
within the computational environment, from one computational node to another, trying to
utilize in a best way free computational resources.
Yet, as it was said, since evolutionary processes are decentralised by nature one may imagine
the incorporation of evolutionary processes into a multi-agent system at a population level. It
means that apart from interaction mechanisms typical of MAS (such as communication), agents
are able to reproduce (generate new agents) and may die (be eliminated from the system).
Such an idea with agents located in ﬁxed positions on some lattice (like in a cellular model
of parallel evolutionary algorithms) was developed by e.g. [24]. This approach yet interesting
was disregarding important, powerful and crucial in facts features of agents i.e. their autonomy
and mobility.
The full realization of the idea of incorporating evolutionary processes into a multi-agent
systems at a population level regarding full autonomy of agents was the decentralised model of
evolution employed by an evolutionary multi-agent system – EMAS [25].
Agents of EMAS represent or generate solutions for a given optimisation problem. Inheri796

Multiobjective optimization of fossil fuel exploitation . . .

L. Siwik et al.

tance is accomplished by an action of reproduction with the use of variation operators, like in
classical evolutionary algorithms. Agents are located on islands, which constitute their local
environment where direct interactions may occur, and may represent a distributed structure of
computation.
Agents are able to change their location, which allows for diﬀusion of information and
resources all over the system. Assuming that no global knowledge is available and the agents
are autonomous, it is diﬃcult to process the agents in generations. That is why a distinctive
mechanism of EMAS is selection, which is realised asynchronously based on non-renewable
resources [17].
In order to realize the selection process “better” (what means that they simply better solve
the given problem) agents are given more resources from the environment (or from other agents)
and “worse” agents are given less resources (or should give some of its resources to “better”
agents).
Such mechanisms result in decentralized evolutionary processes in which individuals (agents)
make independently all their decisions concerning reproduction, migration, interactions with
other agents, etc., taking into consideration conditions of the environment, other agents present
within the neighborhood, and resources possessed.

4

Computational method

To solve deﬁned problem of multiobjective optimization of liquid fossil fuels extraction we proposed hybridization of evolutionary multi-agent system adapted for solving multiobjective optimization problems with dedicated solver for primal/inverse problems i.e. modern isogeometric
ﬁnite element method solver IGA-FEM [8, 9, 14].
Evolutionary multi-agent system for multiobjective optimization is responsible for approaching the set of non-dominated solutions (i.e. Pareto set and Pareto frontiers respectively) with
appropriately deﬁned agents’ actions whereas IGA-FEM solver is responsible for simulating
distribution of chemicals in the geological formation and computing the amount of extracted
fuel and contamination of groundwater depending on the localization of pumps and sinks.
Every single agent represents a location of pump(s) and sink(s) encoded in their ”DNA”
as the matrix of coordinates. Agents, to evaluate their solution launch IGA-FEM solver which
is used here as a black box, with the input describing the location of the pumps (where the
chemicals are pushed into the formation) and the sinks (where the oil is extracted). The IGAFEM solver provides the amount of extracted oil and the contamination of groundwater for
given coordinates of pumps and sinks. Graphically, proposed approach is presented in ﬁg. 1.
For comparison, as the benchmark, the NSGA-II [1] algorithm has been used which is one
of the most commonly and widely used evolutionary algorithm for multiobjective optimization.
It is based on non-dominated sorting procedure ensuring that the better the individual is
(it is non-dominated, or dominated only once (by non-dominated individuals) etc.) it is the
higher probability that the individual is directly carried over to the next generation. The
algorithm is just a state-of-the-art in the multiobjective optimization ﬁeld and is constantly
improved (recently NSGA-III algorithm has been proposed which is non-dominated sorting
based algorithm for solving many-objective optimization problems [16]).

4.1

IGA-FEM solver

Recently, the isogeometric ﬁnite element method (IGA-FEM) [8] became the state-of-the-art
method for performing accurate simulations of diﬃcult time dependent problems. This is be797

Multiobjective optimization of fossil fuel exploitation . . .

L. Siwik et al.

Figure 1: Proposed solver of LFFEP: hybridization of NSGA-II and IGA-FEM

cause the IGA-FEM utilizes B-splines and non-uniform rational B-splines (NURBS) [9] as basis
functions and thus provide a global higher continuity of the numerical solution, especially when
the simulated physical phenomena requires higher order partial diﬀerential equations (PDE).
Additionally there are linear computational cost solvers allowing for fast accurate solution of
the system of linear equations obtained from IGA-FEM simulations [10, 11]. That is why the
IGA-FEM solver has been used as the primal problem solver modeling the process of pumping
the water into oil/gas bearing formations as the non-linear ﬂow in heterogeneous media.
In our IGA-FEM simulation each time step involves solving an L2 projection problem, as
shown in sec. 2, i.e. solving a system of linear equations where the matrix is the Gram matrix
of chosen basis functions. For this purpose we use ADI method [10, 11].
Linear computational cost of Alternating Direction Solver is an eﬃcient alternative to classical multi-frontal solvers, delivering O(N 2 p3 ) computational cost for 3D problems when running
in sequential [26], and this cost can be reduced down to O(N ( 4/3)p2 ) when using parallel shared
or distributed memory implementations [27, 28].
The ADI method has been originally introduced in [4, 5, 6, 7] to solve parabolic, hyperbolic and elliptic partial diﬀerential equations. Recently, the method has been extended to
isogeometric ﬁnite element methods simulations. Its sequential implementation delivers linear
computational cost with respect to mesh size [10, 11] and the parallel version scales well up
to 1,000 processors [14]. The method has been applied as a fast solver to 2D non-stationary
problem [10], as well as the preconditioner for ILUPCG iterative solvers in case of solution of
non-stationary PDE over complex geometries [11].
The method exploits a special structure of Gram matrix of our basis functions, which are
798

Multiobjective optimization of fossil fuel exploitation . . .

L. Siwik et al.

constructed as a tensor product of one-dimensional basic B-splines, i.e. basis functions are
deﬁned as:
Bijk (x, y, z) = Bi (x)Bj (y)Bk (z)
(16)
where Bα are one-dimensional basic B-splines. This is possible due to simplicity of domain
geometry and boundary conditions. It can be shown that Gram matrix of such basis can be
expressed as a tensor product of Gram matrices of one-dimensional bases:
M = M x ⊗ My ⊗ M z

(17)

This property allows us to reduce the problem of solving the system of M x = b to solving
multiple systems with smaller matrices Mx , My and Mz , which can be done eﬃciently (in linear
time with respect to the number of unknowns), since they are banded. Detailed exposition and
full derivation of the algorithm can be found in [13].
The solver for the primal problem has been developed in the frame of the PRELUDIUM
grant DEC-2014/15/N/ST6/04662.

5

Experimental studies

Medium permeability map Kq used in the simulation is presented in Figure 3. Most of the
medium has constant low permeability (transparent on the picture), except for some highly
permeable ,,conduits”. Initial state u0 (x) based on medium permeability map Kq . Let us
˜ q a function similar to Kq , but assuming values [0, 1] instead of [1, 1000], i.e.
denote by K

Then u0 is given by

˜ q (x) = Kq (x) − 1
K
1000 − 1

(18)

˜ q (x) θ0.2,0.3 ( x − c )
u0 (x) = 0.1K

(19)

where c = (0.5, 0.5, 0.5).
For the simulation we use 10 × 10 × 10 mesh on a domain cube. We use the time step of
order of magnitude Δt = 10−7 due to stability constraints arising from Courant-Friedrichs-Lewy
(CFL) condition.
Assuming above initial conditions the task has been deﬁned as looking for the positions of
three pumps and a one sink to minimize groundwater contamination and maximize drained
liquid for an oil concentrated in a ball in the center of a cubic domain.

5.1

Experimental results

NSGA-II
EMAS

Best ﬁnal HV
0.756
0.745

Mean HV
0.751
0.664

Std. Dev.
0.0047
0.081

Friedman test rank
2.0
1.0

Table 1: Selected comparative characteristics obtained during the experiments
We have performed several independent executions of IGA-FEM solver hybridized with
EMAS adjusted for solving the LFFEP problem. Just for comparisons we have also performed
several executions of IGA-FEM solver hybridized with NSGA-II algorithm. We used NSGA-II
799

Multiobjective optimization of fossil fuel exploitation . . .

L. Siwik et al.

0.5

0.6

0.7

0.8

HV:FlowOilProblem

NSGAII

EMAS

Figure 2: The sample characteristics (a) and the average values (b) of the hypervolume metrics
obtained during the experiments

implementation available in jMetal framework [15] and EMAS has been implemented as a new
heuristic within jMetal framework. In the consequence both compared metaheuristics used
exactly the same computational environment, the same quality indicators, variation operators
(for instance crossover, mutation etc.) what makes the comparison reliable and credible. During
all experiments the maximum number of ﬁtness function evaluations equals to 1,000 has been
deﬁned as a stop condition.

(a) NSGA II

(b) EMAS

Figure 3: Location of pumps and sinks in Pareto-optimal solutions found (initial oil pressure
distribution displayed in the background)
As a quality measure the hypervolume (HV) [1] metrics has been used (HVR [1] can not be
used since the true Pareto frontier is not known).
The sample characteristics and the average values of the hypervolume metrics obtained
during the experiments by NSGA-II and EMAS algorithms are presented in ﬁgure 2.
As one may see in ﬁgure 2a, generally there were such experiments where the characteristic
of the HV metrics in the consecutive steps as well as its ﬁnal value were almost the same (or very
similar). In numbers it is conﬁrmed in Table 1. In the ﬁrst column the best ﬁnal value of the HV
800

Multiobjective optimization of fossil fuel exploitation . . .

L. Siwik et al.

metrics is presented and it is almost the same in both cases. But the general conclusion coming
from the preliminary experiments is that NSGA-II algorithm is more stable. It is conﬁrmed
both in Table 1 and (graphically) in ﬁgure 2b where the mean value of the HV metrics as well
as its standard deviation is better in the case of NSGA-II algorithm. It comes from the fact
that sometimes EMAS-based solver got stuck what disallowed to obtain a really high-quality
solutions since in the NSGA-II based solver the stagnation has never been observed.
From the LFFEP problem point of view it can be interesting where in fact the pumps and
sinks should be located according to the obtained non-dominated solutions to maximize the
amount of the gas drilled and to minimize the contamination of the groundwater. The sample
localization of the pumps and sinks obtained by both i.e. EMAS-based and NSGA-II based
solvers are presented in the ﬁgure 3. As one may see according to the intuition some optimal
sink positions are close to the center of the deposit but there are also some solutions with sinks
signiﬁcantly distant from the center.
One may ask: what in fact is the level of the improvement we can obtain thanks to optimizing
the exploitation process according the LFFEP problem deﬁned and using solvers presented in
this paper. According to the obtained results the optimization process allows us to decrease
the pollution by about 4 × 10−5 (from ≈ 1.9 × 10−5 to ≈ 1.5 × 10−5 ). Furthermore, solutions
from the ﬁnal population have quadruple the oil drain in comparison to the best ones from the
initial population (increase from ≈ 2 × 10−9 to almost 8 × 10−9 ).

6

Conclusion

In the paper we have shown that the use of EMAS-based optimization together with IGA-FEM
solver for modeling of non-stationary ﬂow of the non-linear ﬂuid in heterogeneous media might
be a good solution for solving the real diﬃcult problem of extracting liquid fossil fuels. We have
considered one of exploitation methods which consists in pumping chemicals to the geological
formation and ‘sucking out’ the fuel that is pushed out by the solution. A real problem in
this case is natural environment contamination caused mainly by chemicals soaking through
the geological formations to groundwater. Thus the optimization problem is a multicriteria
one with simulation-based objectives evaluation, which makes it diﬃcult to use traditional
approaches.
Reported results of computational experiments proved that the proposed models and methods allow for obtaining valuable results and seems to be very promising for further investigation
and research. Agent-based reverse problem solver allows to obtain even better results comparing to state-of-the-art NSGA-II algoriithm, but sometimes seems to get stuck in some local
optima. The future works will thus include (but won’t be reduced to) working on mechanisms
preventing premature EMAS stagnation as well as developing three dimensional version of the
model of non-linear ﬂow in heterogeneous media, investigating the relation between the IGAFEM mesh size, and the accuracy of the primal and inverse problem solution and performing
extensive experimental studies in supercomputing facilities.

Acknowledgments
The work has been supported by the AGH University of Science and Technology Dean’s grant
no. 15.11.230.250 from the Faculty of Computer Science, Electronics and Telecommunications
and by AGH University of Science and Technology Statutory Fund no. 11.11.230.124.
801

Multiobjective optimization of fossil fuel exploitation . . .

L. Siwik et al.

References
[1] K.Deb, Multi-Objective Optimization using Evolutionary Algorithms, John Wiley & Sons,2008
[2] E.Zitzler, Evolutionary algorithms for multiobjective optimization: methods and applications,
Swiss Federal Institute of Technology, Zurich,1999
[3] A.Abraham and L.C. Jain and R.Goldberg, Evolutionary Multiobjective Optimization Theoretical
Advances and Applications, Springer, 2005
[4] D.W. Peaceman, H.H. Rachford Jr., The numerical solution of parabolic and elliptic diﬀerential
equations, Journal of Society of Industrial and Applied Mathematics 3 (1955) 2841
[5] J. Douglas, H. Rachford, On the numerical solution of heat conduction problems in two and three
space variables, Transactions of American Mathematical Society 82 (1956) 421439
[6] E.L. Wachspress, G. Habetler, An alternating-direction-implicit iteration technique, Journal of
Society of Industrial and Applied Mathematics 8 (1960) 403423
[7] G. Birkhoﬀ, R.S. Varga, D. Young, Alternating direction implicit methods, Advanced Computing
3 (1962) 189273
[8] Y. Bazilevs, V.M. Calo, J.A. Cottrell, et al., Isogeometric analysis using T-splines. Computer
Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering, 199:229-263, 2010.
[9] T.J.R. Hughes, J.A. Cottrell, Y. Bazilevs, 2005. Isogeometric analysis: CAD, ﬁnite elements,
NURBS, exact geometry and mesh reﬁnement, Computer methods in applied mechanics and engineering 194(39):4135-4195.
[10] L. Gao, V.M. Calo, 2014. Fast Isogeometric Solvers for Explicit Dynamics, Computer Methods in
Applied Mechanics and Engineering, 274 (1) (2014) 19-41
[11] L. Gao, V.M. Calo, 2015. Preconditioners based on the alternating-direction-implicit algorithm
for the 2D steady-state diﬀusion equation with orthotropic heterogeneous coeﬃcients, Journal of
Computational and Applied Mathematics, 273 (1) (2015) 274-295
[12] M. Alotaibi, V.M. Calo, Y. Efendiev, J. Galvis, M. Ghommem, 2015. Global-Local Nonlinear
Model Reduction for Flows in Heterogeneous Porous Media, Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering, 292 (1) 122137
[13] M. Lo´s, M. Wo´zniak, M. Paszy´
nski, L. Dalcin, V.M. Calo, 2015. Dynamics with matrices possesing
Kronecker product structure, Procedia Computer Science, 51 286 – 295
[14] M. Wo´zniak, M. Los, M. Paszy´
nski, L. Dalcin, V.M. Calo, 2015. Parallel fast isogeometric solvers
for explicit dynamic, accepted to Computing and Informatics.
[15] A.J. Nebro and J.J.Durillo and M.Vergne, Redesigning the jMetal Multi-Objective Optimization
Framework, Proceedings of the Companion Publication of the 2015 Annual Conference on Genetic
and Evolutionary Computation,GECCO Companion ’15,2015,
[16] Y.Yuan and H.Xu and B.Wang, An Improved NSGA-III Procedure for Evolutionary Manyobjective Optimization, Proceedings of the 2014 Annual Conference on Genetic and Evolutionary
Computation, GECCO ’14, ACM, 2014
[17] A. Byrski, R. Drezewski, L. Siwik, and M. Kisiel-Dorohinicki. Evolutionary multi-agent systems.
The Knowledge Engineering Review, vol. 30, no 2, pp. 171186, 2015.
[18] D. Krzywicki, . Faber, A. Byrski, and M. Kisiel-Dorohinicki. Computing agents for decision support
systems. FGCS, vol. 37, pp. 390400, 2014.
[19] M. Kisiel-Dorohinicki, G. Dobrowolski, and E. Nawarecki. Agent populations as computational
intelligence. In Leszek Rutkowski and Janusz Kacprzyk, editors, Neural Networks and Soft Computing, volume 19 of Advances in Soft Computing, pages 608613. Physica-Verlag, 2003.
[20] M. Kisiel-Dorohinicki. Agent-based models and platforms for parallel evolutionary algorithms. In
M. Bubak, G.D. van Albada, P.M.A Sloot, and J. Dongarra, editors, Computational Science ICCS
2004. Proc. of 4th Int. Conf. Part III, volume 3038 of LNAI, pages 225236. Springer, 2004.
[21] R.Sarker, T.Ray Agent-Based Evolutionary Search, Springer Verlag, 2010

802

Multiobjective optimization of fossil fuel exploitation . . .

L. Siwik et al.

[22] S.h. Chen, Y.Kambayashi, H. Sato: Multi-Agent Applications with Evolutionary Computation
and Biologically Inspired Technologies, IGI Global, 2011
[23] R. Schaefer, J. Kolodziej: Genetic search reinforced by the population hierarchy,Foundations of
Genetic Algorithms, Morgan Kaufman, 2003
[24] W.Zhong, J.Liu, M.Xue, L.Jiao: A multiagent genetic algorithm for global numerical optimization,
IEEE Trans. on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics, Part B: Cybernetics 34:2, 2004
[25] M.Kisiel-Dorohinicki, Agent-Oriented Model of Simulated Evolution, SofSem 2002: Theory and
Practice of Informatics Springer Verlag, 2002
[26] V. M. Calo, N. O. Collier, D. Pardo, M. Paszynski, Computational complexity and memory usage
for multi-frontal direct solvers used in p ﬁnite element analysis, Procedia Computer Science 4(2011)
1854-1861
[27] M. Wozniak, M. Paszynski, D. Pardo, L. Dalcin, V.M. Calo, Computational cost of isogeometric
multi-frontal solvers on parallel distributed memory machines, Computer Methods in Applied
Mechanics and Engineering, 284 (2015) 971-987
[28] M. Wozniak, K. Kuznik, M. Paszynski, V. Calo, D. Pardo, Computational cost estimates for
parallel shared memory isogeometric multi-frontal solvers, Computers & Mathematics with Applications, 67 (2014) 1864-1883
[29] N.Srinivas,K. Deb: Multiobjective Optimization Using Nondominated Sorting in Genetic Algorithms, Evolutionary Computation 2(3),1994
[30] T. Wojtowicz, K.Rzecki, P. Plawiak, M. Niedzwiecki, T.Sosnicki, K. Smelcerz, T. Wojton, Z.Tabor:
Emergence of cooperation as a result of mutation and inheritance in PD/PG-like game, Technical
Transactions, Fundamental Sciences, Krakow University of Technology, Krakow, 2015
[31] L. Siwik and M. Kisiel-Dorohinicki. Semi-elitist evolutionary multi-agent system for multiobjective
optimization. In V. N. Alexandrov, G. D. van Albada et al., Computational Science ICCS 2006:
Proc. of 6th Int. Conf., volume 3993 of LNCS. Springer-Verlag, 2006.
[32] T. Back and U. Hammel and H.-P. Schwefel: Evolutionary computation: Comments on the history
and current state, IEEE Trans. on Evolutionary Computation, 1(1), 1997.
[33] L.Siwik and R.Drezewski, Evolutionary Multi-modal Optimization with the Use of Multi-objective
Techniques, Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Soft Computing, LNCS (8467), 2014
[34] E.Ciepiela and J.Kocot and L.Siwik and R.Drezewski, Hierarchical Approach to Evolutionary
Multi-Objective Optimization, Computational Science — ICCS 2008, Lecture Notes in Computer
Science (5103), Springer International Publishing, 2008
[35] R.Drezewski and L.Siwik: The Application of Agent-Based Co-Evolutionary System with
Predator-Prey Interactions to Solving Multi-Objective Optimization Problems, Proceedings of
the 2007 IEEE Symposium Series on Computational Intelligence, IEEE, 2007
[36] R.Drezewski and L.Siwik: Multi-objective Optimization Using Co-evolutionary Multi-agent System with Host-Parasite Mechanism, Computational Science — ICCS 2006, Lecture Notes in Computer Science, Springer International Publishing, 2006
[37] R.Drezewski and L.Siwik: Co-Evolutionary Multi-Agent System with Sexual Selection Mechanism
for Multi-Objective Optimization, Proceedings of the IEEE World Congress on Computational
Intelligence (WCCI 2006), IEEE, 2006
[38] L.Siwik, M.Los, M.Kisiel-Dorohinicki, A.Byrski: Evolutionary multiobjective optimization of liquid fossil fuel reserves exploitation with minimizing natural environemnt contamination, LNAI,
Proc. of 15th International Conference, on Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Soft Computing, ICAISC
2016, In Print.
[39] R.Drezewski and L.Siwik, A Review of Agent-Based Co-Evolutionary Algorithms for
Multi-Objective Optimization, Computational Intelligence in Optimization. Aplication and
Implementations,Springer-Verlag, 2010
[40] M.J. Wooldridge An Introduction to Multiagent Systems. John Wiley & Sons, 2009.

803

