Procedia Computer Science
Volume 80, 2016, Pages 386–397
ICCS 2016. The International Conference on Computational
Science

A Hybrid Human-Computer Approach to the
Extraction of Scientiﬁc Facts from the Literature
Roselyne B. Tchoua1 , Kyle Chard2 , Debra Audus3 , Jian Qin4 , Juan de Pablo5 ,
and Ian Foster1,2,6
1

2

6

Department of Computer Science, The University of Chicago, Chicago, IL, USA
roselyne@uchicago.edu
The Computation Institute, The University of Chicago and Argonne, Chicago, IL, USA
3
The National Institute of Standards and Technology, Gaithersburg, MD, USA
4
Department of Chemical Engineering, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305
5
Institute for Molecular Engineering, The University of Chicago, Chicago, IL, USA
Math and Computer Science Division, Argonne National Laboratory, Argonne, IL, USA

Abstract
A wealth of valuable data is locked within the millions of research articles published each year.
Reading and extracting pertinent information from those articles has become an unmanageable
task for scientists. This problem hinders scientiﬁc progress by making it hard to build on
results buried in literature. Moreover, these data are loosely structured, encoded in manuscripts
of various formats, embedded in diﬀerent content types, and are, in general, not machine
accessible. We present a hybrid human-computer solution for semi-automatically extracting
scientiﬁc facts from literature. This solution combines an automated discovery, download, and
extraction phase with a semi-expert crowd assembled from students to extract speciﬁc scientiﬁc
facts. To evaluate our approach we apply it to a challenging molecular engineering scenario,
extraction of a polymer property: the Flory-Huggins interaction parameter. We demonstrate
useful contributions to a comprehensive database of polymer properties.
Keywords: Crowdsourcing, Information Extraction, Classiﬁcation, Flory-Huggins, Materials Science

1

Introduction

The amount of scientiﬁc literature published every year is growing at a proliﬁc rate. Some studies count more than 28,000 scientiﬁc journals and 1.8 million articles published annually [19]. As
a result, the amount of information (e.g., experimental results) embedded within the literature
is overwhelming. It has become impractical for humans to read and extract pertinent information. This problem hinders the advancement of science, making it hard to build on existing
results buried in the literature. It also makes it diﬃcult to translate results into applications
386

Selection and peer-review under responsibility of the Scientiﬁc Programme Committee of ICCS 2016
c The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V.

doi:10.1016/j.procs.2016.05.338

A Hybrid Human-Computer Approach to the Extraction of Scientiﬁc Facts

Tchoua et al.

and thus to produce valuable products. In materials science and chemistry, for example, diﬃculties discovering published materials properties directly aﬀect the design of new materials [6].
Indeed, despite the many publications in this domain, the process of designing new materials is
still one of trial and error. Access to a structured, queryable database of materials properties
would facilitate the design and model validation of new substances, improving eﬃciency by
enabling scientists and engineers to more quickly discover, query, and compare properties of
existing compounds. At the very least, it would transform an avalanche of publications into a
machine-accessible and human-consumable source of knowledge.
Historically, materials properties have been collected in human-curated review articles and
handbooks (e.g., the Physical Properties of Polymers Handbook [7], the Polymer Handbook [18]).
However, this approach is laborious and expensive, and thus such collections are published
infrequently. We contend that a better approach is to leverage information extraction techniques
to process thousands of papers and output structured content for human consumption. To this
end, we have developed a semi-automated system, χDB, which, with moderate input from
humans, can extract materials properties for the scientiﬁc community.
We initially target extraction of a fundamental thermodynamic property called the FloryHuggins interaction (or χ) parameter, which characterizes the miscibility of polymer blends.
We chose to work with this property as a test case as it is particularly challenging to extract,
due to the fact that it is published in heterogeneous data formats (e.g., text, ﬁgures, tables)
and is represented in several diﬀerent temperature-dependent expressions. To address these
challenges, we developed a workﬂow consisting of an automated Web information extraction
phase followed by a crowdsourced curation phase. The output of this workﬂow is a high quality
human- and machine-accessible digital handbook of polymer properties. We show that we are
able, using only a small group of students, to create a high quality database of properties with
more χ values than in other notable handbooks. We expect that our approach is likely also to
work well for other materials properties and in other scientiﬁc domains.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents background information related to Flory-Huggins theory and polymer science. Section 3 discusses related approaches that
support automated extraction. Section 4 describes the χDB architecture. Section 5 presents
the data collected via crowdsourcing. Section 6 explores the application of machine learning
algorithms to improve the automatic selection of χ-relevant publications. Finally, we conclude
and discuss future work in Section 7.

2

Application Background

The initial focus of our work is the extraction of properties of particular polymers blends (e.g, χ
parameter and glassiﬁcation temperature). Although highly curated properties database exist
for hard [8] and metallic [17] materials, no equivalent exists for polymers blends. However, there
is a clear need for a trusted, up-to-date, and easily accessible databases of properties within the
soft matter community.
Polymers are large molecules (macromolecules) composed of many repeating units. Since
polymeric materials are both ubiquitous and typically consist of several polymeric components,
which are generally incompatible, the χ parameter represents a key property in the design of
next-generation materials. A database of χ values would allow researchers to make informed
judgments as to which χ values and thermodynamic analysis to use when predicting and understanding the phase behavior of multi-component polymeric materials. However, while there
are thousands of published χ parameters, there is little consensus regarding the values. Diﬀerent measurement methods yield diﬀerent values, and diﬀerent groups have at times reported
387

A Hybrid Human-Computer Approach to the Extraction of Scientiﬁc Facts

Tchoua et al.

diﬀerent values for the same polymers. The χ parameter depends on the temperature and the
types of polymer(s) or solvent(s) involved. Consequently, many experimental methods have
been developed to quantify the temperature dependence of χ, and tabulated values are commonly found in standard textbooks and polymer data handbooks [7, 18]. However, many of
these values have not been updated to include recent ﬁndings. Moreover, the list of polymer
blends found in textbooks is not exhaustive; for example the previously mentioned handbook
contains χ values for only 41 polymer-polymer blends. These considerations motivate our goal
to collect and store χ values from materials literature into a digital, searchable database. Each
record would also include the source and the measurement methodology.

3

Related Work

We review here current practice for building collections of scientiﬁc facts, populating scientiﬁc
databases, information extraction, and crowdsourcing.
Major scientiﬁc databases have emerged in various ﬁelds where data is growing at exponential rates and the need for data sharing is recognized by the community, notably in biotechnology [2, 9]. In materials science, the Materials Project [8] provides access to large numbers
of computed values. For polymers, the expert-curated Physical Properties of Polymers Handbook [7], last published in 2007, is a valuable source of data. However, while a valuable resource,
it lacks recent results from the literature and does not contain an exhaustive list of polymers.
Information extraction (IE) from text has been extensively studied [5]. IE aims to extract
structured information from unstructured and semi-structured documents. It often focuses primarily on extracting information from written language via natural language processing [4].
Sub-disciplines include Web IE [1] and IE from PDF documents and images. Web IE leverages the inherent structure in HTML rather than grammatical rules to extract semantically
meaningful information. Web IE approaches work well when extracting information from many
pages with the same structure (e.g., real estate listings); however, they do not work well for
heterogeneous web pages or when page structure changes [10]. Extracting information from
other data types, such as images and PDFs, is particularly diﬃcult. In the case of images,
variations in texture, contrast, font size, style and color, orientation, alignment, etc., all impact
the extraction process. Similarly, PDF ﬁles, while easy to understand for humans, are not designed for machine accessibility. Thus, it is challenging to extract information from embedded
items—such as tables and equations—due to the lack of structure in the document. For example, extraction of tables from PDF documents typically relies on identifying cell borders and
attempting to map text locations relative to these borders. As tables diﬀer signiﬁcantly between
documents, a considerable amount of human assistance is needed to achieve good results.
One solution to the challenges associated with PDF ﬁles is to use experts to identify and
correct errors [15]. Indeed, given inaccuracies in IE methods, many IE systems rely on teams of
people to review and curate extracted information [14]. Such crowdsourcing approaches leverage
the fact that humans perform certain tasks better than computers, an idea also exploited in
systems such as Galaxy Zoo [12], for image labeling in astronomy; the Amazon Mechanical
Turk micro-task marketplace [3], and the Wikipedia online encyclopedia.

4

χDB Architecture and Implementation

Mining the literature for a loosely structured property such as the χ parameter requires extracting values from a variety of objects, including text, ﬁgures, tables, and equations; processing the
388

A Hybrid Human-Computer Approach to the Extraction of Scientiﬁc Facts

Tchoua et al.

many diﬀerent forms in which the property occurs, e.g., a single number at a given temperature
or a linear equation as a function of temperature; and identifying associated information such
as the polymers and solvents involved, their molecular masses, the temperature(s) at which
experiments were performed, the methods used, and any error estimates. Thus, the techniques
used to ﬁnd, extract and store χ must be ﬂexible.
Given these multiple levels of complexity, we have developed χDB—a hybrid machine-human
system that leverages both automatic extraction and expert human review via crowdsourcing.
The χDB workﬂow shown in Figure 1 comprises three main phases: automatic download and
ﬁrst-level extraction of publications; crowdsourced extraction and review (the “review process”)
of χ values, and ﬁnally the exposure of a curated database of χ values (the “Digital Handbook
of Properties”). In the rest of this section, we deﬁne the χDB data model and then describe
the system architecture used to realize each of these workﬂow phases.

Figure 1: χDB architecture

4.1

Data Model

The χDB data model is designed to represent (1) the complex extraction and review workﬂow,
(2) the various temperature-dependent formats in which χ occurs, and (3) the complete provenance of each extracted value. To model the diﬀerent users’ reviews the data model includes
a representation of publications before, during, and after reviews, as well as a data model for
the multiple representations of χ. The χDB data model includes seven core tables: papers
(extracted publications), items (extracted publication items), sources and reviewed sources
(reviewed information before and after consensus), chis and reviewed chis (χ values before
and after consensus), and reviewed papers (classiﬁed papers). One challenge when deﬁning
the data model is the need to support diﬀerent representations in which χ is speciﬁed. After
reviewing the literature we developed a data model that could include four main representations of χ: 1) a number at a speciﬁc temperature; 2) a linear equation in terms of temperature:
B
C
χ = A+ B
T ; 3) a quadratic equation in terms of temperature: χ = A + T + T 2 ; 4) a number
that combines χ and N, where N is proportional to the degree of polymerization or molecular
weight: χN; and a ﬁnal catch-all class, 5) other representations.
389

A Hybrid Human-Computer Approach to the Extraction of Scientiﬁc Facts

4.2

Tchoua et al.

Extraction

χDB ﬁrst discovers and downloads relevant publications—in this case publications that contain the keyword Flory-Huggins—from suitable journals. It then uses an HTML tag parser
to extract structured publication metadata, including Digital Object Identiﬁer (DOI), title,
authors, and date of publication. This information is used to index the publication such that
it can be linked to other stored information (e.g., referenced values in other papers). Finally,
the publication is parsed into items (e.g., abstract, ﬁgures, tables, equations, text) that are
separately downloaded and can be reviewed individually. Links between publication items and
their originating publication are maintained so that they can be displayed to reviewers in a
coherent manner. The full text and the original URL are also stored such that reviewers and
users can retrieve the original publication.
We implemented this phase in three components: a Python web crawler (to discover relevant
publications), a downloader (to download a copy of the publication), and a WebIE extractor
(to extract metadata and items from the publication). We initially focused on Macromolecules,
a leading scientiﬁc journal on polymers. The crawler is conﬁgured to use the Macromolecules
search capabilities to prioritize downloads. After discussion with experts, we chose the search
term Flory-Huggins and speciﬁed a date range from January 2010. The crawler returns a
ranked list of publications. The downloader uses these results to download each publication
(as an HTML ﬁle) using the URL returned by the crawler. The downloader extracts relevant
metadata from the structured web page (DOI, title, authors, etc.) Finally, a Python WebIE
script parses the HTML to detect and extract items from the publication (e.g., abstract, images,
equations, and tables). The abstract and the HTML tables are stored directly in the χDB
database. Figures and equations are downloaded and referenced in the database.

4.3

Crowdsourced Review

To assemble a crowd for reviewing extractions we developed a materials science course that
combined teaching the fundamentals of polymer chemistry and physics and reviewing the literature containing χ parameters. The reviewing component of the course tasked the students
with extracting χ parameters using the χDB system. This involved reviewing the free-text
publication, and entering any χ values that they identiﬁed.
We implemented this phase as a PHP-based web service and PHP/HTML website. Due
to copyright restrictions, the reviewing components of χDB are accessible only within the
University of Chicago network. The review interface includes two main pages: a list of all
publications with assigned reviewers and a review page for reviewing publications and items.
We implemented a consensus-based review process using two reviewers per paper to reduce
error. We rely on a second class of reviewers (experts) to resolve conﬂicting reviews.
An individual review consists of scanning extracted items for χ values. Once identiﬁed,
reviewers are asked to extract χ values from all of these items, with the exception of ﬁgures
as extractions from ﬁgures are likely to be inaccurate. The reviewer enters each extracted
χ value in an online form. The item from which a value is extracted is marked as relevant.
Note: items may be marked as relevant even if they do not contain any χ values. For example,
a relevant ﬁgure may be a phase diagram or a micrograph of the material; a relevant table
may contain supporting information. If a paper contains a single χ value or a single relevant
item, it is also marked as relevant. Consequently, a paper that contains neither is classiﬁed as
irrelevant. Figure 2 shows an example of the review form. To ensure that the resulting database
is unambiguous, we deﬁne a set of minimum required information for submission of a χ value.
Some χ values are embedded directly in the text (rather than in an extracted item); therefore
390

A Hybrid Human-Computer Approach to the Extraction of Scientiﬁc Facts

Tchoua et al.

Figure 2: Screenshot of the χDB Graphical User Interface with the χ entry form enabled
reviewers are able to retrieve the full text article via the link on the review page. If additional χ
values are found in the full text, reviewers click the “Add Chi” button next to the abstract with
the possibility to indicate in the form that the value was actually extracted from the main text.
Second reviews of the same publications consist of a similar process, however second reviewers
are able to view the previous reviewers’ input before submitting their own, giving them the
opportunity to identify errors or conﬂicts between reviews. In the case of errors, the interface
allows submission of either review; in the case of conﬂicts it allows the publication to be ﬂagged
for expert review.
Students reported an average of 15 minutes to review relevant publications and ﬁve minutes
to review irrelevant publications. Submissions from second reviewers are automatically stored
in our Digital Handbook of χ values.

4.4

Digital Handbook of χ Values

Once a χ value has passed through the review cycle, it is stored in the curated section of
the database with associated provenance information that links the value back to the original
publication, the item in which it was found, and the reviewers that extracted the value. To
facilitate broad access to the database, χDB oﬀers a web service API and HTML website. The
website allows users to browse and search the database for speciﬁc χ values. The web service
API supports ingestion of χ values directly from custom applications, for example to retrieve
χ values for a set of speciﬁc polymers that may then be used for calculations or visualizations.
Both the website and web service are available at http://pppdb.uchicago.edu.
The website allows users to query for information related to a particular polymer. Once
the user selects a particular polymer from the search interface, he or she is presented with a
table of searchable χ values that relate to that polymer. Each row in the table includes the
391

A Hybrid Human-Computer Approach to the Extraction of Scientiﬁc Facts

Tchoua et al.

Figure 3: Screenshot of the χDB Digital Handbook
second compound (polymer or solvent) involved in the interaction, the measurement method
used (where available), the temperature at which the parameter was measured (in various
forms), and a link to the original publication. Rows can also be expanded to show additional
metadata such as molecular masses and concentration. Figure 3 shows an example of χ values
for poly(methyl acrylate) in the Digital Handbook.
The χDB REST API supports querying the Digital Handbook for χ values that relate to a
speciﬁc polymer-polymer or polymer-solvent pair. The REST API has been used to create a
Flory-Huggins phase diagram generator for speciﬁc polymer blends. This application determines
the liquid-liquid curves for a binary blend of polymers, as well as a polymer solution.

5

Results

During the class and over a two month period immediately thereafter, students reviewed 376
publications from the period 2010–2015 in Macromolecules. We brieﬂy explore here the results
of extractions, looking speciﬁcally at the characteristics of the χ values, the range of compounds
for which χ values were collected, and the methods used to derive χ values.
χ Values: Of the 376 publications reviewed, students deemed 259 (69 %) of the papers
relevant, of which 145 (38.5 %) of the papers contained one or more χ values. Our dataset
includes 388 χ values, including 237 (61 %) polymer-polymer χ values. Measured χ values
account for approximately half (48.5 %) of all χ values extracted, the other half (51.6 %) are
cited from other publications. Of these measured values, the dataset includes 84 (21.7 %)
measured polymer-polymer χ values. In the most focused case of measured polymer-polymer
pairs, we found that 70.9 % of χ values were embedded directly in publication text, and 9.7 %
in the abstract. Combined, these values indicate that mining text for χ values would potentially
capture about 80 % of χ values. The vast majority (89.0 %) of χ values that we identiﬁed were
published as type 1 or 2 i.e., a number or a linear function of temperature.
Compounds: Polystyrene (PS) is the most studied polymer by a large margin, with 140
392

A Hybrid Human-Computer Approach to the Extraction of Scientiﬁc Facts

Tchoua et al.

χ values collected. The second and third most frequent, Poly(methyl methacrylate) (PMMA)
and Polyisoprene (PI), have 59 and 22 χ values, respectively. The average number of χ values
per polymer is 4.74. Not surprisingly, the most frequent polymer pair is PS–PMMA, with 36 χ
values.
Methods: One ﬁnal area of great interest to our experts was evaluating the method used
to measure the χ values. Unfortunately the method was not always present (or clear) in
publications. Students were unable to identify the method for 62 (16.0 %) of the 388 χ values
found and were unsure about 12 others (3.1 %), resulting in a total of 19.1 % χ values with
no identiﬁed method. Originally, experts provided a list of seven methods that they expected
would be commonly used. Analysis of our dataset reveals that, for the target case of measured
polymer-polymer values these methods are indeed the most commonly used, with only four of
the 84 measured polymer-polymer values not using one of these seven methods.

6

Automated Classiﬁcation

While our approach has established a rich database of χ values, there is potential for further
improvements. For example, only 38.5 % of our selected publications contained χ values; thus,
about 62 % of the papers curated by reviewers did not in fact contribute to the digital handbook.
As a ﬁrst step towards improving this ratio we have investigated the application of machine
learning techniques to optimize the prioritization and classiﬁcation of relevant publications.
To undertake this task, we used the Support Vector Classiﬁer (SVC) from Scikit Learn [11],
an open source machine learning Python library. SVC is an implementation of Support Vector
Machines (SVMs), supervised learning models with associated learning algorithms that analyze
data and recognize patterns. The models map data into a feature space to make predictions.
Three performance metrics are commonly used to evaluate the accuracy of classiﬁers: precision, recall, and F-measure. Precision and recall are expressed in terms of Positive and Negative
predictions, i.e., in our case Contains χ and Does not contain χ; True and False predictions
correspond to correct and incorrect predictions. Precision measures the percentage of predictions that were correct while recall measures the percentage of items in the test dataset that
were correctly predicted. Precision and recall are deﬁned in Equations 1 and 2.
P recision =
Recall =

T rueP ositives
T rueP ositives + F alseP ositives

T rueP ositives
T rueP ositives + F alseN egatives

(1)
(2)

The FX -score is a measure of a test’s accuracy. The traditional F-measure or balanced
Fscore (F1 score) is the harmonic mean of precision and recall; it can be interpreted as a
weighted average of the precision and recall, with a best value of 1 and worst of 0. The general
formula for positive real β is deﬁned in Equation 3.
Fβ = (1 + β 2 ) ×

6.1

precision × recall
+ recall

β 2 .precision

(3)

Test dataset

Our datasets include two sets of abstracts. The ﬁrst set is composed of all abstracts of publications reviewed by the students, each of which has been classiﬁed by them as either relevant or
irrelevant. These 376 publications were selected by the χDB crawler and are therefore biased
393

A Hybrid Human-Computer Approach to the Extraction of Scientiﬁc Facts

Tchoua et al.

by the Flory-Huggins keyword search. (However, as previously discussed, only 145 of these
publications contained χ values.) To address this bias we downloaded an additional 135 publications from two arbitrarily chosen issues of Macromolecules (January 12, 2010 and January
26, 2010). Table 1 shows the sets of abstracts used in the classiﬁcation of abstracts; we call the
initial and biased set of abstracts “biased abstracts” and the larger set, which contains both
the original 376 biased abstracts and the additional 135 unbiased abstracts, “All abstracts.”
To classify the additional set of papers we visually inspected the abstracts and full text of each
publication and reviewed them for χ values.
Table 1: Characteristics of the abstracts used as input to the classiﬁcation process
Category
Relevant
Irrelevant
Total

6.2

Biased abstracts
145
231
376

Unbiased abstracts
2
133
135

All abstracts
147
364
511

Results

We applied Scikit Learn’s Support Vector Classiﬁer to the set of abstracts, varying just the
criteria used to identify abstracts as relevant or irrelevant. The features used by the classiﬁer
are generated using a word-weighting scheme commonly used in information retrieval [13]. The
abstracts are ﬁrst converted to a matrix of token counts and subsequently transformed into a
normalized tf-idf (term frequency-inverse document frequency) representation. The two terms
are multiplied in order to reduce the impact of terms that occur frequently in a given corpus
and thus are less informative. We used three diﬀerent deﬁnitions of relevancy: includes χ value;
includes measured χ value; and includes measured polymer-polymer χ value.
Table 2 shows that the performance of the classiﬁer for both sets of abstracts. Accuracy
improves as relevancy becomes more speciﬁc. We also see a small (≈3–7 %) improvement
in accuracy when using all abstracts. When using all abstracts, the accuracy of classifying
measured polymer-polymer relevant papers is 86.9 % precision and 90.9 % recall.
There is a tradeoﬀ between maximizing the number of relevant publications (and minimizing
the number of irrelevant publications) retrieved. Deciding whether these scores are acceptable
depends on the cost of errors (false negatives and false positives). Our observed precision score
(of 86.9 %) means that 13.1 % irrelevant papers remain; a considerable improvement over
the initial 61.5 % of publications that did not contain χ values. The recall score of 90.9 %
means that we misclassify ≈9 % of relevant papers. As ideally we would like to capture all
such publications, further work should aim at improving this score. Nevertheless, our results
demonstrate the potential of capturing a signiﬁcant portion of targeted publications in the
literature.
We observe that the top 25 features (words) used by our classiﬁer in the most focused case
of polymer-polymer pairs include a mixture of more or less χ-related terms. For example, terms
like “process,” “parameter,” and “form” could refer to various experimental settings. On the
other hand, the word “domains” (as in microphase domains) is relevant to measuring χ and is
also used for a wide variety of applications in which χ is important. χ is a measure of polymerpolymer “interaction” that is present in the list of features. Microphase “morphologies” are
relevant to measuring χ via phase diagrams. This combination represents a challenge in further
isolating publications that are speciﬁcally related to χ and may require incorporating some
domain knowledge into the χDB workﬂow.
394

A Hybrid Human-Computer Approach to the Extraction of Scientiﬁc Facts

Tchoua et al.

Table 2: Classiﬁcation of abstracts in χDB
Relevancy (contains)
χ Values

Measured χ values

Measured polymerpolymer χ values

7

Metric
Mean F1 score
Mean precision score
Mean recall score
Mean F1 score
Mean precision score
Mean recall score
Mean F1 score
Mean precision score
Mean recall score

Biased abstracts
0.624
60.5 %
64.5 %
0.790
75.9 %
82.2 %
0.852
82.7 %
87.8 %

All abstracts
0.679
65.1 %
71.2 %
0.835
80.9 %
86.4 %
0.890
86.9 %
90.9 %

Conclusion and Future Work

As part of a long-term project to create a digital handbook of polymer properties, we have
developed χDB, a hybrid human computer-system that extracts the Flory-Huggins (or χ) parameter from scientiﬁc literature. Our work to date has extracted 388 χ values for 120 polymers
and 30 solvents. Our 237 measured χ values for blends of 63 unique polymers exceed the 134 χ
values for blends of 41 unique polymers found in the Physical Properties of Polymers Handbook
[7]. One reason for our superior performance is that we were able to collect values reported after
the 2007 publication of the Handbook (84 of our χ values are from 2010 to 2015); another is that
our more exhaustive search leads us to ﬁnd earlier values not reported in the Handbook. Our
results emphasize the potential for using our approach to create and maintain a digital database
of χ parameters that is more comprehensive and up to date than any survey publication. The
database is currently available at http://pppdb.uchicago.edu.
Using publications marked relevant and machine learning software, we were able to improve
the publication selection process considerably, decreasing the number of reviewed publications
that do not contribute to the χ database from 61.5 % to 13.1 %. We hope in future work
to further improve this classiﬁcation process by using alternative methods and by integrating
polymer science insight gained through exploration of our data collection. For example, we will
explore the utility of using more frequently occurring methods as a publication ﬁlter prior to
running the classiﬁer. We are exploring collaborations with journals in order to gain access
to more publications and mine more properties. While this work is focused on χ, the steps
required to collect a new property are straightforward; ﬁrst the crawler must be conﬁgured
to use a diﬀerent keyword; the schema for the target property will guide the design of a new
input form and the corresponding database table. Future work will also involve addressing
crowdsourcing challenges in order to recruit more trained users and experts. Scaling out χDB
will also lead us to explore deep learning systems for fact extraction [16].

Acknowledgments
We thank the student contributors to χDB. This work was supported in part by NIST contract
60NANB15D077, the Center for Hierarchical Materials Design, and DOE contract DE-AC0206CH11357. Certain commercial equipment and/or materials are identiﬁed in this report in
order to adequately specify the experimental procedure. In no case does such identiﬁcation
imply recommendation or endorsement by the National Institute of Standards and Technology,
395

A Hybrid Human-Computer Approach to the Extraction of Scientiﬁc Facts

Tchoua et al.

nor does it imply that the equipment and/or materials used are necessarily the best available
for the purpose.

References
[1] M. Banko, M. J. Cafarella, S. Soderland, M. Broadhead, and O. Etzioni. Open information
extraction for the web. In Proceedings of the 20th International Joint Conference on Artiﬁcal
Intelligence (IJCAI), pages 2670–2676, 2007.
[2] D. A. Benson, I. Karsch-Mizrachi, D. J Lipman, J. Ostell, B. A Rapp, and D. L. Wheeler. Genbank.
Nucleic Acids Research, 28(1):15–18, 2000.
[3] M. Buhrmester, T. Kwang, and S. D. Gosling. Amazon’s Mechanical Turk A new source of
inexpensive, yet high-quality, data? Perspectives on Psychological Science, 6(1):3–5, 2011.
[4] Erik Cambria and Bruce White. Jumping nlp curves: a review of natural language processing
research [review article]. Computational Intelligence Magazine, IEEE, 9(2):48–57, 2014.
[5] J. Cowie and W. Lehnert. Information extraction. Communications of the ACM, 39(1):80–91,
1996.
[6] J. J. de Pablo, B. Jones, C. L. Kovacs, V. Ozolins, and A. P. Ramirez. The Materials Genome
Initiative, the interplay of experiment, theory and computation. Current Opinion in Solid State
and Materials Science, 18(2):99–117, 2014.
[7] H. B. Eitouni and N P. Balsara. Thermodynamics of polymer blends. In Physical Properties of
Polymers Handbook, pages 339–356. Springer, 2007.
[8] A. Jain, S. Ping Ong, G. Hautier, W. Chen, W. D. Richards, S. Dacek, S. Cholia, D. Gunter,
D. Skinner, and G. Ceder. Commentary: The Materials Project: A materials genome approach
to accelerating materials innovation. APL Materials, 1(1):011002, 2013.
[9] M. D. Mailman, M. Feolo, Y. Jin, M. Kimura, K. Tryka, R. Bagoutdinov, L. Hao, A. Kiang,
J. Paschall, L. Phan, et al. The NCBI dbGaP database of genotypes and phenotypes. Nature
Genetics, 39(10):1181–1186, 2007.
[10] I. Muslea. Extraction patterns for information extraction tasks: A survey. In The AAAI-99
Workshop on Machine Learning for Information Extraction, pages 1–6, 1999.
[11] F. Pedregosa, G. Varoquaux, A. Gramfort, V. Michel, B. Thirion, O. Grisel, M. Blondel, P. Prettenhofer, R. Weiss, V. Dubourg, J. Vanderplas, A. Passos, D. Cournapeau, M. Brucher, M. Perrot,
and E. Duchesnay. Scikit-learn: Machine learning in Python. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 12:2825–2830, 2011.
[12] M. J. Raddick, G. Bracey, P. L. Gay, C. J. Lintott, C. Cardamone, P. Murray, K. Schawinski,
A. S. Szalay, and J. Vandenberg. Galaxy Zoo: Motivations of citizen scientists. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1303.6886, 2013.
[13] Juan Ramos. Using tf-idf to determine word relevance in document queries. In Proceedings of the
ﬁrst instructional conference on machine learning, 2003.
[14] A. Rzhetsky, I. Iossifov, T. Koike, M. Krauthammer, P. Kra, M. Morris, H. Yu, P. A. Dubou´e,
W. Weng, W. J. Wilbur, Hatzivassiloglou V., and C. Friedman. GeneWays: A system for extracting, analyzing, visualizing, and integrating molecular pathway data. Journal of Biomedical
Informatics, 37(1):43–53, 2004.
[15] C. Seifert, M. Granitzer, P. H¨
oﬂer, B. Mutlu, V. Sabol, K. Schlegel, S. Bayerl, F. Stegmaier,
S. Zwicklbauer, and R. Kern. Crowdsourcing fact extraction from scientiﬁc literature. In HumanComputer Interaction and Knowledge Discovery in Complex, Unstructured, Big Data, pages 160–
172. Springer, 2013.
[16] J. Shin, S. Wu, F. Wang, C. De Sa, C. Zhang, and C. R´e. Incremental knowledge base construction
using Deepdive. Proceedings of the VLDB Endowment, 8(11):1310–1321, 2015.
[17] PJ Spencer. A brief history of CALPHAD. Calphad, 32(1):1–8, 2008.

396

A Hybrid Human-Computer Approach to the Extraction of Scientiﬁc Facts

Tchoua et al.

[18] Dirk Willem Van Krevelen and Klaas Te Nijenhuis. Properties of polymers: their correlation with
chemical structure; their numerical estimation and prediction from additive group contributions.
Elsevier, 2009.
[19] M. Ware and M. Mabe. The STM report: An overview of scientiﬁc and scholarly journal publishing.
Technical report, STM, 2009.

397

