Procedia Computer Science
Volume 80, 2016, Pages 2418–2422
ICCS 2016. The International Conference on Computational
Science

Evaluation of the cardiovascular risk in middle-aged
workers: an artificial neural networks-based approach
Alexander Sboev1,2,3 , Svetlana Gorokhova4, Viktor Pfaf4, Ivan
Moloshnikov1,
Dmitry Gudovskikh1, Roman Rybka1, Anton Selivanov1 and Aleksey
Serenko1
1

NRC «Kurchatov Institute», Moscow, Russia, sag111@mail.ru
2
NRNU «MEPhI», Moscow, Russia
3
Plekhanov Russian University of Economics, Moscow, Russia
4
Research Clinical Center of Russian Railways, Moscow, Russia, cafedra2004@mail.ru

Abstract
A method of the evaluation of the risk of cardiovascular events in the group of
middle-aged male workers was developed on the basis of artificial neural networks
(ANN). The list of analyzed variables included parameters of allostatic load and signs of
myocardial involvement. The results were compared with traditional scales and risk
charts (SCORE, PROCAM, and Framingham). A better prognostic value of the
proposed model was observed, which makes it reasonable to use both additional markers
and ANN.
Keywords: data science, neural network, data analysis, cardiovascular risk

1 Introduction
The evaluation of cardiovascular risk is a difficult and important problem. The prediction of
coronary heart disease (CHD) and major adverse cardiovascular events (MACE), e.g. myocardial
infarction, sudden death etc. is especially significant in persons working with traffic safety. Risk
charts, such as Systemic Coronary Risk Estimation (SCORE), PROCAM, Framingham risk score etc.
are traditionally used in clinical practice to evaluate cardiovascular risk. The agreement between these
risk scales is low (67% in average) (Allan, Nouri, Koronwyk, Kolber, Vandermeer, & McCormack,
2013), and their informative value significantly differs in various professional groups. These scales

2418

Selection and peer-review under responsibility of the Scientiﬁc Programme Committee of ICCS 2016
c The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V.

doi:10.1016/j.procs.2016.05.540

Evaluation of the Cardiovascular Risk: an ANN-Based Approach

Sboev, Gorokhova, Pfaf et al.

also do not include markers of allostatic load as well as subclinical signs of the involvement of target
organs. It is necessary to apply methods of mathematical data processing to extend the list of analyzed
variables. Artificial neural networks (ANNs) can be used to solve the problem of the prediction of
cardiovascular events (Atkov, et al., 2012) (Gorokhova, Sboev, Kukin, Rybka, Muraseeva, & Atkov,
2013). The aim of this study was to develop a prognostic model for CHD and MACE in the group of
locomotive crew members (LCMs) on the basis of artificial neural networks. The paper presents an
ANN-based model for the evaluation of cardiovascular risk in the group of middle-aged male workers.

2 Data Collection
The study included data on 106 LCMs (mean age 48.13, all men), who underwent a long-term
medical observation. They were regularly subject to periodic and pre-trip ambulatory examinations,
and in-depth hospital examination to diagnose CHD. The parameters of cardiovascular status were
defined by a standard clinical examination, ECG, and echocardiography. Blood tests and stress tests
(ECG and/or EchoCG) were performed in all the participants. The state of coronary arteries was
assessed by coronary angiography and/or multi-slice spiral computed tomography (MSCT). CHD was
diagnosed if documented signs of coronary myocardial ischemia, coronary atherosclerosis (according
to coronary angiography and MSCT) or myocardial infarction were found. After that, patients were
divided into two groups; CHD and No-CHD.
The initial set of variables in the database included over 60 signs:
— demographic data: age, length of service in the profession;
— medical history of hypertension, diabetes or other conditions;
— markers of allostatic load, such as body mass index (BMI), systolic and diastolic blood pressure
(BP), hemoglobin, blood glucose, cholesterol, low density lipoprotein (LDL), triglycerides, creatinine
etc.;
— signs of cardiovascular involvement, such as left ventricle mass index, end-diastolic diameter of
left ventricle, arrhythmia, ECG QT-interval, sleep-disordered breathing, arterial stiffness, thickening
of the carotid intima-media complex etc.;
— indexes of cardiovascular risk according to SCORE, PROCAM and Framingham.

3 Materials and Methods
The following steps were made to create the model:
1. pre-processing of input data with meaningful parameters extraction;
2. creation of the model of cardiovascular risk;
3. estimation of statistical accuracy of the newly developed and existing models on a dataset.
Tools used for problem solution were: Python 2.7.10 programming language; IDE: ipython
notebook; software libraries: numpy 1.10.1, scipy 0.16.1, pandas 0.17.1, scikit-learn 0.17.0, matplotlib
1.5.1, seaborn 0.6.0.

3.1 Data Pre-processing
The first step of data pre-processing was data cleaning. The variables were excluded from the list if
they:
1) lacked diagnostic value;
2) were obtained only in few workers (e.g. sleep apnea).

2419

Evaluation of the Cardiovascular Risk: an ANN-Based Approach

Sboev, Gorokhova, Pfaf et al.

The next step was filling up the missing values of the remaining parameters with mean values.
Then, data conversion was performed in order to improve the prediction accuracy of the classification
model.
The pre-processing methods tested for the data conversion were input data normalization, principal
component analysis (PCA), dimensionality reduction by choosing high-importance features (based on
information entropy criterion), and PCA based on normalized data.
Normalization was performed with feature scaling algorithm, which brings all values of the
parameters into the 0-1 range. PCA with 4 principal components was used. There were 6 highimportance parameters.

3.2 Classification Methods
All pre-processing methods were tested with all classification models. The following classification
models were taken: support vector machine (SVM), decision tree classifier, extra-trees classifier,
random forest classifier, adaBoost, bagging classifier, gradient tree boosting, probabilistic neural
network (PNN).
Multiclassification algorithm for SVM in the current research was “one-vs-one”, i.e. classes were
sequentially considered in pairs (Wu & Lin, 2004). SVM was based on a Gaussian radial basis
function (RBF) kernel, which showed better results compared to linear or polynomial kernels. The
testing of SVM with different class weights demonstrated that the optimal class weights were 1.0 for
each class.
A decision tree was created based on the information entropy criterion (parameters with higher
information entropy had higher importance in the classification problem). The size of the tree, the
number of leaves and the number of objects in each node were not limited. The maximum entropy
reduction was chosen as a splitting criterion.
Extra-trees classifier is a method based on building of a number random decision trees (a “forest”)
(Breiman, 2001). Random forest classifier is based on a set of random decision trees for various subsamples of the input dataset (Geurts, Ernst, & Wehenkel, 2006). Bootstrap method was used for the
division of samples. Parameters of decision trees in these methods were equal to the parameters of the
decision tree classifier. There were 10 decision trees.
AdaBoost classification starts with fitting a classifier on the initial dataset and then fitting
additional copies of the classifier into the same dataset, but with weights adjusted to incorrectly
classified instances, in order to focus subsequent classifiers on difficult cases (Zhu, Zou, Rosset, &
Hastie, 2009).
Gradient boosting classifier builds an additive model in a forward stage-wise fashion; it allows
optimizing the arbitrary differentiable loss functions. In each stage, multiclass regression trees fit on
the negative gradient of the binomial or multinomial deviance loss function (Friedman, 2001).
Scikit-learn software library implementation was used in most models; PNN was implemented in
RBF kernel as a subclass of scikit-learn “base estimator” class, which was an abstract parent class for
all classification models.
Optimal parameters of each classification model were fitted on the base of training and validation
subsets of the original clinical data. After parameter fitting, each configuration of preprocessing
method and classification model was tested.
The best classification results were obtained in extra-trees classifier in binary classification task,
and in PNN in ternary classification task. Both models were based on normalized data pre-processed
by PCA. The comparison and evaluation method of the models is described in the next section.
The estimation of the results of classification was performed with a stratified K-fold crossvalidation of average results of 10 classification model executions. Configurations were estimated by
ROC-AUC measure.

2420

Evaluation of the Cardiovascular Risk: an ANN-Based Approach

Sboev, Gorokhova, Pfaf et al.

4 Results
The primary goal of binary classification in CHD prediction is to assess the risk of the disease;
therefore, the main estimation parameter is ROC AUC of the first class (CHD group). Extra-trees
classifier model based on normalized data pre-processed with PCA had the highest ROC AUC in the
first class prediction (64%).
Ternary classification estimation with ROC AUC had two important parameters for CHD risk
prediction: ROC AUC of the first class (CHD) and ROC AUC of the second class (MACE). The
average value of these parameters was taken as the main estimation of configurations. The best model
for the second-class prediction was the decision tree classifier based on information entropy criterion
and normalized data pre-processed with PCA.
PNN model based on normalized data pre-processed with PCA had the highest average estimation
(57%) and ROC AUC of the first-class prediction (63%). All top configurations for both binary and
ternary classifications were based on normalized data pre-processed with PCA.
As a result, an optimal combination of methods to solve the problem of the prediction of heart
diseases was determined. The best results were demonstrated in case of PNN with sigma = 0.1 and
normalized data pre-processed with PCA with four principal components.
According to the ROC-analysis, the results of CHD prediction according to SCORE, PROCAM
and Framingham scales were AUC = 0.72, 0.65, 0.69. However, AUC values for these risk calculators
of myocardial infarction were significantly lower (0.34, 0.42, and 0.32, respectively).

5 Conclusion
SCORE, PROCAM, and Framingham scales of cardiovascular risk assessment are characterized
with inconsistency of the results, and insufficient informative value to predict MACE (including
myocardial infarction) in the group of middle-aged male railroad workers. This means that the use of
these scales in this group of patients is limited. The best prognostic value of PNN model was achieved
by the inclusion of the markers of allostatic load and signs of the left ventricular myocardial
involvement (myocardial mass index). At the same time, the list of markers should not be excessive,
and the variables should be thoroughly chosen. The results suggest that it is reasonable to use both
additional markers and artificial neural networks.

References
Allan, G., Nouri, F., Koronwyk, C., Kolber, M., Vandermeer, B., & McCormack, J. (2013).
Agreement Among Cardiovascular Disease Risk Calculators. Circulation, pp. 127:1948-1956.
Atkov, O., Gorokhova, S., Sboev, A., Generozov, E., Muraseeva, E., Moroshkina, S., et al. (2012).
Coronary heart disease diagnosis by artificial neural networks including genetic polymorphisms and
clinical parameters. J Cardiol., 190-194.
Breiman, L. (2001). Random Forests. Machine Learning, 5-32.
Friedman, J. (2001). Greedy Function Approximation: A Gradient Boosting Machine. The Annals
of Statistics, 1189-1232.
Geurts, P., Ernst, D., & Wehenkel, L. (2006). Extremely randomized trees. Machine Learning, 342.
Gorokhova, S., Sboev, A., Kukin, K., Rybka, R., Muraseeva, E., & Atkov, O. (2013). The
Application of Artificial Neural Networks in the Diagnosis of Coronary Heart Disease. In: Network
Topologies: Types, Performance Impact and Advantages/Disadvantages., 45-57.

2421

Evaluation of the Cardiovascular Risk: an ANN-Based Approach

Sboev, Gorokhova, Pfaf et al.

Wu, T.-F., & Lin, C.-J. (2004). Probability Estimates for Multi-class Classification by Pairwise
Coupling. J Machine Learning Research., 975-1005.
Zhu, J., Zou, H., Rosset, S., & Hastie, T. (2009). Multi-class AdaBoost. Stat Interface, 349-360.

2422

