Procedia Computer Science
Volume 80, 2016, Pages 1791–1800
ICCS 2016. The International Conference on Computational
Science

Biomedical Big Data Training Collaborative
(BBDTC): An effort to bridge the talent gap in
biomedical science and research
Shweta Purawat1, Charles Cowart1, Rommie E. Amaro2 and Ilkay Altintas1
1

San Diego Supercomputer Center, University of California, San Diego, USA
shpurawat@sdsc.edu, altintas@sdsc.edu, charliec@sdsc.edu
2
Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, University of California, San Diego, USA
ramaro@ucsd.edu

Abstract
The BBDTC (https://biobigdata.ucsd.edu) is a community-oriented platform to encourage high-quality
knowledge dissemination with the aim of growing a well-informed biomedical big data community
through collaborative efforts on training and education. The BBDTC collaborative is an e-learning
platform that supports the biomedical community to access, develop and deploy open training
materials. The BBDTC supports Big Data skill training for biomedical scientists at all levels, and from
varied backgrounds. The natural hierarchy of courses allows them to be broken into and handled
as modules. Modules can be reused in the context of multiple courses and reshuffled, producing a new
and different, dynamic course called a playlist. Users may create playlists to suit their learning
requirements and share it with individual users or the wider public. BBDTC leverages the maturity and
design of the HUBzero content-management platform for delivering educational content. To facilitate
the migration of existing content, the BBDTC supports importing and exporting course material from
the edX platform. Migration tools will be extended in the future to support other platforms. Hands-on
training software packages, i.e., toolboxes, are supported through Amazon EC2 and Virtualbox
virtualization technologies, and they are available as: (i) downloadable lightweight Virtualbox Images
providing a standardized software tool environment with software packages and test data on their
personal machines, and (ii) remotely accessible Amazon EC2 Virtual Machines for accessing
biomedical big data tools and scalable big data experiments. At the moment, the BBDTC site contains
three open Biomedical big data training courses with lecture contents, videos and hands-on training
utilizing VM toolboxes, covering diverse topics. The courses have enhanced the hands-on learning
environment by providing structured content that users can use at their own pace. A four course
biomedical big data series is planned for development in 2016.
Keywords: e-learning, biomedical, collaborative, big data, education, toolbox

Selection and peer-review under responsibility of the Scientiﬁc Programme Committee of ICCS 2016
c The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V.

doi:10.1016/j.procs.2016.05.454

1791

Biomedical Big Data Training Collaborative

Purawat, Cowart, Amaro and Altintas

1 Introduction
Researchers increasingly rely on Big Data, Computational Science, and High Performance
Computing (HPC) to solve problems within scientific domains and explore them in new ways
(Ryabinin & Chuprina, 2015). However, it is often difficult to effectively apply these approaches in
practice. They draw heavily from domains including computer science and applied mathematics, and
most researchers are not greatly invested in them (Chapman, et al., 2014). Moreover, petascale and
exascale datasets require techniques to process and manage that many practioners have not
encountered in their studies or work (Ryabinin & Chuprina, 2015).
University training is largely offered through a multidisciplinary Computational Science discipline,
or as specializations in existing domains such as computational chemistry, computational physics, etc.
(Chapman, et al., 2014). These offerings cannot keep up with current demand, or the rapid changes in
technologies and practices. Students are not entering the field with enough real-world skills, and there
aren’t enough programs to rapidly affect a change in the talent gap.
To overcome this challenge, our vision is to cultivate an online community focused narrowly on
data science and computing in biomedicine, and fostering high quality, well informed, and freely
accessible knowledge. Our community, the Biomedical Big Data Training Collaborative (BBDTC),
targets the development of technical skills as well as education. Our effort will assist educators by
developing and communicating best practices for content development and deployment, along with
adaptive learning, assessment metrics, and testing practices.
Our educational material not only includes traditional video and text, but all of the data and tools
required to participate in our courses or learn independently. Tools come preinstalled and
preconfigured on virtual machines that can be run on a local workstation, or in Amazon EC2 cloud.
Users can adapt existing material to their own needs, by assembling parts of multiple courses into their
own playlists. Our training material is accessible to a broad community of biomedical researchers and
students, including those without access to high performance computing facilities.
By focusing on technical training as well as education, providing real-world datasets, and
presenting packaged toolkits that are simple enough to learn yet powerful enough to perform real
work, BBDTC differentiates itself from other online learning providers.
Unlike university courses, BBDTC’s online presence makes it available to more content providers
as well as more students. Being a community-driven resource allows it to evolve quickly and be more
responsive to user needs.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows: In section 2, we describe the software architectures
of our framework, its user interface, and how it integrates with other important software platforms. In
section 3, we cover our current usage statistics. In section 4, we outline related work. In section 5 we
conclude, and in section 6 we discuss future work. we describe the results of our efforts. In section 6,
we will cover future work.

2 Approach: BBDTC Framework
BBDTC framework utilizes and extends HUBzero (McLennan, 2010), an open-source software
platform that facilitates course creation and content management. BBDTC utilizes HUBzero’s LAMP
stack; a web-portal comprising the Joomla content management system, Apache web server, and

1792

Biomedical Big Data Training Collaborative

Purawat, Cowart, Amaro and Altintas

MySQL database. BBDTC extends HUBzero modules whenever required to meet demands unique to
the Biomedical Big Data research community. The platform is extended to Amazon EC2 Cloud
infrastructure in order to enable scalable Big Data experiments. To facilitate offline learning, users can
download complete packages as Virtualbox images from the BBDTC platform. The HUBzero
platform is further enhanced through the implementation of cross platform integration module. Cross
Platform Integration enables instructors to rapidly build content by leveraging their already existing
courses on other platforms such as edX in a seamless manner.

The BBDTC framework comprises three main components: (i) BBDTC User Interface; (ii)
BBDTC VM Toolbox; and (iii) Cross platform integration module. The components are explained in
further detail in successive sub-sections.

Figure 1: BBDTC Framework

2.1 BBDTC User Interface
BBDTC User Interface is designed with simplicity and usability at the center. It consists of four
major sub-components: (i) course building interface for instructors and course managers; (ii) course
viewing interface for learners; (iii) a repository with playlist functionality for every BBDTC
contributor; and (iv) social media interface for creating an involved learning atmosphere.
Course Building Interface: The platform offers several features to create an online interactive
class through a simple and intuitive interface. A course can be tailored to create multiple ‘offerings’
with a subset of the content changed or updated. An offering is a collection of ‘units’. A unit can be
further broken down into one or more ‘lessons’. Instructors can upload materials, assignments,
assessments, tools using all or any existing options for embedding a video, uploading files, including
a wiki page and attaching web-links. Videos are hosted on BBDTC’s YouTube channel1 and streamed
on a BBDTC course page on user’s computer. Instructors can track the progress of each learner
through course progress bubbles, the real-time updates on quizzes taken, and the breakdown of scores
and grades. Figure 2: BBDTC User Interface Screenshots demonstrations a course outline page, an
embedded video lecture, an online quiz, learner’s grade reporting and progress tracking dashboard.
1

The BBDTC YouTube Channel: https://www.youtube.com/channel/UCj9gpCafVV23WcP_b66Wkdw

1793

Biomedical Big Data Training Collaborative

Purawat, Cowart, Amaro and Altintas

Course Viewer Interface: Course viewer interface is for learners. Learners can only view the
course contents but cannot upload or edit materials. They can track their personal progress and grades.

Figure 2: BBDTC User Interface Screenshots

BBDTC Repository and Playlist Builder: Each learner is unique and needs a course structure
that matches her personal learning requirements. The requirements include attributes such as different
learning pace, prior knowledge of a subject etc. The playlist feature promotes personalization of
content by enabling customization to meet an individual’s requirements. BBDTC offers a central
repository where users contribute by uploading course modules, tools, and datasets. BBDTC allows
researchers to create their own customized catalogue for personalized education by selectively adding
content from the repository. The playlist feature enables users to add materials from the repository
and/or upload their own content, and arrange them in the order that aids their personal learning
requirements. The user interface provides drag and drop function to add contents to the playlist.
Social Media Interface: Learners can utilize functionalities such as forums, discussion boards,
blogs and groups to enhance their knowledge through community involvement. A forum provides an
online discussion area where people can exchange queries, difficulties, concepts and solutions in form
of messages. People with common interest can form peer groups. The group can share contents and
exchange conversations privately or publicly. People in a group can form their own forums for
discussions. Research has shown that collaborative techniques such as Pair Programming (Williams,
2002) results in improved learning outcomes. BBDTC promotes a connected learning atmosphere by
providing multiple channels to collaborate and enhance the learning experience through peer
engagement.

1794

Biomedical Big Data Training Collaborative

Purawat, Cowart, Amaro and Altintas

2.2 Toolbox Integration: Cloud and Local
In line with our goal of maximizing users’ time for learning rather than installing tools, we
introduce tailored pre-installed software environments that enhance the learning experience. Users can
access these toolboxes over the cloud through Amazon EC2 and locally through Oracle Virtualbox
virtualization technologies.
Users with access to the internet can remotely connect to pre-built Amazon EC2 Virtual Machines
for accessing biomedical big data tools and perform scalable big data experiments. We also support
local execution in equally simple style via downloadable Virtualbox Images. Every downloadable VM
contains a standardized software tool environment with all required software packages and test data.
The BBDTC provides an efficient software distribution mechanism using ready-to-go Virtual Machine
Toolboxes. These toolboxes free the user of installation and configuration hassles. Users can directly
get to the task of problem solving using specially customized virtual machines. The notable features of
the two categories is as follows:

• Downloadable VM toolbox on Local Machine: In this category, the software tools are

•

shared as a downloadable Virtualbox Image. The VM toolbox allows users to get a
standardized software tool environment with their required software dependencies and the
necessary test data on their personal machines.
Amazon EC2 VM Toolbox on the Cloud: This category provides a ready-to-go solution
for scalable big data experiments, saving users from setting up a local machine with
necessary hardware specifications. Instead, the users can directly access an Amazon EC2
Virtual Machine through the BBDTC website using a light-client machine. The system
utilizes noVNC (Martin, 2011), an HTML5 based VNC client. The noVNC web-client
communicates with a remote VNC server on Amazon EC2 Cloud infrastructure through
websockets. Figure 3: Amazon EC2 VM Toolbox Integration Architecture demonstrates
Amazon EC2 toolbox integration with BBDTC platform.

Figure 3: Amazon EC2 VM Toolbox Integration Architecture

1795

Biomedical Big Data Training Collaborative

Purawat, Cowart, Amaro and Altintas

We have verified and tested the features of the BBDTC course-building interface. The toolbox
framework is live and linked to an existing online-course on "Scalable Bioinformatics Bootcamp" that
is available to learners through the BBDTC portal.

2.3 Cross Platform Integration
Organizing text, video, and other prepared materials into a new online course can be a significant
effort. Once the new course has been designed, the metadata capturing this organization cannot always
be migrated outside of the online application. The time taken to develop a course online discourages
researchers and educators from redeveloping the same course across several MOOCs, encouraging
‘vendor lock-in’ to a particular provider.

Figure 4: Importing exported edX Studio data

The MOOC provider edX has taken steps to remedy this by defining a specification for XBlocks,
hierarchical components of text, video, assessments, etc., that can be used like building blocks to
construct a new course. Courses constructed using edX’s edX Studio can be exported as an XBlocks
blueprint to an author’s local computer, merged and modified by third-party tools, and imported back
into edX.

1796

Biomedical Big Data Training Collaborative

Purawat, Cowart, Amaro and Altintas

BBDTC has developed a ‘back-end’ tool to process this exported data from edX Studio, and
import it into BBDTC as new courses and resources. This has enabled biomedical big data educators
and researchers, who made early investments into edX, the ability to also provide that content in the
centralized resource that is BBDTC. Similarly, BBDTC is currently working on a tool to perform the
reverse operation, and export courses and resources from BBDTC as XBlocks blueprint; this will
enable courses created using BBDTC’s course building interface to imported into edX as new courses,
or as a library of content to make new courses from.

3 Usage Statistics
In the first year of the development for BBDTC, we offered three complete and open biomedical
training courses during the alpha release of the framework. We received an excellent response with a
total of 162 users registered on the BBDTC website in the year 2015.
The National Biomedical Computation Resource (NBCR) 2 launched two biomedical training
courses on the BBDTC platform in 2015: NBCR Summer Training Program - "Data to Structural
Models” and NBCR & TCBG Joint Training Program - “Simulation-Based Drug Discovery”. These
week-long intensive training programs introduced new principles, methods and NBCR tools to the
biomedical community. The major goals of launching the courses online via BBDTC were to outreach
a broader user base of biomedical research community. It also enabled us to test the platform
capabilities and get feedback from the active users for further improvements. Following are the data
analysis reports from the two courses:
Course 1, NBCR Summer Training Program - "Data to Structural Models”: We received a
total of 31 enrollments for this course. BBDTC provided interface to track learners course progress
and grades. We observed 6 students accessed full course material and 9 completed the quiz. Figure 5:
NBCR Summer Training Program - "Data to Structural Models" represents user profile distribution
according to Career level, Location and Continent.

Figure 5: NBCR Summer Training Program - "Data to Structural Models"

Course 2, NBCR & TCBG Joint Training Program - “Simulation-Based Drug Discovery”:
We received a total of 42 enrollments for this course. Figure 6: NBCR & TCBG Joint Training
Program - "Simulation Based Drug Discovery" represents user profile distribution according to Career
level, Location and Continent.

2

National Biomedical Computation Resource (NBCR) website: http://nbcr.ucsd.edu

1797

Biomedical Big Data Training Collaborative

Purawat, Cowart, Amaro and Altintas

Figure 6: NBCR & TCBG Joint Training Program - "Simulation Based Drug Discovery"

Course statistics information delivered by the BBDTC enables content creators to understand
our learners and to provide a learning experience that goes beyond their expectations. It
promotes course providers to experiment with new learning techniques and recognize how the
learners respond. This structured feedback mechanism of BBDTC accelerates high quality content
creation by iterative upgradation of techniques.

4 Related Work
A series of short tutorial videos, of the kind commonly used in Coursera and other MOOCs, was
recently used to teach two graduate-level biostatistics courses at the Public Health Program at the
University of New Mexico (Hund & Getrich, 2015). Students met twice a week in a computer lab,
with access to the instructor as well as required software. The instructor also held office hours twice a
week. In this setting, students’ overall perception of videos was positive, with 87.5% of the students
stating that the videos were advantageous to their studying. Specifically, students found that shorter
videos were easier to ‘re-watch’ and ‘skim’. “The ability to use the videos in a self-paced and
repetitive manner was consistently cited as a major advantage by the students (Hund & Getrich,
2015).”
Students didn’t view the videos as a replacement for in-class instruction, but as a supplement;
instructors found that the availability of the videos allowed for more time in class to be spent on
discussion. Most importantly, it was found that using videos promoted social support between
classmates (Hund & Getrich, 2015). Although students would watch videos individually, they would
reference and recommend specific videos when communicating with other classmates.
In another study, conducted across six different public institutions, students took the same
introductory course on statistics (Bowen, Chingos, Lack, & Nygren, 2012). At each institution, a
control group took the course in a classroom-based setting, while a second group took a hybrid course.
This hybrid course used software developed at Carnegie Mellon University to guide students’ mode of
instruction, with one face-to-face meeting with an instructor, per week. Results from this study
showed that students in the hybrid course performed as well as students in the classroom-based
setting, in terms of course completion, course grades, and performance on standardized tests.
Recently, a group of researchers conducted a series of surveys with over five hundred students
taking a select group of online courses, over a period of three years (Cole, Shelleu, & Swartz, 2014).
Students found their experience with online instruction only moderately satisfactory, and hybrid
courses were rated with higher satisfaction over purely online courses; lack of interaction with others

1798

Biomedical Big Data Training Collaborative

Purawat, Cowart, Amaro and Altintas

was the most often reason cited for this dissatisfaction. The above research suggests that engagement
with an instructor and/or a community is key to a student’s overall satisfaction and performance when
taking a course. Compared with older online learning paradigms, modern MOOCs are augmented with
social networks that provide community and support through message boards and discussion groups
(Duderstadt & Colloquium, 2013).
Today’s MOOCs are primarily targeted at serving individuals, rather than communities
(Duderstadt & Colloquium, 2013). BBDTC instead focuses on cultivating a community, by offering
multiple social networking tools, and focusing on the biomedical big data community’s particular
needs. Rather than supplanting traditional education, the BBDTC expects to be successful by
supplementing it.

5 Conclusion
Biomedical Big Data Science is a thriving and an exponentially growing community. Scientists
need a quick-access gateway to high-quality knowledge content on topics that interest them. BBDTC
is a community-oriented platform with an aim to promote knowledge sharing and accelerate
information transfer rate from the field experts to an inquisitive learner. Smooth information
dissemination will encourage new approaches and enable community members to combine tools from
diverse domains to solve critical problems.
The collaborative provides essential tools to facilitate content development and deployment of
Biomedical Big Data training and education. The simple and intuitive platform enables the community
to contribute at many different levels such as by adding course modules and playlists, adding new
tools or working with the development team to introduce customized VM packages. BBDTC's fact
based progress tracking dashboard and statistical reports enable content creators to understand learners
and to provide a learning experience that goes beyond their expectations.

6 Future Work
There are several areas in which we plan to expand our current work. To give an experiential view
of a scientific facility, we plan to add Virtual Field Trips to BBDTC. Using this feature, community
members can gain fundamental understanding of each other's strengths to better collaborate. This
feature will enable labs to achieve higher visibility among their target community members.
To further facilitate easy dissemination of read-to-use tools, we plan to automate the VM toolbox
generation process. In addition, we will enhance BBDTC's integration with Amazon AWS, by
launching virtual machines using AMI id information from the BBDTC website.
For fast exchange of MOOC course structure, we plan to extend the ability to import and export
feature to additional platforms that are gaining traction in the community. A user-interface to allow
educators to individually import and export data will also be explored in the future. In the playlist
interface, we plan to include access to course repository and resources from the same interface.
Finally, a tool is only as good as its utility to the stakeholders. We will build incentive for
biomedical researchers to share materials. We will aggressively increase community engagement with
the key stockholders, such as, R25 awardees, BD2K Centers of Excellence, NIH P41 BTRRs by
serving their training and educational material through BBDTC, and acting on feedback at every step.

1799

Biomedical Big Data Training Collaborative

Purawat, Cowart, Amaro and Altintas

7 Acknowledgements
This work is supported by NIH R25 GM114821-01 for BBDTC and P41 GM103426 for NBCR.

References
Bowen, W. G., Chingos, M. M., Lack, K. A., & Nygren, T. I. (2012). Interactive Learning Online
at Public Universities: Evidence from Randomized Trials. Ithaka S+R.
Chapman, B., Calandra, H., Crivelli, S., Dongarra, J., Hittenger, J., Lathrop, S., et al. (2014). DOE
Advanced Scientific Advisory Committee (ASCAC): Workforce Subcommittee Letter. Washington, DC:
USDOE Office of Science.
Cole, M. T., Shelleu, D. J., & Swartz, L. B. (2014). Online Instruction, E-Learning, and Student
Satisfaction: A Three Year Study. The International Review of Research in Open and Distance
Learning , 15 (6), 111-131.
Duderstadt, J. J., & Colloquium, I. G. (2013, June). The Impact of Technology on Discovery and
Learning in Research Universities. Ninth Glion Colloquium , 5-9.
Hund, L., & Getrich, C. (2015). A Pilot Study of Short Computing Video Tutorials in a Graduate
Public Health Biostatistics Course. Journal of Statistics Education , 23 (2).
Martin, J. (2011). noVNC project website. Retrieved from https://kanaka.github.io/noVNC/
McLennan, M. a. (2010). HUBzero: a platform for dissemination and collaboration in
computational science and engineering. Computing in Science & Engineering , 48--53.
Ryabinin, K., & Chuprina, S. (2015). Using Scientific Visualization Tools to Bridge the Talent
Gap. ICCS 2015 International Conference On Computational Science. 51, pp. 1734-1741.
Amsterdam: Elsevier.
Williams, L. a. (2002). In support of pair programming in the introductory computer science
course. Computer Science Education , 197--212.

1800

