Procedia Computer Science
Volume 80, 2016, Pages 752–761
ICCS 2016. The International Conference on Computational
Science

Detecting Informative Patterns in Financial Market Trends
based on Visual Analysis.
Javier Sandoval2 , Jaime Nino3 , German Hernandez4 , and Andrea Cruz1
1

2

Universidad Nacional, Bogota, Colombia
amcruzm@unal.edu.co
Universidad Nacional,Universidad Externado Bogota, Colombia
jhsandovala@unal.edu.co
3
Universidad Nacional, Bogota, Colombia
jhninop@unal.edu.co
4
Universidad Nacional Bogota, Colombia
gjhernandezp@unal.edu.co

Abstract
This paper presents a graphical representation that fully depicts the price-time-volume dynamics in a Limit Order Book (LOB). Based on this pattern representation, a clustering technique
is applied to predict market trends. The clustering technique is tested on information from
the USD/COP market. Competitive trend prediction results were found, and a benchmark for
future extensions was settled.
Keywords: Market Trend, Limit Order Book, Pattern Extraction.

1

Introduction

Every exchange market is organized as a dealership or a limit order market. Current markets
share features from both categories. However, it is possible to identify markets with a dominant
side. In a dealership market, a customer’s order is ﬁlled at a single price quoted by a specialist,
an institutional investor that is in charge of providing liquidity. The price that the specialist
provides for a certain quantity of the corresponding asset does not aﬀect the price that it would
quote for diﬀerent quantities. In dealership markets, dealers are expected to quote prices that
clear the current buy and sell pressure. Examples of markets organized as dealership markets
are NASDAQ and LSE.
In contrast, several exchange markets, including the EURONEXT and the Colombian stock
and FX markets, are organized into what is called, order-driven markets, markets that do not
have a specialized dealer. In limit order markets, participants carry on their trades submitting
752

Selection and peer-review under responsibility of the Scientiﬁc Programme Committee of ICCS 2016
c The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V.

doi:10.1016/j.procs.2016.05.365

Visual Analysis for detecting Financial Trends.

Sandoval,Nino,Hernandez and Cruz

either limit orders or market order. This diﬀerentiation is important because it is directly related to the cost assumed by the agent when executing a buy/sell transaction.
Informally, a limit order is deﬁned as an order that has to be fulﬁlled at a speciﬁc volume
and price. If market conditions are not adequate for executing a limit order, the latter will be
queued in what is called the limit order book until execution or cancellation, whichever occurs
ﬁrst. Orders in the limit order book are organized by price, with the best prices on top. It
means the buy order with the highest price on the buy side of the book and the sell order with
the lowest price on the sell side of the book. If multiple orders have the same price, they are
organized by time of arrival following a FIFO (First In First Out) mechanism.

Figure 1: Snapshot of the limit order book on February 2nd 2011 at 10:20:09 A.M extracted
from the SETFX, the interbank exchange platform. The best fourteen prices and volumes are
presented. ﬁrst column shows average prices, second column shows cumulative volume, third
column shows order volume and forth column shows order prices. Demandas, ofertas, monto,
precio stand for bids, oﬀers, quantity and price respectively.

Figure 1 shows a snapshot of the limit order book for the Colombian exchange market on
February 2nd, 2011 at 10:20:09 A.M extracted from the SETFX, the interbank exchange platform. Suppose a market agent wants to sell 750 thousand dollars at 1852.32. She has to use a
limit order. The later will be placed on the sell (right) side of the limit order book, after the
order to sell 250 thousand dollars at 1852.3 and before the order to sell 250 thousand dollars
at 1852.33. Before the new limit order could be fulﬁlled, orders above of it have to be executed
or canceled.
In contrast to limit orders, market orders deﬁne a speciﬁc volume and no price at which
they have to be executed. Therefore, market orders take their prices from the limit orders
753

Visual Analysis for detecting Financial Trends.

Sandoval,Nino,Hernandez and Cruz

needed to be fulﬁlled. Now, assume that an agent delivers a market order to sell 750 thousand
dollars. Because the agent’s order is a market order, it will be matched with best limit orders
on the corresponding limit order book side. If the market order is a buy (sell) order, it will be
executed using the limit order book sell (buy) side. Therefore, the previous market order will
be fulﬁlled using the ﬁrst two limit orders of the book buy side. The selected limit and market
orders leave the market as executed orders, and the limit order book changed.
Depending on which type of orders participants use, transaction costs will be diﬀerent. Observing ﬁgure 1, if an agent wants to buy 250 thousand dollars, he has to choose between a
market or a limit order. If he decided to use a market order, the execution price would be
1851.5. If he decided to use a limit order, the best he could do is to place an order on the
top of the buy side book, for example, selecting 1851.21 as the limit price. Assuming that the
limit order is executed (remember that the latter is not guaranteed), it will be a diﬀerence of
29 cents between both transactions.
The LOB evolves discretely in time when market buyers and sellers insert, modify or delete
limit orders. However, LOB also changes when market participants demand liquidity using
market orders [3]. Formally, an LOB is considered a variable length list consisted of limit orders where transactions occur at non-uniform time intervals[4].
Recently, there has been a strong interest in modeling and analyzing LOB dynamics to
extract richer information than closing prices to predict market trends [5, 7–12]. Closing prices
are publicly available today to any investors, while LOB information is usually only available to
brokers or professional investors willing to pay for this extra information. However, there is not
overwhelming evidence to support the extra predictability ability of the LOB, or the problem
is too technique or market dependent. For example,[9] and [5] state that the whole LOB helps
to determine price direction, whereas [1] presents results where the further the movement from
the best quotes on the LOB, the less information they convey. On the other hand, [8] uses
changes on the LOB to forecast directly transaction price dynamics without obtaining statistically signiﬁcant results. As evidence is mixed, the problem of predicting ﬁnancial prices using
LOB information seems to be too technique or market dependent.
Although current electronic ﬁnancial markets generate a massive amount of information,
the standard way of approaching LOB modeling has been parametric models that describe the
LOB dynamics in a compact way or ﬂexible agent models based on simulation. See for example [6], where a Kalman ﬁlter is used to estimate current LOB’s states from a linear dynamic
system and [2], where simulation is used to determine agents behavior when exposed to LOB
information to determine trading decisions.
Although parametric and simulation-based models are helpful to understand the dynamics
of LOBs, new eﬃcient methods and hash functions to handle and operate LOB data are necessary [13], specially if researchers and practitioners want to apply non-parametric techniques
to process LOB data. Under this circumstance, this paper starts providing a methodological
approach to managing LOB data in order to extract useful information to construct proﬁtable
trading strategies.
This work is organized as follows: Section 2 presents the experimental setup. Section 3
shows results and discussion. Finally, Section 4 presents conclusions and extensions for future
754

Visual Analysis for detecting Financial Trends.

Sandoval,Nino,Hernandez and Cruz

work.

2

Experimental Setup

This section presents a method for handling large amounts of data in ﬁnancial markets. Experiments were conducted using real trading data from the USD/COP market between March 1
and August 31, 2012. Complete LOB of USD/COP is rebuilt from every market event observed.
Available information includes limit order timestamps, prices, and volumes; LOB data is
summarized every minute and every 20 COP cents in the time/price domain respectively.
LOB volume was quantized in multiples of USD 250,000, the minimum trading volume for
the USD/COP market. The maximum volume observed for a particular order during the period analyzed was 43.5 million US dollars. The maximum price found was 1,862.6 COP, and
the minimum was 1,742.2 COP.
First, this work depicts an LOB Graphical representation to facilitate human traders localize
visual patterns. The suggested visualization was built as follows:
• Book Event Aggregation: Due to USD/COP Market Depth, we chose an aggregating
interval of one minute. We suggest that more liquid markets use aggregation intervals of
30 seconds or even 1 second.
• Price quantization: LOB order prices were mapped to a discretized price grid with a
granularity of 20 COP cents. This quantization helps to deal with the LOB sparsity.
• Volume quantization: Inside the discretized price ranges for every time interval, We averaged tick-by-tick volumes; the higher the averaged volume in certain price level, the
lowest the level of lightness used to represent it.
A similar representation named BookMap X-ray1 is provided by VeloxPro. This representation is also volume inspired. However, it is built in grayscale and it does not take advantage
of chromatic diﬀerences or relationships presented in data.
Deﬁnition 1. Pattern: A matrix representing aggregated volume in the LOB for a speciﬁc
window in the price/time domain.
Deﬁnition 2. Trend: A trend in ﬁnancial markets represents the sign of the price movements
in a particular time interval. One last price, higher(lower) than an initial price shows a positive(negative) trend. According to the distance between prices, a trend is classiﬁed as strong or
weak.
This paper holds the assumption that frequent volume structures in the price/time domain
are informative. If repeating volume patterns were found, it would be reasonable to count every
appearance of each pattern and store the number of times that the pattern is associated with a
speciﬁc trend (in this case bullish or bearish), to calculate the probability of the pattern being
related to a given trend. This process allows labeling frequent patterns in bullish or bearish
formations with the purpose of building a classiﬁer. More elaborate techniques to connect
patterns and price predictions could be explored, however, naive classiﬁers should always be
examined ﬁrst to settle a benchmark for future extensions.
1 http:\\www.bookmap.com.

755

Visual Analysis for detecting Financial Trends.

Sandoval,Nino,Hernandez and Cruz

Figure 2: Example of the Visual Representation used over the USD/COP LOB data. Y-axis
represents USD/COP exchange rates and x-axis captures time intervals using an aggregating
one-min interval. Red means sell volume and green represents buy volume.

2.1

Pattern Exploration and Cluster Analysis.

The original 6-month dataset of LOB information was divided into two subsets. The ﬁrst 70%
of the data was used to train a K-means algorithm and to learn naive market trend abilities for
each cluster. The last 30% of available data was used to test the generalization ability of the
naive classiﬁer based on LOB image clusters.
As shown in Figure 3, the training subset LOB was used to build non-overlapping images
of the LOB centered around the bid-ask spread valid during each image. In detail, every image
patch represents 30 units of the aggregating interval chosen (in this case 1 Min) and 30 units
of the discretized price grid centered around the mid-price, calculated using the best quotes for
every image patch.
Figure 4 shows a sample of images obtained following previous procedure. No pre-processing
technique was run over the image training sample. Therefore, we have built raw LOB images
centered around the bid-ask spread representing current volume dynamics in the most interesting part of the LOB. Images on Figure 4 use green for buy volume and red for sell volume. The
highest the color intensity the highest the volume at that particular price value. White spaces
correspond to an absence of volume in the bid-ask spread.
The resulting images of the training subset correspond to 875 visual LOB patches. Over
these patches, We run a K-means algorithm using Euclidean distance and K = 13. The number
of clusters was experimentally chosen in order to balance the dimensionality reduction process
and the ability to predict future market trends aﬀected by clustering overﬁtting. If the cluster
number was too low, the dimensionality reduction eﬀect is high, but the trend prediction ability
is low and vice-versa.

756

Visual Analysis for detecting Financial Trends.

Sandoval,Nino,Hernandez and Cruz

6

x 10
6

4

2

0

−2

−4

−6

Figure 3: 30 × 30 volume windows representing 30 min and 3 COP up and down from every
mid-price calculated using lowest best buy price and highest best sell price during the selected
time window. Red means sell volume and green represents buy volume.

Figure 4 presents graphically the 13 cluster centroids in the lowest-most row and a sample
of LOB image patches that belong to each image class. The cluster model learned that there
were certain LOB patches with a strong volume on one side and certain price patterns. For
example, Cluster 1 shows uptrend prices with higher sell than buy volume. Cluster 2 shows the
opposite case.
Cluster classes showed a similar frequency of occurrence except for two cases, class 10 and
5. Class 10 corresponds to an initial uptrend followed by ranging prices in a context of light
volume and class 5 corresponds to an initial downtrend followed by stable prices also in a context of low volume. See Figure 5.
After obtaining clusters centroids, We replaced every sample by its corresponding class centroid and determined the connection between each cluster class and a price trend during the
next time window. This information was used to construct a naive classiﬁer based on current
visual LOB information observed.

757

Visual Analysis for detecting Financial Trends.

Sandoval,Nino,Hernandez and Cruz

Figure 4: Clustering of visual patches using K-means and 13 clusters. Bottom-most row presents
a visual representation of every cluster’s centroid. Clusters in the x-axis are organized according
to their probability of being associated to a particular market trend. Clusters 12, 8, 7, 4, 10 are
related to uptrend movements, clusters 5, 6, 9, 3, 13, 11 are related to downtrend movements and
clusters 1, 2 showed a weak tendency to downtrend regimes.
Figure 6 presents conditional probabilities for all clusters organized in descending order,
according to the conditional probability of observing a positive trend in the subsequent LOB
visual patch i.e. during the next 30 mins. The training data shows that cluster 12 had the highest prediction power for uptrend movements and cluster 11 had the highest prediction power
for downtrend movements. There were also found some cluster classes that do not give clear
evidence of being related to a particular market trend.

2.2

Testing Performance of Cluster Analysis

After obtaining 13 cluster classes and their corresponding subsequent market trend sign, the last
30% LOB observations, 375 samples were used to test the generalization ability of the selected
cluster model. We classiﬁed market trend in the subsequent image of every visual patch and
compared forecasting results with realized price directions. Table 1 presents the corresponding
Confusion Matrix calculated over the testing dataset. The True positive rates correspond to
56.84% and 58.39% for up-trend and down-trend respectively. Moreover, as presented on Table
758

Visual Analysis for detecting Financial Trends.

Sandoval,Nino,Hernandez and Cruz

Figure 5: Histogram showing how frequent patterns from each clusters are during the training
sample. X-axis presents each cluster and y-axis is observed frequency during training sample.

2, original interpretation of market trend for classes found in the training set, also persisted
during the testing set. The naive classiﬁer showed a market trend prediction ability superior
to a random classiﬁcation. These results will serve as benchmarks for future extensions focused
on taking advantage of image details to improve model’s prediction ability.

UpTrend Prediction
DownTrend Prediction

UpTrend Outcome
56.84%
41.61%

DownTrend Outcome
43.16%
58.39%

Table 1: Prediction ability of the naive classiﬁer calculated over the testing data.

UpTrend
DownTrend

Training Set
12, 8, 7, 4, 10
11, 13, 3, 9, 6, 5, 2, 1

Testing Set
4, 8, 7, 12, 10
9, 6, 5, 2, 13, 11, 3, 1

Table 2: Market Trend and Cluster association calculated over the training and testing set.
Classes are presented descendently in terms of prediction strength

759

Visual Analysis for detecting Financial Trends.

Sandoval,Nino,Hernandez and Cruz

Figure 6: Conditional probability distribution of future price movement in next 30-min time
window conditional to the current observation of elements from each cluster. X-axis presents
patterns from each cluster and y-axis shows observed probability during training sample.

3

Conclusions

This work introduced a novelty visual representation of the LOB used to trained a cluster
model aimed at forecasting short-term ﬁnancial market trends. The model was tested on LOB
information from the USD/COP using 13 clusters, which were aligned with their corresponding
future market trend. The model’s generalization ability was tested on the last 30% observations
of the dataset using this naive classiﬁer. Every class in the testing set kept its trend association
found during the training phrase. Moreover, the confusion matrix of the proposed classiﬁer
showed superior classiﬁcation results than random guessing. We expect these results to be a
benchmark for future extensions that will focus on learning from details of image patches to
improve model’s forecasting ability.

4

Acknowledgment

The authors thank Algocodex for providing the dataset used in this work.

References
[1] Hee Joon Ahn, Jun Cai, and Yan Leung Cheung. Price clustering on the limit-order book: Evidence
from the Stock Exchange of Hong Kong. Journal of Financial Markets, 8(4):421–451, 2005.

760

Visual Analysis for detecting Financial Trends.

Sandoval,Nino,Hernandez and Cruz

[2] Wei Cheng, Shan Cun Liu, He Ying Jiao, and Wan Hua Qiu. How does limit order book information aﬀect trading strategy and market quality: Simulations of an agent-based stock market.
Proceedings - International Conference on Management and Service Science, MASS 2009, 2009.
[3] J. Doyne Farmer, Paolo Patelli, and Ilija I. Zovko. The Predictive Power of Zero Intelligence in
Financial Markets. 2003.
[4] Martin D Gould, Mason a Porter, Stacy Williams, Mark McDonald, Daniel J Fenn, and Sam D
Howison. Limit Order Books. Quantitative Finance, 13(11):42, 2010.
[5] He Huang and Alec N Kercheval. A generalized birth-death stochastic model for high-frequency
order book dynamics. Quantitative Finance, 12(April 2012):547–557, 2012.
[6] Jian Jiang and Wing Lon Ng. Revealing intraday market eﬃciency - Estimating diurnal price
densities in limit order books. Proceedings - 2009 International Conference on Information and
Financial Engineering, ICIFE 2009, (1985):8–12, 2009.
[7] Mario Onorato and Bunhill Row. An integrated pricing model for defaultable loans and bonds.
European Financial Management, pages 1–20.
[8] D Palguna and I Pollak. Non-parametric Prediction of the Mid-price Dynamics in a Limit Order.
IEEE Statistical Signal Processing Workshop, pages 896–899, 2012.
[9] Roberto Pascual and David Veredas. What pieces of limit order book information matter in
explaining order choice by patient and impatient traders? Quantitative Finance, 9(5):527–545,
2009.
[10] Angelo Ranaldo. Order aggressiveness in limit order book markets. Journal of Financial Markets,
7(1):53–74, 2004.
[11] N Vvedenskaya, Y Suhov, and V Belitsky. A non-linear model of limit order book dynamics. 2011
IEEE International Symposium on Information Theory Proceedings, pages 1260–1262, 2011.
[12] Ming-Chang Wang, Lon-Ping Zu, and Chau-Jung Kuo. The state of the electronic limit order book,
order aggressiveness and price formation. Asia-Paciﬁc Journal of Financial Studies, 37(2):245–296,
2008.
[13] Kilian Weinberger, Anirban Dasgupta, Josh Attenberg, John Langford, and Alex Smola. Feature Hashing for Large Scale Multitask Learning. Proceedings of the 26th Annual International
Conference on Machine Learning, (Icml):(pp. 1113–1120)., 2009.

761

