Procedia Computer Science
Volume 80, 2016, Pages 1061–1070
ICCS 2016. The International Conference on Computational
Science

Trawl-Door Shape Optimization by Space-MappingCorrected CFD Models and Kriging Surrogates
Ingi M. Jonsson1 , Leifur Leifsson1,2 , Slawomir Koziel1 ,
Yonatan A. Tesfahunegn1 , and Adrian Bekasiewicz1
1

Reykjavik University, Reykjavik, Iceland
Iowa State University, Ames, Iowa, U.S.A.
ingij@ru.is, leifur@iastate.edu, koziel@ru.is, yonatant@ru.is, bekasiewicz@ru.is
2

Abstract
Trawl-doors are a large part of the ﬂuid ﬂow resistance of trawlers ﬁshing gear and has considerable eﬀect on the fuel consumption. A key factor in reducing that consumption is by
implementing computational models in the design process. This study presents a robust two
dimensional computational ﬂuid dynamics models that is able to capture the nonlinear ﬂow
past multi-element hydrofoils. Eﬃcient optimization algorithms are applied to the design of
trawl-doors using problem formulation that captures true characteristics of the design space
where lift-to-drag ratio is maximized. Four design variables are used in the optimization process to control the ﬂuid ﬂow angle of attack, as well as position and orientation of a leading-edge
slat. The optimization process involves both multi-point space mapping, and mixed modeling
techniques that utilize space mapping to create a physics-based surrogate model. The results
demonstrate that lift-to-drag maximization is more appropriate than lift-constraint drag minimization in this case and that local search using multi-point space mapping can yield satisfactory
design at low computational cost. By using global search with mixed modeling a solution with
higher quality is obtained, but at a higher computational cost than local search.
Keywords: Trawl-doors, computational ﬂuid dynamics, surrogate-based optimization, space mapping,
kriging interpolation.

1

Introduction

Optimization of trawl-door shapes is a key in minimizing the fuel consumption of ﬁshing trawlers
(Jonsson, 2012; Hermannsson, 2014). Due to the complex ﬂuid ﬂow past the trawl-doors,
accurate computational ﬂuid dynamics (CFD) models are required to resolve the ﬁgures of
merit (the forces acting on the trawl-doors). High cost of the CFD simulations renders the
optimization problem computationally challenging when using conventional techniques.
This paper presents an application of surrogate-based optimization techniques to hydrodynamic shape optimization of trawl-doors. The approach exploits construction of fast data-driven
Selection and peer-review under responsibility of the Scientiﬁc Programme Committee of ICCS 2016
c The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V.

doi:10.1016/j.procs.2016.05.409

1061

Trawl-Door Shape Optimization by Space Mapping-Corrected Kriging Surrogates

Jonsson et al.

surrogate models developed from space-mapping-corrected variable-ﬁdelity CFD simulations.
The resulting surrogate model provides an accurate representation of the design space at a
relatively low cost since it is constructed using fast physics models. The surrogate is iteratively
optimized and updated using the local optimum as an inﬁll point. The algorithm is applied to
lift-to-drag maximization and lift-constrained drag minimization of multi-element trawl-doors
involving four design variables controlling the angle of attack and the trailing-edge slat position
and orientation. The optimized shapes are obtained at a relatively low cost.

2

Problem Formulation

The objective of this work is to optimize the shape and conﬁguration of trawl-doors, where they
are treated as an independent system. The conventional trawl-doors are not considered since
recent studies have revealed that airfoil-shaped trawl-doors, as proposed by Jonsson (2012) and
Hermannsson (2014) are much more eﬃcient than the conventional shape. Here we consider
trawl-doors that are constructed from airfoil-shaped elements with multi-element conﬁgurations.
Three sets of conﬁgurations are presented, main element with leading-edge slat, trailing edge
ﬂap or both as shown in Fig. 1.
In this study there are two diﬀerent objective function formulations. On one hand, we
minimize the drag coeﬃcient for a constant lift coeﬃcient as done in Leifsson et al. (2015),
and on the other we maximize the lift-to-drag ratio. The ﬁrst objective is written as:
min Cd (x) s.t. Cl (x) = const., where Cl is the lift coeﬃcient, Cd is the drag coeﬃcient,
and x is the vector of design variables. The second objective is written as: max Cl (x)/Cd (x).
In this work, the shape of each element and the free-stream velocity V∞ is held constant
through the optimization process. The inclination and position of the leading-edge ﬂap and
the trailing-edge slat, as well as angle of attack are designable parameters. Then the vector
of design variables for multi element trawl-door with leading-edge slat and trailing-edge ﬂap
T
can be written as x = [ xslat /c yslat /c θslat xf lap /c yf lap /c θf lap α ] , where xslat /c is the
slat leading-edge position on the x-axis, yslat /c is the slat leading-edge position on the y-axis,
θslat is the inclination of the slat relative to the x-axis, xf lap /c is the ﬂap leading edge position
on the x-axis, yf lap /c is the ﬂap leading-edge position on the y-axis, θf lap is the inclination of
the ﬂap relative to the x-axis, α is the angle of attack relative to the x-axis and c is the chord
length of the main element. Throughout this study the shape of the elements are normalized,
so that c = 1. All design variables are subjected to bounds, that is l ≤ x ≤ u, where u is the
upper bound of the design variable vector and l is the lower bound.
y
θslat
yslat /c

x
θf lap

α

yf lap /c

V∞
xslat /c

xf lap /c

Figure 1: Two dimensional view of multi-element trawl-door constructed from airfoil shaped
elements
1062

Trawl-Door Shape Optimization by Space Mapping-Corrected Kriging Surrogates

3

Jonsson et al.

Computational Fluid Dynamics Modeling

This section describes the computational ﬂuid dynamics (CFD) modeling for trawl-door ﬂow
analysis in two-dimensions. In particular, the governing equations, computational grid, and
ﬂow solver are described. Furthermore, the section gives results of grid independence studies,
and validation results.

3.1

Governing Equations

The ﬂow is assumed to be steady, incompressible, viscous, and turbulent. Governing equations
are the Reynolds-Averaged Navier-Stokes (RANS) equations with Menter’s Shear-Stress Transport (SST) k − ω turbulence model. Refer to Tannehill and Anderson (1997) for further details
on the governing equations and the SST k − ω turbulence model.

3.2

Flow Solver

The ﬂow solver is coupled velocity-pressure-based formulation. The spatial discretization
schemes are second order for all ﬂow variables and the gradient is found by node based GreenGauss method. Due to complex ﬂow condition at high angles of attack a pseudo-transient option
and high-order relaxation terms are used to obtain stable convergence. The solution controls
were set with ﬂow Courant number as 40, momentum and pressure relaxation factors were 0.10.
The under relaxation factors for both turbulent kinetic energy and speciﬁc dissipation rate were
set to 0.8, while higher order term relaxation factor for ﬂow variables were set to 0.25.

3.3

Computational Grid

The goal was to have a grid with good quality and that could be generated both automatically and robustly according to updated geometries proposed by the optimizer. Unstructured
triangular grid was chosen, it is generated more automatically and robustly when dealing with
complex geometries than structured grids Mavriplis (1997). The far-ﬁeld was conﬁgured with
a box-topology, extending 100 main element chord-lengths c in all directions from the leading
edge of the main element that was located in the center of the box. The far-ﬁeld has to be
located relatively far away from the trawl-door so that the ﬂow generated by the boundary
conditions is fully developed at the trawl-door for consistency of the ﬂow solution. The triangular grid is clustered around the trawl-door geometry, and grows in size as it gets closer to
the far-ﬁeld where the maximum size is deﬁned as 10c. The initial size of the triangular grid,
closest to the trawl-door is deﬁned by the spacing between elements of the prismatic inﬂation
layer that is extruded from all geometry surfaces. The role of the inﬂation layer is to capture
characteristics of the boundary-layer and spacing between elements in stream-wise direction is
determined by performing a grid convergence study. 10 prismatic layers were extruded from the
geometry with exponential growth ratio of 1.2 and the initial layer height were set to 2.5e−5
for the optimized geometries so that the non-dimensional wall distance y + < 1. An example
grid is given in Fig. 2.

3.4

Convergence Study

Figure 3a shows a grid convergence study for a trawl-door with a NACA 2412 main element and
a NACA 3210 leading edge slat placed at x = −0.18 y = −0.08. The length of the slat is 20%
of the length of the main element and at an angle of 35◦ . The assembly is placed at an angle of
1063

Trawl-Door Shape Optimization by Space Mapping-Corrected Kriging Surrogates

(a) Farﬁeld

Jonsson et al.

(b) Close-up to the trawl-door

Figure 2: Example grid for multi-element trawl-door.

1,000

250

Lift count
Drag count

900
800

200

700
Time [min]

600
500
400

150

100

300
200

50

100
0 3
10

104
105
Number of grid elements

0 3
10

106

(a)

104
105
Number of grid elements

106

(b)

Figure 3: Grid convergence study.
attack of 5◦ and the velocity were set at 2m/s. It can be seen that the ﬁrst three grid triplets
consists of coarse and unreliable grids inheriting high uncertainties. The uncertainty reduces
as the grids get ﬁner and the solution more stabled, until it reaches a minimum at grid triplet
seven where the solution is considered converged. For that reason grid number 9 with 4,800
elements distributed over the main element in stream-wise direction, resulting in total number
of approximately 517,000 elements was chosen for the optimization process for this geometry.
Figure 3b shows how the computational time increases as the total number of elements grow,
resulting in a computational time of 170 minutes for the chosen grid.

4

Optimization Methodology

In this section, we describe the optimization methodology. In particular, we describe the general surrogate-based optimization algorithm, and surrogate construction for local and global
searches. The local search is performed using multi-point output space mapping surrogates,
and the global search with space-mapping-enhanced kriging surrogate models.
1064

Trawl-Door Shape Optimization by Space Mapping-Corrected Kriging Surrogates

4.1

Jonsson et al.

Surrogate-Based Optimization Algorithm

The optimization problem, discussed in Section 2, is cast as a nonlinear constrained minimization:
x∗ = arg min H(f (x)) s.t. g(x)) ≤ 0,

(1)

x

where f is the high-ﬁdelity model response, H is the objective function, and g is an inequality
T
constraint. The model response f (x) = [Cl,f Cd,f ] where Cl,f and Cd,f are the lift and drag
coeﬃcients obtained by the high-ﬁdelity model. For lift-to-drag maximization the objective
function takes the form H(f (x)) = −Cl,f (x)/Cd,f (x), and for drag minimization H(f (x)) =
Cd,f (x) with g(x) = Cl,t − Cl,f (x) where Cl,t = const..
In this work, we solve (1) by using the surrogate-based optimization (SBO) concept (Queipo
et al., 2006; Forrester and Keane, 2009; Koziel, 2011; Koziel et al., 2013). The idea behind SBO
is to replace direct optimization of an expensive computational model by an iterative process
in which a sequence of designs approximating the solution to the original optimization problem
is generated by means of optimizing a fast yet reasonably accurate representation of the highﬁdelity model, referred to as a surrogate. In each iteration, the surrogate model is updated
using the high-ﬁdelity model evaluation at the most recent design (and, sometimes, some other
suitably selected designs). Formally speaking, the surrogate-based optimization process can be
written as (Koziel et al., 2013)
x(i+1) = arg min H(s(i) (x))

(2)

x

where x(i), i = 0, 1, . . . , is a sequence of approximate solutions to the original problem (1),
whereas s(i) is the surrogate model at the i th iteration. x(0) is the initial design.
The main prerequisite for the process (2) to be computationally eﬃcient is the surrogate
model s being signiﬁcantly faster than the high-ﬁdelity model f. At the same time, the surrogate
has to be suﬃciently accurate (in terms of representing the high-ﬁdelity model). In case of local
search methods, reasonable accuracy is only requested in the vicinity of the current design x(i) .
If both conditions are satisﬁed, the algorithm (2) is likely to quickly converge to the high-ﬁdelity
model optimum x∗ .

4.2

Local Search with Multi-Point Output Space Mapping Surrogates

A generic multi-point space mapping surrogate at iteration i in the SBO algorithm (2) (Koziel
et al., 2006)
s(i) (x) = s(x, p(i) ),

(3)

where the parameters p are found by parameter extraction by solving a nonlinear minimization
problem of the form
p(i) = arg min
P

i

wi,k

f(x(k) ) − s(x(k) , p)

2

,

(4)

k=0

where wi,k are weighting coeﬃcients. The surrogate s can be constructed based on the model
inputs x, and p (input space mapping (Koziel et al., 2006)), or based the model outputs
(output space mapping (Koziel and Leifsson, 2012)). In both cases, a low-ﬁdelity model c is
used in place of the high-ﬁdelity model f. c can be derived from simpliﬁed physics models,
1065

Trawl-Door Shape Optimization by Space Mapping-Corrected Kriging Surrogates

Jonsson et al.

coarse model discretization, or a combination of the two (see, e.g., (Leifsson and Koziel, 2015)).
The minimization problem (4) aligns the surrogate model with the high-ﬁdelity model using
samples of both the high- and low-ﬁdelity models gathered locally during the search process,
i.e., minimized the diﬀerence of f and s in a least square sense using the samples at each design
iteration k = 0, 1, . . . , i.
For aero/hydrodynamic output responses from CFD models, Koziel and Leifsson (2012)
suggested the following multi-point output space mapping surrogate form
s(i) (x) = A(i) ◦ c(x) + D(i) + q(i) = al (i) Cl.c (x) + dl (i) + ql (i) ad (i) Cd.c (x) + dd (i) + qd (i)

T

,
(5)
where ◦ denotes component-wise multiplication, c is the low-ﬁdelity model, and the response
correction parameters A(i) and D(i) are obtained by solving
A(i) , D(i) = arg min

[A,D]

i

f(x(k) ) − A ◦ c (x(k) ) + D

2

.

(6)

k=0

The response scaling improves the matching for all points previously iterated. The additive
response correction term q(i) is deﬁned as (Koziel and Leifsson, 2012)
q(i) = f(x(i) ) − A(i) ◦ c(x(i) ) + D(i)

(7)

to make sure that there is perfect matching between the surrogate and the high-ﬁdelity model
at zero order consistency condition x(i) , s(i) (x(i) ) = f(x(i) ).
The response correction parameters A(i) , D(i) and the response scaling q(i) can be calculated
analytically (Koziel and Leifsson, 2012)
al (i)
= (CTl Cl )−1 CTl Fl
dl (i)
(8)
(i)

ad
= (CTd Cd )−1 CTd Fd
dd (i)
where
Cl =

Cl.c (x(0) )
1

Cl.c (x(1) )
1

···
···

Cl.c (x(i) )
1

T

(9)
(0)

Fl =

Cl.f (x
1

)

Cd =

Cd.c (x(0) )
1

(1)

Cl.f (x
1

(i)

)

···
···

Cl.f (x )
1

Cd.c (x(1) )
1

···
···

Cd.c (x(i) )
1

T

and
T

(10)
Fd =
1066

Cd.f (x(0) )
1

Cd.f (x(1) )
1

···
···

Cd.f (x(i) )
1

T

Trawl-Door Shape Optimization by Space Mapping-Corrected Kriging Surrogates

Jonsson et al.
(i)

(i)

This is the least-square optimal solution to the linear regression problem Cl al + dl = Fl and
(i)
(i)
Cd ad + dd = Fd , equivalent to (6).

4.3

Global Search with Space-Mapping-Corrected Kriging Surrogate
Models

Koziel and Bandler (2007) suggested creating a surrogate by mixing data-driven methods
(Queipo et al., 2006; Forrester and Keane, 2009) with physics-based surrogate models (Koziel
et al., 2013; Leifsson et al., 2015). In this work, we follow the approach by (Koziel and Bandler, 2012) for modeling of microwave devices and construct a global surrogate model using
kriging interpolation (Forrester and Keane, 2009) and enhance it with space mapping (Koziel
and Leifsson, 2012). More speciﬁcally, the low-ﬁdelity model c is used to construct the kriging
model and the output space mapping technique is used correct it using a limited amount of
high-ﬁdelity model f samples.
Using (5), the output space mapping surrogate is then given by
s(i) (x) = A(i) ◦ ˜s(x) + D(i) = al (i) Cl.˜s (x) + dl (i) ad (i) Cd.˜s (x) + dd (i)

T

,

(11)

where ˜s = [Cl.˜s Cd.˜s ]T is the kriging surrogate model. The parameters A(i) and D(i) are still
calculated using (8)-(10), but with ˜s in place of c.
Kriging is a Gaussian process based modeling method, which is compact and cheap to
evaluate Journel and Huijbregts (1981); Simpson et al. (2001); Kleijnen (2009); Rasmussen and
Williams (2005). In its basic formulation, kriging assumes that the function of interest is of the
following form Journel and Huijbregts (1981); Simpson et al. (2001)
f(x) = g(x)T β + Z(x),

(12)

T

T

where g(x) = [g1 (x) g2 (x) . . . gK (x) ] are known (e.g., constant) functions, β = [β1 β2 . . . βk ]
are the unknown model parameters (hyperparameters), and Z(x) is a realization of a normally distributed Gaussian random process with zero mean and variance σ 2 . The regression
part g(x)T β is a trend function for f, and Z(x) takes into account localized variations. The
covariance matrix of Z(x) is given as
Cov Z(x(i) )(x(j) ) = σ 2 R

R(x(i) , x(j) )

,

(13)

where R is a p × p correlation matrix with Rij = R(x(i) , x(j) ). Here, R(x(i) , x(j) ) is the
correlation function between sampled data points x(i) and x(j) . The most popular choice is the
Gaussian correlation function
n

θk |xk − yk | ,

R(x, y) = exp −

(14)

k=1

where θk are the unknown correlation parameters, and xk and yk are the k th components of
the vectors x and y, respectively. The kriging predictor is deﬁned as
˜s(x) = g(x)T β + rT (x)R−1 (F − Gβ),
T

(15)
T

where r(x) = R(x, x(1) ) . . . R(x, x(p) ) , F = f(x(1) ) f(x(2) ) . . . f(x(p) ) , and G is a p×K
matrix with Gij = gj (x(i) ). The vector of model parameters β can be computed as β =
1067

Trawl-Door Shape Optimization by Space Mapping-Corrected Kriging Surrogates

Jonsson et al.

(GT R−1 G)−1 GT R−1 f. Model ﬁtting is accomplished by maximum likelihood for θ k Journel
and Huijbregts (1981).

5

Numerical Example

This section presents the results of a numerical example illustrating the proposed approach
applied to the design of a trawl-door shape with a main element and a leading-edge slat.

5.1

Description

The high-ﬁdelity model has about 517,000 elements (grid 9). The ﬂow solver convergence criteria
were set to 5,000 iterations, or when residuals had dropped by six orders of magnitude. The
low-ﬁdelity model is the same as the high-ﬁdelity one, but with a coarser mesh discretization
and relaxed convergence criteria. The selected grid has about 15,000 elements (grid 4) and
the model is considered converged after a ﬁxed number of 500 ﬂow solver iterations. The low
ﬁdelity model is on average around 78 times faster than the high-ﬁdelity one.
The problem formulation is discussed in Section 2. We perform two local searches using
multi-point output space mapping (described in Section 4.2), one for each objective function
setup (as described in Section 4.1), and one global search (described in Section 4.2).
The ﬂow speed is set to 2 m/s. The search space is deﬁned as: −0.35 ≤ xf lap /c ≤ −0.17,
−0.08 ≤ yf lap /c ≤ 0.07, 10 ≤ θf lap ≤ 40 deg, 5.0 ≤ α ≤ 35 deg. The initial design is set as
xf lap /c = −0.2, yf lap /c = −0.08, θf lap = 25 deg and α = 8 deg.

5.2

Results

Table 1 summarizes the optimization results. When all the optimization results are examined, they all yield satisfactory results. In all of the cases, optimum results for design variable xslat /c is within the range of −0.200 ≤ xslat /c ≤ −0.205 and yslat /c within
−0.0558 ≤ xslat /c ≤ −0.0800 whether the objective is to maximize Cl /Cd or minimize Cd .
Even though the consistency is not as good between simulation results for design variables θ
and α, the solutions are considered valid. The reason is that there are more than one equally
good solutions for the problem at hand.
The highest lift-to-drag ratio of 82.1 is obtained by using global search. However, the
diﬀerence between the two search methods is negligible considering the numerical noise present
in the simulations. The case where the objective is to minimize Cd for given lift is not considered
comparable in context of lift-to-drag values. Even though the nature of the problem requires
the solution to be on top part of the lift-to-drag curve it is not constraint to the highest point.
If computational eﬃciency of the optimization runs is examined, the global search needs
the longest computational time. The reason is a high number of low-ﬁdelity evaluations, even
though the low-ﬁdelity model is computationally inexpensive compared to the high-ﬁdelity one
the high number of 900 evaluations take over 63 hours to compute. The advantages of this
method are that the number of evaluations are directly related to the size of the search space
(i.e., a smaller search space may translate to fewer evaluations). Another advantage is that only
one high-ﬁdelity evaluation is needed after the kriging surrogate has been constructed. Figure
4 shows the space-mapping-corrected kriging surface.
There is also much diﬀerence in computational time of the optimization process using multipoint SM. The case that minimizes Cd needs much higher number of both low- and high-ﬁdelity
evaluations. In that optimization run, the low-ﬁdelity model is of lower quality than in the other
1068

Trawl-Door Shape Optimization by Space Mapping-Corrected Kriging Surrogates

Jonsson et al.

Table 1: Numerical results.

Objective
x/cslat
y/cslat
θ [deg]
α [deg]
Cl
Cd
Cl /Cd
Evaluations HF/LF
Runtime gain ratio
Total runtime [hours]

Local Search I

Local Search II

Global Search

min Cd , Cl ≥ 1.2
-0.200
-0.0630
24.1
8.38
1.20
0.0150
78.4
14/400
≈ 78
≈ 55

max Cl /Cd
-0.200
-0.0800
29.3
12.3
1.67
0.0204
81.8
4/83
≈ 18
≈ 19

max Cl /Cd
-0.205
-0.0558
25.5
10.7
1.48
0.0180
82.1
1/900
≈ 67

(a) The black dot represents the optimum solution

(b) Closer view

Figure 4: Slice parallel to the xslat /c, yslat /c surface of the kriging model at optimum location
of θ = 20.5 deg. and α = 10.7 deg.

cases, but instead the computational time for each low-ﬁdelity evaluation is much lower. This
diﬀerence is also aﬀected by the objective value needed for the model to be converged.

6

Conclusion

A computationally eﬃcient optimization methodology for the hydrodynamic design of multielement trawl-door shapes using high-ﬁdelity two-dimensional CFD models has been presented.
Our approach exploits variable-ﬁdelity models corrected using space mapping, and kriging interpolation surrogates. Numerical design studies of multi-element trawl-door shapes illustrate
that satisfactory designs can be obtained at a low computational cost.
1069

Trawl-Door Shape Optimization by Space Mapping-Corrected Kriging Surrogates

Jonsson et al.

References
J. Forrester and A. Keane. Recent advances in surrogate-based optimization. Progress in
Aerospace Sciences, 45:50–79, 2009.
E. Hermannsson. Hydrodynamic shape optimization of trawl doors with three-dimensional computational ﬂuid dynamic models and local surrogates. Master’s thesis, KTH Royal Institute
of Technology, 2014.
E. Jonsson. Aerodynamic optimization by variable-resolution modeling and space mapping.
Master’s thesis, School of Science and Engineering, Reykjavik University, 2012.
A. Journel and C. Huijbregts. Neural network inverse modeling and applications to microwave
ﬁlter design. IEEE Transactions on Microwave Theory and Techniques, 56:867–879, 1981.
J. Kleijnen. Kriging metamodeling in simulation: a review. European Journal of Operational
Research, 192:707–716, 2009.
S. Koziel. Reliable design optimization of microwave structures using multipoint-responsecorrection space mapping and trust regions. International Journal of RF and Microwave
Computer-Aided Engineering, 21:534–542, 2011.
S. Koziel and J. Bandler. Microwave device modeling using space-mapping and radial basis
functions. IEEE MTT-S Int. Microwave Symposium Digest, 55:799–802, 2007.
S. Koziel and J. Bandler. Accurate modeling of microwave devices using kriging-corrected space
mapping. International Journal of Numerical Modelling, 25:1–4, 2012.
S. Koziel and L. Leifsson. Knowledge-based airfoil shape optimization using space mapping. In
30th AIAA Applied Aerodynamics Conference, 2012.
S. Koziel, J. Bandler, and K. Madsen. Theoretical justiﬁcation of space-mapping-based modeling
utilizing a data base and on-demand parameter extraction. IEEE Trans. Microwave Theory
Tech., 54:4316–4322, 2006.
S. Koziel, L. Leifsson, and S. Ogurtsov. Surrogate-Based Modeling and Optimization. Applications in Engineering. Springer, 2013.
L. Leifsson and S. Koziel. Variable-resolution shape optimization: low-ﬁdelity model selection
and scalability. Int. J. of Mathematical Modelling and Numerical Optimisation, 6:1–21, 2015.
L. Leifsson, E. Hermansson, and S. Koziel. Optimal shape design of multi-element trawl-doors
using local surrogate models. Journal of Computational Science, 10:55–62, 2015.
D. Mavriplis. Unstructured grid techniques. Fluid Mechanics, 29:473–514, 1997.
N. Queipo, R. Haftka, W. Shyy, T. Goel, R. Vaidynathan, and P. Tucker. Surrogate-based
analysis and optimization. Progress in Aerospace Sciences, 41:1 – 28, 2006.
C. Rasmussen and C. Williams. Gaussian Processes for Machine Learning. The MIT Press,
2005.
T. Simpson, T. Maurey, J. Korte, and F. Mistree. Kriging models for global approximation in
simulation-based multidisciplinary design optimization. AIAA Journal, 39:2233–2241, 2001.
J. Tannehill and D. Anderson. Computational Fluid Mechanics and Heat Transfer. Taylor &
Francis, 1997.
1070

