Procedia Computer Science
Volume 80, 2016, Pages 345–355
ICCS 2016. The International Conference on Computational
Science

Identifying Venues for Female Commercial Sex Work
Using Spatial Analysis of Geocoded Advertisements
Daniil Voloshin, Ivan Derevitskiy, Ksenia Mukhina and
Vladislav Karbovskii
1
ITMO University, Saint-Petersburg, Russia
achoched@gmail.com, iderevitskiy@gmail.com, mukhinaks@gmail.com,
vladislav.k.work@gmail.com

Abstract
Despite being widely visible on the web, Internet-promoted commercial sex work has so far attracted
limited attention from the side of researchers. Current studies outline the issues that new forms of sex
work are associated with, however, very little is known to date about their spatial manifestation. In
this research we follow the environmental perspective in spatial analysis of crime and deviance with
the assumption that the location of venues for provision of commercial sex work can be modeled via
the algorithms trained on the distribution of possible correlates in the proximity to the existing venues.
Visualization of the acquired results is presented herein along with the errors and score metrics for
evaluation of the applicability of specific methods of machine learning. The paper is concluded with
the estimation of potential extensions and peculiarities of data used in the research.
Keywords: spatial analysis, commercial sex work, machine learning, data analysis, venue location

1 Introduction
Commercial sex work itself and an ever-extending range of accompanying problems pose a
constant challenge for policymakers, specialists in public health and law enforcement, society in
general and, what is more important, for those exploited in the industry (who are estimated to amount
to 4.5 million people [1], [2]). It has not avoided the influence of the development of communicative
technologies which has partially shaped its modern image. Given the advantages Internet offers,
people involved into commercial sex work in different roles have seemingly minimized their physical
visibility in the eyes of law enforcement and public health officials and acquired new techniques of
“recruiting” and addressing potential clients with new services more efficiently. Despite the on-going
virtualization of commercial sex service, Internet-mediated escort has not yet replaced completely [3]
the street-based commercial sex work. Instead, it raised new threats and kept the workers nearly as
vulnerable as they were before web services became an important part of so-called shadow economy.

Selection and peer-review under responsibility of the Scientiﬁc Programme Committee of ICCS 2016
c The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V.

doi:10.1016/j.procs.2016.05.349

345

Predicting Venues for Female Commercial Sex Work

D. Voloshin et al

Moreover, it has put to trial the methods and approaches previously incorporated by officials and other
stakeholders fighting human trafficking. Provision of services in-question has not lost its physical
manifestation, but the tasks for analysis of its scope became more complex as the available data
became more voluminous and ambiguous. Taking that into account, it is assumed herein that the
development of new techniques in studying spatial dimension of commercial sex work is required.
The motivation behind the need for more advanced spatial analysis of commercial sex work stems
from a number of considerations. First of all, it might be beneficial for understanding the topologies of
networks of sexual contacts used in the research on dissemination of sexually-transmitted infections
[4]. Moreover, it can be used to inform the strategies for allocating resources aimed at securing sexual
workers and preventing dangerous behavior among both providers of escort services and their clients.
From the urban studies perspective, assessment of the venue-choice strategies of commercial sex
service may bring new insights into the construction and transformation of the image of certain areas
of big cities as well as the role of different factors affecting the emergence of areas characterized by
the concentration of facilities of certain type. Finally, spatial analysis of data on commercial sex
service venues can provide a basis for the detection of clusters of establishments that are potentially
involved into human trafficking and forced labor. Though all of the abovementioned tasks can be
approached with the retrospective analysis of data, elaboration of the predictive models is suggested
here to account for the changing environmental conditions of commercial sex work.
In the domain of crime time and location analysis (which is now attracting increasing attention in
both law enforcement practice and academia [5]), the issues of preventing the solicitation and
provision of illegal services and goods have been already addressed [6], however, this topic is still
somewhat understudied, compared to the similar investigations of violent and property crime types [7]
[8]. Moreover, it can be claimed that spatial mapping and analysis of the web-mediated commercial
sex service is still yet to be addressed in the literature. In this paper an extension of the use of spatial
analysis techniques and approaches developed in criminology is proposed. Present research follows
the logic of the ecological perspective in predictive crime analysis and aims at observing the trends
behind the location of venues for commercial sex work based on the influence of the surrounding
physical structures and objects (entertainment facilities, police stations, transport, rental flats) that are
expected to facilitate or hinder the location of establishments or residence of the individual providers
of commercial sex service. The area under investigation has been limited to the administrative
boundaries of Saint-Petersburg, Russia. Data on distribution of primary units of analysis (existing
commercial sex venues) have been gathered from open access sources – specialized websites that
promote sexual service in the city. Areas of potential emergence of new venues are acquired herein
through the use of predictive models trained on multiple sources of spatial data.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows: first, a survey of relevant research is presented, with
two areas of prime interest: commercial sex work and spatial analysis of crime. Paper then proceeds
with the description of the methodology that has been applied to the description and analysis of the
geocoded data as well as the discussion of the model that has been developed based on the relations
between the variables. Further on, results of the exploratory research are presented. The paper is
concluded with the key deliverables of the research along with the proposed directions for future
studies.

2 Related works
For a long period of time different forms of commercial sex work, predominantly – prostitution,
has been in focus of the researchers from different fields (with certain subjects dominating the
research at different times [9]). For instance, in the domain of public health studies the phenomenon of
commercial sex has been mostly viewed from the perspective of substance use on health conditions of
commercial sex workers [10]. However the major interest towards the investigation of prostitution is

346

Predicting Venues for Female Commercial Sex Work

D. Voloshin et al

fueled by the role that it plays in the transition of sexually transmitted infections (STI) [11]. A number
of studies [12] suggested using sexual contact network analysis in order to outline the risks for the
commercial sex workers as well as their clients and sexual partners of both groups. Some of them
assumed that geography of the nodes and topology of the networks can have effect on the transmission
of the STI’s [13], [14]. Another issue that is addressed in studies of commercial sex work is human
trafficking [1] and related involvement into prostitution [15]. In the recent years, a growing body of
research emerged that addresses the role of Internet in empowering sex trafficking [16]–[19] and
moreover – the side-effects that increase the vulnerability of the sexual workers and impunity of their
clients.
With the advent of web technologies commercial sex work in its various forms have found new
possibilities for both arranging and providing sexual service to the clients via Internet, as well as
finding new targets for human trafficking. It has been suggested [13] that this form of information
spreading is perceived by the clients as a more effective and safe form of interaction with other clients
and providers of sexual service. It has been as well noted [13] that the number of sex service providers
does not grow linearly with the population of the city under investigation. In this research this
observation is tested in a different manner through the analysis of the relation between the local
residential population densities inside the city and the “hot-spots” of escort provision. It is also worth
noting that there is currently a lack of research that focus on the investigation of the web-based
prostitution on the intra-city level, since the majority of research deals with data on scales larger than a
single city.
Though internet-mediated prostitution is generally perceived as being a domain of individual
commercial sex workers practicing independently from brothels and other establishments of the kind,
there is a growing body of research that seeks to detect the cases of human trafficking in the overall
mass of escort web advertising. For instance, in the approach proposed by [20] the opportunity for
human traffickers, provided by the classified advertising services (such as Craiglist.com and
Backdoor.com) is used for the benefits of law enforcers. Analysis of the full-text contents of
advertisements (through the identification of common expressions patterns) and meta—data is
assumed to be useful in identifying potential cases of forced involvement into prostitution and patterns
of traffickers’ relocations. Other researchers [21] take the idea even further and propose to use the data
from classified advertisements to identify potential traffickers and, provoking the artificial denial of
service of the telephone numbers listed in the entries, make such web advertising useless [21]. A more
systematic approach is being taken by [22] and [23] who propose to use the machine-learning
algorithms, informed by the practitioners in the sphere of fighting human trafficking, to analyze the
textual contents of the advertising and adjust the models that would effectively separate the cases of
individual provision of sexual service from the forced involvement into the sex trade. One of the main
benefits that these approaches present is the use of so-called weak features in order to classify the
entries other than relying solely on strong features, such as telephone numbers that appear to be
dynamic. Despite these approaches showing plausible results, there is a significant limitation that
hinders their wide application – their dependence on the availability of large amounts of reasonably
consistent data presented in a textual form. This condition is especially sensitive if one considers the
cases of specialized websites such as the ones analyzed in the present research – which store the data
in partially closed format with minimum verbal descriptions attached.
Considering the spatial analysis of commercial sex work, it is worth noting that the majority of
studies to date have been focused on describing the localities of street-based [24], [25] and
establishment-based escort [26], [27] and thus seem to have neglected the possibility of investigating
the ways web-based commercial sex work is materialized in the urban space and what are the areas of
intersection between the two of these types. In order to fill this gap, present study suggests exploring
the possibility of setting up a model based on the open data from web escort advertising websites for
identifying potential locations of new commercial sex venues.

347

Predicting Venues for Female Commercial Sex Work

D. Voloshin et al

Since commercial sex work is both a complex social phenomenon and an area of occupation,
which is stigmatized in the majority of the modern societies, for a long time it has been of prime
interest for practitioners and researchers from the fields related to public health, social service and law
enforcement. In the latter domain a number of techniques have emerged that assist the analysis of the
scope and spatial patterns of the problem on a regional or city level. Spatial analysis of crime has been
initially motivated by the practitioners and policy makers who sought for mechanisms of sex service
solicitation prevention. For quite a long time advances in both theory and practice were focused on
understanding the background, motivation and behavioral patterns of individual offenders [28]. Along
with the latter the interest has been as well paid towards the understanding of the social embeddedness
of crime, its ethnicity, socio-economic and other features of communities [29], [30]. When it became
obvious that crime events are distributed unequally through the space [31], practitioners and
researchers started developing concept-backed methodologies that would allow the detection of areas,
where most of the law violations happen.
Over the course of time, a number of techniques have been developed with some of them
successfully engaged into the everyday practice of police departments. The most common way to
categorize them found in the literature [7] is to divide them into retrospective (also referred to as “hot
spot mapping”) analysis official crime records (which incorporates a wide range of techniques [8]) and
more sophisticated, theory-backed analytical methodologies like Risk Terrain Modeling [32]. The
difference between the two approaches is that hot spot mapping derives predictions for future
occurrences of crime based on the locations and congregations of already-registered law violations,
thus hypothesizing that crimes are likely to happen in those areas where cases of greater incidence
frequency or quantity are concentrated [28]. Risk Terrain Modelling extends the application of
geocoded official crime records with an overlay of the data on spatial distribution of the factors that
have been empirically proved to correlate with an increase or decrease in the risk of the incidence of
new crime events of a certain type (residential burglary, car theft, aggravated assault etc.). As a result
of applying such a technique an ad-hoc map (produced for the particular spatial unit of analysis)
representing the areas of relatively higher or lower risk is acquired and used to inform future crime
mitigation operations.
Though present research has been significantly inspired by Risk Terrain Modeling and partially by
its predecessor, there is a number of limitations that do not allow a straightforward application of the
above-mentioned techniques currently developed in criminology. First of all, both approaches require
substantial history of records of actual crimes in order to make predictions reasonable and statistically
significant. In this sense, access to the reliable and systematic data on crime is required, which is to
times exclusive for the researchers affiliated with law enforcement agencies or their partners.
Secondly, as it has been mentioned above, the empirical and conceptual basis behind the prediction of
future locations of internet-mediated commercial sex work is now limited. In order to address this
issue, it is proposed to explore first the relevance of the correlates of the street-based commercial sex
work found in the literature [32] as well as the ones suggested in this paper given their alleged link to
the elements of infrastructure purportedly required for the promotion and provision of commercial sex
services (referred to as opportunities in the field of crime studies [33]). Along with the attractors and
generators of the observed type of illegal activities, the role of the mitigating factors in “repelling”
commercial sex venues (the presence of the police stations in the nearest proximity) is assessed as
well.

3 Dataset description
Geoinformation systems (GIS), which are proclaimed to be a perspective technology to assist
policy-making in the field of crime prevention [34] are as well used by those people standing behind
the internet-mediated commercial sex trade (whether they are managers or individual providers of

348

Predicting Venues for Female Commercial Sex Work

D. Voloshin et al

commercial sex services) and the final consumers of the service – the clients of escort agencies,
brothels or individual sex workers. Though this factor facilitates the expansion of the escort economy,
it nevertheless provides researchers with a flexible source of easily quantifiable data.
The following is the description of the datasets used for mapping the approximate locations of the
venues for commercial sex service provision and distribution of the points marking the presence of the
environmental factors that are expected to correlate with them. The inclusion of a primary set of
factors has been motivated by assumptions derived from the existing literature on the spatial correlates
of another type of commercial sex work – street prostitution [35]–[37]. Two types of datasets for the
case of Saint Petersburg have been collected and analyzed:
1.

2.

Independent variable-related: originally the dataset included point locations of bars, saunas,
objects of so-called adult industry (entertainment facilities that might potentially attract major
flows of clients), police stations (spatial limiters of illegal activities including commercial sex
trade), metro stations (denoting accessibility of the regions where commercial sex venues
might cluster) and hotel or apartment accommodation offers (suggested herein as an important
part of the commercial sex infrastructure). Further on, it was extended with additional
categories in order to explore a wider range of latent correlates: banks, tourist attractions,
shops, parking lots, beauty salons, industrial sites, etc. Moreover, point data have been
supplemented with municipality-level population density and inequality statistics. The data on
differences in well-being among residents of municipalities has been derived from the study of
spatial characteristics of socioeconomic inequality in St. Petersburg [38]. Author assessed
well-being through weighted sum of the following attributes: property taxation rates, selfemployed to working population share, higher education attainment and the proportion of
residents holding a scientific degree.
Dependent variable-related: geocoded advertisements data collected from websites promoting
commercial sex services via HTML parsing algorithm adjusted to gather entries’ metadata.

Locations of the objects from the first dataset have been derived from the open-sourced Wikimapia
geographic information service based on participant contributions. Coordinates for each of the objects
from the described categories have been retrieved via the API provided by Wikimapia. Throughout the
study, it has been noted that entries in the database are not always accurate. Most of the errors can be
attributed to the nature of the geocoded information in the database as it has been submitted by the
users on the voluntary basis. For instance, a multitude of points tagged as “bars” and located inside
certain building may equally mean that there is one establishment of this type found at this address or
a number of them. Due to the same reasons, some of the new objects appear in the database with a
delay.
Location of police stations have been derived
from the official website of the regional Internal
Affairs Office [39], and transferred into geographic
coordinates. Dataset comprising the locations of
subway stations includes geographical coordinates of
the points matching the center of the lobby of each of
the stations of the St. Petersburg metro.
Rental estate data has been collected from the
local classified advertisements website [40]. The total
count for apartments offered is 10000 for SaintPetersburg. The priority has been set for those
premises that have one or two rooms and studio-type
Figure 1: Geotagged advertisements for
flats. The shares are the following: a total of 959
venues situated at the nodes of a regular
advertisements for studio-type apartments, 6294 for a
grid, exposing the allegedly artificial
single-roomed flats and 3587 entries offering twopattern for point distribution

349

Predicting Venues for Female Commercial Sex Work

D. Voloshin et al

roomed accommodation. The data has been retrieved with the help of the algorithm that processes the
GET-requests to the website. The output consists of the coordinates for each of the addresses acquired
with the help of the geocoding algorithm described above and a price set for the rent of a particular
object (either per day or per month depending on the type of advertisement).
Commercial Sex website data collection has been organized in the following steps:
1.

2.

Selection of websites that present geocoded profiles of potential commercial sex workers. The
primary inclusion criterion is the availability of geotagged profiles of potential sex service
providers. In order to collect a sufficient number of cases, only the websites with at least 100
geocoded profiles have been chosen. In addition, during the visual analysis of the geotags, a
number of websites was excluded from the analysis because of the alleged use of the
algorithm for subsequent arrangement of components in a regular grid, which proves the
artificial nature of these spots’ location. Figure 1
presents an example of one of such cases.
Acquirement of the coordinates, price parameters and
phone numbers (used for filtering out the cases where
same phone numbers are used on different websites) for
each of the profiles. A total of 2100 entries have been
collected at this stage.

Exclusion of the repeating entries is based on the matching
mobile phone numbers between the websites under investigation.
Since in the present study we do not aim to address the issue of
separating brothels from individual escort providers, in cases
where two profiles with identical numbers are detected on the
same site, both profiles are added to the dataset. The resulting
dataset consists of 1796 geo-coded sex workers’ profiles.

4 Experimental study
4.1 Methodology
Given the multiplicity of factors that could be potentially
associated with the distribution of commercial sex venues,
analysis of the data have been performed in two steps: (a)
calculation of p-values (used to filter out insignificant spatial
factors) and Pearson-R coefficient (aimed at distinguishing the
role of factors most associated with the allocation of commercial
sex venues); (b) application of machine learning algorithms to
the development of the model for commercial sex venue
identification.
The primary unit of analysis (location of a commercial sex
venue) is represented by a point on a grid with a cell size equal
to: (a) area of municipality for irregular grid (used in correlation
analysis); (b) 1 square kilometer on a regular grid (used in
modelling). The size of the cell for a regular grid has been
adjusted following the visual analysis of the results of the test
runs as to maintain the balance between accuracy and precision.
The use of different grids for correlation and regression analysis

350

Figure 2: Heat maps produced by
different machine learning
algorithms (a-g) and the one
acquired from the visualization of
the primary data (h)

Predicting Venues for Female Commercial Sex Work

D. Voloshin et al

is motivated by the need to achieve results that could be meaningful regarding the existing
administrative division of the city and allow for their higher reliability.
Since there are currently no empirically-grounded estimates of the effect that various
environmental factors have upon the internet-mediated commercial sex venues location, the aim of
identifying new venues has been approached through the regression analysis using the following
machine learning algorithms (for a comprehensive review of the models, refer to [41]): (a) Lasso; (b)
Linear Regression; (c) Random Forest Regressor; (d) KNeighbors Regressor; (e) Support Vector
Regressor; (f) Bayesian Ridge; (g) Gradient Boosting Regressor.
Two types of features associated with these objects have been introduced into the development of
predictive models:
1.

2.

Radius-based – stand for the number of objects found in an area around the given point. The
radius of this area for points representing independent variables has been set up to 2
kilometers, in order to account for potential overlapping effects of the nearest points of
interest.
Range-based – proximity to the nearest objects of certain type.

The target value for predictive models is a number of suggested venues (marked by the individual
advertisement entries) that fall into the range of 1.5 kilometers around the spot where an object,
identified as having certain effect on the likelihood of emergence of new venues for commercial sex
service.

Figure 3: Pearson-R coefficient values describing the relationship between various environmental
factors and distribution of commercial sex venues among municipalities

4.2 Results
At the primary stage of the data analysis, a number of categories of objects have been excluded
from consideration on the basis of computed p-values (p > 0.05): markets, educational facilities,
industrial areas, nightclubs, striptease clubs and saunas. The linear correlation coefficient has been
calculated for the following categories: (Fig.3): (1) Hotels, (2) Hostels, (3) Parking lots, (4) Beauty
Salons, (5) Sex shops, (6) Population density, (7) Police stations, (8) Bars and clubs, (9) Well-being
level, (10) Pharmacy shops, (11) Bars, (12) Metro stations, (13) Two room apartments for rent, (14)
Short-term apartment rentals, (15) Shops, (16) Rooms for rent, (17) Long-term apartment rentals, (18)
Banks. Correlation coefficients analysis shows that some of the originally assumed environmental
factors (metro stations, short-term apartments for rent, leisure spots) have proven to be moderately
associated with the commercial sex venue locations, whereas banks (one of the categories that have
been included into the extended dataset for the matter of exploratory inquiry), shops and long-term
rentals exhibit surprisingly strong correlation with sex trade venues.

351

Predicting Venues for Female Commercial Sex Work

D. Voloshin et al

The following are the results of data analysis carried out in pursue of the goal of predicting the
locations of the commercial sex venues based on the characteristics of the neighboring transport,
entertainment and accommodation facilities.

Figure 4: Distribution of error rates and scores among the models, produced with different algorithms
In order to estimate the applicability of each of the proposed methods, two tests have been carried
out: the visual analysis of the heat maps produced by the resulting models (Fig. 2) and assessment of
error levels (Fig.4). The overall picture generated by each of the methods reproduces the visuals
derived from the data quite realistically hence we assume that the proposed methodology can be
applied to identifying the already-existing clusters and future locations of commercial sex venues.
From Fig. 3 that depicts the results of the trials (calculation of the mean and median absolute errors, R2
scores and explained variance), it can be inferred that Random Forest Regressor (3), KNeighbors
Regressor (4) and GradientBoosting Regressor (7) produce the most plausible results compared to
other algorithms, given the relatively higher scores and lower error levels.

5 Discussion and conclusion
Though the results are somewhat tenable and suggesting the potential of the proposed approach to
identification and modeling of the venues for web-mediated commercial sex, a number of
considerations have to be highlighted with regard to the observed associations between spatial factors
and moderate, yet higher than expected values for errors generated by the acquired models.
Firstly, it is worth noting that in this research we have modeled the environmental risks of
emergence of commercial sex venues in different areas of the city and not the exact location and
quantifiable probability of their emergence. In other words, the results of the modeling assume that
spatial regions, where the risk is higher, are just relatively more suitable for setting up a venue than
those where it is lower. Thus the outcomes shall be best treated as insights into under-investigated
domain and proof that it can be accessed with the suggested approach.
Throughout the analysis of the data, it has been assumed that the open-sourced, user-contributed
geographical data may not be robust enough – it is rich, but at the same time prone to errors, bias and
may lack precision. The distribution of spots is far from being ideally consistent which suggests that
the set is prone to incompleteness and existence of “blind spots” observed in different parts of the city.
There are also certain concerns about the overall quality of the data on the locations of existing
commercial sex venues. Since it has been submitted to open access by people who mediate or organize
the provision of commercial sex services, without further analysis, one can not be sure that it is not
purely artificial (namely, representing a product of deliberate work of specialists affiliated with sex
trade coordinators), based on the promotional patterns that might exist on the market. In other words,
further effort shall be put into making sense of the presented data and understanding the underlying
mechanisms of Internet-mediated sex trade.

352

Predicting Venues for Female Commercial Sex Work

D. Voloshin et al

Though the assumptions behind some of the proposed features of the physical environment of the
venues have been partially justified with relevant tests, a number of spatial factors have been excluded
from the analysis due to the absence of appropriate data. On the other hand, some unsuspected factors
(e.g. location of banks, long-term apartment rentals and shops that are unlikely to explain the
concentration of sex trade venues) have been found to be strongly associated with distribution of
commercial sex venues, which implies the presence of confounding variables that are to be identified
in further research.
In order to overcome the abovementioned limitations and expand the scope of the present research,
we propose a number of extensions to the data and methodology elaborated herein. A cooperation with
law enforcement authorities in accessing crime records could be preferred for objectively assessing the
scope and validity of the research. Throughout the analysis of the primary data on venues locations it
has been hypothesized that currently available advertisements found on the Internet might be used as
an additional source of information for predictions, but before that they must undergo the process of
classification in order to separate the locations of the venues where different forms of commercial sex
service are provided (for instance, brothels, domestic, street and individual venues). Moreover, as a
potential solution to the issue of latent artificiality of the data, we suggest supplementing the analysis
of the metadata of commercial sex advertisements with the study of their contents (e.g. full text or
closed-format descriptions analyzed under a mixed-method research design). This can help achieve at
least two goals: (a) identification of the semantically-linked clusters of venues (assuming the presence
of sex trade organizers or mediators); (b) analysis of the distinct features of the occupation-specific
language (which can be further used to track the spread of related information through social
networking websites [42], one of the important mediums for communicating potential clients).
Furthermore, we propose herein that more flexible (compared to the administrative one) classification
of regions (for instance, vernacular areas) as areal units of analysis is preferable, as the borders of
municipalities can doubtfully match those of congregations of sex trade venues. Finally, we suggest
further investigation of the role that transport plays in the allocation of commercial sex venues (for
instance, through empirically-grounded agent-based simulations [43]), since transport accessibility of
venues is expected to boost their competitive advantages.
Acknowledgements. This paper is financially supported by Ministry of Education and Science of
the Russian Federation, Agreement #14.584.21.0015 (11.11.2015), project ID: RFMEFI58415X0015.

References
[1]
[2]
[3]
[4]

[5]

[6]
[7]

R. Weitzer, “Sex trafficking and the sex industry: The need for evidence-based theory and
legislation,” J. Crim. Law Criminol., vol. 101, no. 4, pp. 1337–1369, 2011.
I. L. Office, ILO Global Estimate of Forced Labour: Results and Methodology. International
Labour Office, 2012.
S. Cunningham and T. Kendall, “Prostitution 2.0: The Internet and the Call Girl,” in first
annual meeting of the Economics of Risky Behavior, 2009.
M. R. Decker, A. L. Wirtz, S. D. Baral, A. Peryshkina, V. Mogilnyi, R. A. Weber, J.
Stachowiak, V. Go, and C. Beyrer, “Injection drug use, sexual risk, violence and STI/HIV
among Moscow female sex workers,” Sex. Transm. Infect., vol. 88, no. 4, pp. 278–283, 2012.
T. Hart and P. Zandbergen, “Kernel density estimation and hotspot mapping: Examining the
influence of interpolation method, grid cell size, and bandwidth on crime forecasting,” Polic.
An Int. J. Police Strateg. Manag., vol. 37, no. 2, pp. 305–323, 2014.
C. W. Telep and D. Weisburd, “Hot Spots and Place-Based Policing,” in Encyclopedia of
Criminology and Criminal Justice, Springer, 2014, pp. 2352–2363.
G. Drawve, S. C. Moak, and E. R. Berthelot, “Predictability of gun crimes: a comparison of
hot spot and risk terrain modelling techniques,” Polic. Soc., pp. 1–20, 2014.

353

Predicting Venues for Female Commercial Sex Work

[8]
[9]
[10]

[11]

[12]

[13]

[14]
[15]

[16]
[17]
[18]
[19]
[20]
[21]
[22]

[23]
[24]

[25]
[26]
[27]

[28]
[29]
[30]

354

D. Voloshin et al

S. Chainey, L. Tompson, and S. Uhlig, “The utility of hotspot mapping for predicting spatial
patterns of crime,” Secur. J., vol. 21, no. 1, pp. 4–28, 2008.
M. Farley and V. Kelly, “Prostitution: A critical review of the medical and social sciences
literature,” Women Crim. Justice, vol. 11, no. 4, pp. 29–64, 2000.
N. El-Bassel, S. S. Witte, T. Wada, L. Gilbert, and J. Wallace, “Correlates of partner violence
among female street-based sex workers: substance abuse, history of childhood abuse, and HIV
risks,” AIDS Patient Care STDS, vol. 15, no. 1, pp. 41–51, 2001.
S. Baral, C. Beyrer, K. Muessig, T. Poteat, A. L. Wirtz, M. R. Decker, S. G. Sherman, and D.
Kerrigan, “Burden of HIV among female sex workers in low-income and middle-income
countries: a systematic review and meta-analysis,” Lancet Infect. Dis., vol. 12, no. 7, pp. 538–
549, 2012.
K. D. Wagner, E. V Pitpitan, C. V Chavarin, C. Magis-Rodriguez, and T. L. Patterson, “Drugusing male clients of female sex workers who report being paid for sex: HIV/STI,
demographic and drug use correlates,” Sex. Transm. Dis., vol. 40, no. 8, 2013.
L. E. C. Rocha, F. Liljeros, and P. Holme, “Information dynamics shape the sexual networks
of Internet-mediated prostitution,” Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci., vol. 107, no. 13, pp. 5706–5711,
2010.
C.-S. Hsieh, J. Ková\vrík, and T. Logan, “How central are clients in sexual networks created
by commercial sex?,” Sci. Rep., vol. 4, 2014.
K. Hickle and D. Roe-Sepowitz, “‘Curiosity and a Pimp’: Exploring Sex Trafficking
Victimization in Experiences of Entering Sex Trade Industry Work Among Participants in a
Prostitution Diversion Program,” Women Crim. Justice, pp. 1–17, 2016.
D. Baker, “Online Sex Slaves: The Internet’s Powerful Role in Sex Trafficking,” 2016.
E. I. Kunze, “Sex trafficking via the Internet: How international agreements address the
problem and fail to go far enough,” J. High Tech. L., vol. 10, p. 241, 2009.
D. M. Hughes, “The Internet and sex industries: Partners in global sexual exploitation,”
Technol. Soc. Mag. IEEE, vol. 19, no. 1, pp. 35–42, 2000.
D. M. Hughes, “Prostitution online,” J. Trauma Pract., vol. 2, no. 3–4, pp. 115–131, 2004.
E. Kennedy, “Predictive patterns of sex trafficking online,” 2012.
R. A. Malaga, “Using Nuisance Telephone Denial of Service to Combat Online Sex
Trafficking,” Open J. Inf. Syst., vol. 2, no. 1, pp. 1–8, 2015.
A. Dubrawski, K. Miller, M. Barnes, B. Boecking, and E. Kennedy, “Leveraging Publicly
Available Data to Discern Patterns of Human-Trafficking Activity,” J. Hum. Traffick., vol. 1,
no. 1, pp. 65–85, 2015.
C. Nagpal, K. Miller, B. Boecking, and A. Dubrawski, “An Entity Resolution approach to
isolate instances of Human Trafficking online,” arXiv Prepr. arXiv1509.06659, 2015.
D. Weisburd, L. A. Wyckoff, J. Ready, J. E. Eck, J. C. Hinkle, and F. Gajewski, “Does crime
just move around the corner? A controlled study of spatial displacement and diffusion of crime
control benefits*,” Criminology, vol. 44, no. 3, pp. 549–592, 2006.
G. Ellison and R. Weitzer, “The Dynamics of Male and Female Street Prostitution in
Manchester, England,” Men Masc., p. 1097184X15625318, 2016.
O. A. Akindele and others, “Riskscapes and Sexscapes: the Socio-Spatial Dialectics of
Brothels in Ogbomoso, Nigeria,” Civ. Environ. Res., vol. 3, no. 13, pp. 14–23, 2013.
A. B. JOEL and A. M. ORKUMA, “Locational Pattern of Brothel-Based Commercial Sex
Works In Kaduna Metropolis of Kaduna State, Nigeria,” Res. Humanit. Soc. Sci., vol. 3, no.
22, pp. 1–7, 2013.
L. W. Sherman, “Hot spots of crime and criminal careers of places.”
C. R. Shaw and H. D. McKay, “Juvenile delinquency and urban areas,” Chicago, Ill, 1942.
G. Nettler, “EXPLAINING CRIME, 2D ED.,” McGraw-HillNettler2Explaining Crime1978,
1978.

Predicting Venues for Female Commercial Sex Work

[31]
[32]
[33]
[34]
[35]
[36]
[37]

[38]

[39]

[40]
[41]

[42]

[43]

D. Voloshin et al

L. W. Sherman, P. R. Gartin, and M. E. Buerger, “Hot spots of predatory crime: Routine
activities and the criminology of place*,” Criminology, vol. 27, no. 1, pp. 27–56, 1989.
J. M. Caplan, L. W. Kennedy, and J. Miller, “Risk terrain modeling: brokering criminological
theory and GIS methods for crime forecasting,” Justice Q., vol. 28, no. 2, pp. 360–381, 2011.
L. E. Cohen and M. Felson, “Social change and crime rate trends: A routine activity
approach,” Am. Sociol. Rev., pp. 588–608, 1979.
S. Chainey and J. Ratcliffe, GIS and crime mapping. John Wiley & Sons, 2013.
R. Weitzer, “Sociology of sex work,” Annu. Rev. Sociol., vol. 35, pp. 213–234, 2009.
L. M. Williams, “Sex in the City Why and How Street Workers Select Their Locations for
Business,” J. Contemp. Ethnogr., vol. 43, no. 6, pp. 659–694, 2014.
J. Prior, P. Hubbard, and P. Birch, “Sex worker victimization, modes of working, and location
in New South Wales, Australia: a geography of victimization,” J. Sex Res., vol. 50, no. 6, pp.
574–586, 2013.
D. V. Zhitin, “ПРОСТРАНСТВЕННАЯ ОБУСЛОВЛЕННОСТЬ СОЦИАЛЬНОГО
РАССЛОЕНИЯ НАСЕЛЕНИЯ САНКТ-ПЕТЕРБУРГА” [SPATIAL CONDITIONING OF
THE SOCIAL STRATIFICATION OF THE POPULATION OF ST. PETERSBURG]
Вестник АРГО (journal), no. 4, 2015.
“ГУ МВД РОССИИ ПО Г.САНКТ-ПЕТЕРБУРГУ И ЛЕНИНГРАДСКОЙ ОБЛАСТИ.”
[Saint-Petersburg and Leningrad Oblast Main Interior Affairs Office] [Online]. Available:
https://78.mvd.ru/contact/units/stp. [Accessed: 01-Jan-2016].
“Avito.ru.”
[Online].
Available:
https://www.avito.ru/sankt-peterburg/nedvizhimost.
[Accessed: 01-Jan-2016].
F. Pedregosa, G. Varoquaux, A. Gramfort, V. Michel, B. Thirion, O. Grisel, M. Blondel, P.
Prettenhofer, R. Weiss, V. Dubourg, and others, “Scikit-learn: Machine learning in Python,” J.
Mach. Learn. Res., vol. 12, pp. 2825–2830, 2011.
N. Butakov, Y. Chuprova, K. Knyazkov, N. Shindyapina, and A. Boukhanovsky,
“Evolutionary-based Framework for Optimizing the Spread of Information on Twitter,”
Procedia Comput. Sci., vol. 66, pp. 287–296, 2015.
V. Karbovskii, D. Voloshin, A. Karsakov, A. Bezgodov, and A. Zagarskikh, “Multiscale
Agent-based Simulation in Large City Areas: Emergency Evacuation use Case,” Procedia
Comput. Sci., vol. 51, pp. 2367–2376, 2015.

355

