Procedia Computer Science
Volume 80, 2016, Pages 577–586
ICCS 2016. The International Conference on Computational
Science

Crack Detection in Earth Dam and Levee Passive Seismic
Data Using Support Vector Machines
Wendy D. Fisher1 , Tracy K. Camp1 , and Valeria V. Krzhizhanovskaya2,3,4
1

2

Colorado School of Mines, Golden, Colorado, U.S.A.
wbelcher@mines.edu, tcamp@mines.edu
University of Amsterdam, Science Park 904, 1098 XH, Amsterdam, the Netherlands
V.Krzhizhanovskaya@uva.nl
3
National Research University ITMO, St. Petersburg, 197101, Russia
4
St. Petersburg State Polytechnic University, St. Petersburg, 195251, Russia

Abstract
We investigate techniques for earth dam and levee health monitoring and automatic detection
of anomalous events in passive seismic data. We have developed a novel data-driven workﬂow
that uses machine learning and geophysical data collected from sensors located on the surface of
the levee to identify internal erosion events. In this paper, we describe our research experiments
with binary and one-class Support Vector Machines (SVMs). We used experimental data from
a laboratory earth embankment (80% normal and 20% anomalies) and extracted nine spectral
features from decomposed segments of the time series data. The two-class SVM with 10-fold
cross validation achieved over 97% accuracy. Experiments with the one-class SVM use the top
two features selected by the ReliefF algorithm and our results show that we can successfully
separate normal from anomalous data observations with over 83% accuracy.
Keywords: Data-driven levee monitoring, machine learning, anomaly detection, passive seismic.

1

Introduction

In this paper, we describe our research for the advancement of earth levee health assessment.
We are developing a novel data-driven workﬂow for the automatic detection of anomalous
events that uses machine learning and geophysical data to identify internal erosion events. Our
lightweight anomaly detection scheme builds upon our work using unsupervised clustering [1],
which shows a clear separation of events (e.g., cracks) from non-events. We begin by discussing
the background and motivation for our application to earth levee passive seismic data.

1.1

Identifying Internal Erosion Events in Earth Dams and Levees

Earth dams and levees are constructed with earthen materials such as rock, sand, and clay [2]
and are built primarily for ﬂood control, water storage, and irrigation. The main causes of earth
Selection and peer-review under responsibility of the Scientiﬁc Programme Committee of ICCS 2016
c The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V.

doi:10.1016/j.procs.2016.05.339

577

Crack Detection in Earth Dam and Levee . . .

Fisher, Camp, and Krzhizhanovskaya

levee failures are typically due to piping, slope instability, foundation issues, or overtopping [3].
Figure 1 shows the result of internal erosion and piping that caused a dam failure and view of
a downstream town that had to be evacuated. Since many U.S. earth dams are nearing the end
of their design life (i.e., over 60 years old) [4] and facing the increasing frequency and severity of
storms around the globe, it is important to ﬁnd ways to eﬃciently monitor earth levee stability.
We research the use of machine learning methods and geophysical sensor technologies to identify
potential problems and better understand the structural integrity of earth levees.

Figure 1: Tunbridge Dam in Tasmania, Australia that experienced failure by internal erosion
(piping) and view of evacuated town downstream (Source: Jeﬀery Farrar (2008) [5])
Researchers at the University of Amsterdam detected anomalies in earth levees from sensors
installed inside the dams (e.g., temperature, pore water pressure, relative inclination) using a
one-sided classiﬁcation approach [6]. In other words, they detected deviations from what is
considered a normal state of the dam or levee. Researchers at Mississippi State University
experimented with unsupervised and supervised methods to detect anomalies [7] and classify
levee slides [8] [9] along the Mississippi River. They investigated the use of a support vector
machine to identify anomalous activity in synthetic aperture radar data. Our novel approach
investigates detecting internal erosion events that could lead to failure by using geophysical
data collected from sensors located on the surface of the levee, thereby retaining the integrity
of the structure.

1.2

Detection of Anomalies

Machine learning is a branch of artiﬁcial intelligence where a computer can learn from data
without human assistance. Anomaly detection is used to identify data observations that deviate
from the normal or expected pattern. The detection of an anomaly in a dataset is important
since an anomaly can indicate a potentially serious issue. The broad categories of anomaly
detection found in the literature [10] are: supervised, semi-supervised, and unsupervised. The
supervised approach requires the use of labeled training data for both normal and anomalies.
This approach is often a good ﬁrst step in experimentation; however, this approach is typically
not the preferred method since the availability of labeled anomalous data is often unavailable
or is diﬃcult to obtain for every possible occurrence. A semi-supervised technique only requires
labeled training data for what is considered normal, which is more readily available. Once
a model is trained, anomalies are identiﬁed through testing the likelihood of membership.
Unsupervised anomaly detection does not use labeled training data, assumes the majority class
is normal, and deﬁnes outliers as anomalies in the data set. The unsupervised approach is
usually the most appropriate technique for many anomaly detection problems.
The development of an anomaly detection scheme is needed in our domain of interest due
to the large class imbalance of data; in other words, there is a lack of anomalous observational
data in our datasets. With this approach, we can train models with what is considered normal
data and detect deviations within a certain threshold. We experiment with the supervised (i.e.,
578

Crack Detection in Earth Dam and Levee . . .

Fisher, Camp, and Krzhizhanovskaya

data with labels for both classes) and semi-supervised (i.e., data with labels for only the normal
class). We plan to investigate unsupervised methods in future work.

2

Data-Driven Approach

Continuous real-time earth levee monitoring will typically produce data with the majority class
representing the normal state of the structure. This normal, or baseline, data can be used as
training data for our machine learning algorithms. Once trained, our detection system identiﬁes
deviations from this normal state (anomalies), which could be an indication of a developing
problem or internal erosion event. We investigate techniques to address this speciﬁc one-sided
classiﬁcation problem, in order to build a model that can be used for the long-term health
assessment of earth levees. Our approach and general data processing workﬂow is depicted in
Figure 2 and described in the following sections.


&"!
&
!



&
& "
&$
& 

	
&
&#

 
& $
&

Figure 2: General data processing and anomaly detection workﬂow.

2.1

Data Collection

We use the data set described in [1]. An experimental laboratory earth embankment was
built at the United States Bureau of Reclamation (USBR) [2] and equipped with geophysical
instrumentation to study internal erosion and cracking events [11]. We were provided with over
4,000 seconds of passive seismic data collected from a vertical array of geophones. The entire
data set includes many crack, ﬂow, and collapse events (30% normal or baseline data and 70%
anomalous data), which is not typically representative of a live monitoring scenario. For this
study, we use the ﬁrst third of the dataset to more closely mimic a real-world data set (80%
normal or baseline data and 20% anomalous data). Figure 3 displays the portion of the provided
time-series data used in our experimentation. We continue with the data preprocessing and
experiments using a support vector machine.

Figure 3: Plot of provided time-series data for a single sensor (1,380 seconds).

579

Crack Detection in Earth Dam and Levee . . .

2.2

Fisher, Camp, and Krzhizhanovskaya

Preprocessing

Spectral Frames It is necessary to transform the data in order to use the dataset as input to
our machine learning algorithms. The data is initially a single long-length string of time series
data collected at 500Hz. The 1,380 seconds of data (which is the ﬁrst third of the provided 4,140
seconds) are converted to the frequency domain, and then decomposed into segments (spectral
frames) for the extraction of features. This data processing step was performed using MATLAB
and the open-source MIRToolbox [12]. We experimented with 1, 2, 3, 5, and 10-second frame
sizes and found all segmented sizes performed well (see Section 3.1 for a comparison).
Feature Extraction We leverage previous work for the selection of features (i.e., features
commonly used in audio signal processing) to represent the internal erosion events in our passive
seismic data [13]. The nine features identiﬁed and selected for our experiments are brieﬂy
described in Table 1.
Table 1: The nine spectral features extracted from each 1, 2, 3, 5, and 10-second frame [12].
Feature
Zerocross (ZC)
Centroid (CR)
Spread (SP)
RMS
85% Rolloﬀ (RO)
Flatness (FL)
Kurtosis (KU)
Irregularity (RG)
Skewness (SK)

Description
A temporal feature which is an indicator of the noisiness of the signal. A count
of the number of times the signal changes sign (crosses the zero axis).
A statistical descriptor of spectral distribution and is the mean or geometric
center (usually associated with the brightness of a sound signal).
A spectral feature that can be used to describe the asymmetry and peakedness
of the signal (values represent the standard deviation of the distribution).
A temporal feature that represents the global energy (loudness) of the signal
which is computed by taking the root average of the square of the amplitude.
Estimate of the amount of high frequency in the signal calculated by ﬁnding
the frequency that a certain fraction (85%) of the total energy is below.
A statistical descriptor to indicate how smooth or spiky the spectral distribution is (the ratio between the two means: geometric and arithmetic).
Another statistical descriptor of the spectral distribution that can indicate the
presence of transients (peaks) in the data.
A measurement of the extent of variation between consecutive spectral peaks.
This feature is an indicator of the asymmetry of the spectral distribution. Zero
values indicate a symmetrical distribution.

Standardization Using the raw feature values can impact the outcome of machine learning
algorithms, especially if the feature values do not conform to a common range or variance. To
address this issue in our experiments, we standardized the feature values. Data standardization
is a method for transforming each of the feature vectors to have a zero mean (μ) and unit
standard deviation (σ). Standardization is the best approach for our study since we have an
input space that is not sparse, are using a large margin classiﬁer (SVM) [14], and are measuring
the variance of the diﬀerent features via Principal Component Analysis (PCA) [15].
Feature Selection Feature selection is a dimensionality reduction technique that ﬁnds a
subset of the original feature set that best represents the problem space. The two most common
strategies for feature selection are ﬁlter and wrapper. Filter methods are used for pre-processing
and ranking of feature importance, regardless of the model selection. Wrapper methods can
detect interactions between the variables and output the best performing feature subset.
580

Crack Detection in Earth Dam and Levee . . .

3

Fisher, Camp, and Krzhizhanovskaya

Machine Learning Methods

In this paper, we experiment with two machine-learning approaches: classiﬁcation and anomaly
detection using the Support Vector Machine (SVM). An SVM is a supervised machine-learning
algorithm primarily used for two-class classiﬁcation, though an SVM can also be used to solve
one-class, multi-class, and regression problems. For our classiﬁcation experiment, we use the
two-class SVM with all nine identiﬁed features. Given a training set of labeled data for both
normal and anomalous classes, the two-class SVM aims to ﬁnd a hyperplane that separates the
classes while maximizing the geometric margin between them. For anomaly detection, we use a
One-Class Support Vector Machine (OCSVM) with the top two ranked features identiﬁed using
a feature selection algorithm (see Section 3.2). Given a training set of labeled data for only the
majority class, the OCSVM seeks to ﬁnd the boundary around the set of normal observations;
data that lie outside of this boundary are considered the minority class, or anomalies. We
apply 10-fold cross validation during our experiments and present the results next. K-fold
cross validation is a technique to assess the performance of the model more accurately than a
traditional single partitioning method. The idea is to partition the data into k subsets; then,
for each round of validation, k − 1 subsets are used for training the model and the remaining
subset is used for validation. This process is repeated k times and the results are averaged.

3.1

Results from Classiﬁcation using a Two-Class SVM

Using an SVM with the Radial Basis Function (RBF) kernel and 10-fold cross validation,
we were able to achieve 97% (or higher) overall accuracy with the nine identiﬁed features.
We conducted timing tests to measure the computational cost per segment of the time series
data. The entire workﬂow takes less than 0.0150 seconds per segment and the portion of the
workﬂow containing the SVM runs at less than 0.0005 seconds per segment. The algorithm was
trained and cross validated with the dataset described in Section 2.1. Recall that our data set
contained a majority of baseline (80% normal) observations and a minority of anomalous (20%
non-normal) data. We applied Principal Component Analysis (PCA) to reduce the dimensions
for visualization and plot the 1st and 2nd principal components in Figure 4.

(a)

(b)

Figure 4: Data points and green contour lines show a separation of normal data from anomalies
where the contour value (color bar) is zero for (a) 2-second and (b) 3-second frame sizes.
581

Crack Detection in Earth Dam and Levee . . .

Fisher, Camp, and Krzhizhanovskaya

The normal data points are plotted in red, the anomalies in blue, and the support vectors are
encircled in black. The color bar describes the values for our contours that provide separating
boundaries between the normal observations and the anomalies based on the predicted likelihood
that a label comes from a particular class. Figure 4 shows that the data is separable using an
SVM and the few identiﬁed false negatives (predicted normal on anomalous data) are located
outside of its appropriate group (i.e., a blue dot located in the normal data).
Using a vector of known class labels, we calculated statistics to measure the predictive
performance of the algorithm and we visualize these statistics with a confusion matrix. A
sample confusion matrix with descriptions is provided in Figure 5.

Figure 5: Confusion matrix sample with descriptions.
The confusion matrices from our experiment have rows for the predicted classes and columns
for the target classes. The green or diagonal elements are where the classiﬁer predicted correctly,
and the red or oﬀ-diagonal elements are where the classiﬁer made mistakes. Figure 6a shows
results from an SVM with a 2-second frame size that achieved a 98.1% overall accuracy and had
only a few misses (0.7%) and false alarms (1.2%). Figure 6b displays the results from an SVM
with a 3-second frame size; this larger frame size resulted in a slightly better overall accuracy
of 98.9%, and also had fewer misses (0.4%) and false alarms (0.7%).

(a)

(b)

Figure 6: Confusion matrix results from our experiments with an SVM using 10-fold cross
validation for (a) 2-second and (b) 3-second frame sizes.
We continued our analysis with additional metrics that are typically used in a classiﬁcation
problem. These metrics are values (percentages) that represent ratios of the statistics described
in the confusion matrix (see Table 2).
582

Crack Detection in Earth Dam and Levee . . .

Fisher, Camp, and Krzhizhanovskaya

Table 2: Evaluation metrics for machine-learning classiﬁers (variables are deﬁned in Figure 5).
Metric

Description

Formula

Accuracy

All correctly predicted observations.

Speciﬁcity

Correctly predicted anomalies.

Precision

Correctly predicted normal class.

Recall

Sensitivity or the hit rate.

F1-score

Harmonic mean of precision and recall.

T P +T N
T otalObservations
TN
F P +T N
TP
T P +F P
TP
T P +F N
recision·Recall
2 · PPrecision+Recall

Results from our runs of an SVM with 10-fold cross validation for 1, 2, 3, 5, and 10-second
frame sizes are listed in Table 3. Overall, the experimental results produced over 97% accuracy
and 98% F1-score (the harmonic mean between precision and recall); these results show an
SVM can be used to separate normal from anomalous data observations.
Table 3: SVM 10-fold cross-validated results.
Metric
Accuracy
Speciﬁcity
Precision
Recall
F1-score

3.2

1 Second
0.971
0.897
0.974
0.990
0.982

2 Second
0.981
0.942
0.986
0.991
0.988

3 Second
0.989
0.968
0.992
0.995
0.993

5 Second
0.986
0.964
0.991
0.991
0.991

10 Second
0.993
1.000
1.000
0.991
0.995

Results from Anomaly Detection using a One-Class SVM

Although the nine identiﬁed spectral features performed well during our clustering [1] and twoclass SVM experiments (see Section 3.1), we applied the ReliefF [16] feature selection technique
to further reﬁne the feature set for use during our one-class SVM experiments. ReliefF is a
ﬁlter method for feature selection that uses k-nearest neighbors per class (we used k = 10).
Figure 7 shows the resultant weighted ranking for 1, 2, 3, 5, and 10-second frame sizes. Results
indicate the top two features are zerocross and irregularity for 1 and 2-second frame sizes and
zerocross and RMS for 3, 5, and 10-second frame sizes.

Figure 7: Weighted ranking from the ReliefF feature selection using our nine extracted spectral
features for 1, 2, 3, 5, and 10-second frame sizes.
583

Crack Detection in Earth Dam and Levee . . .

Fisher, Camp, and Krzhizhanovskaya

We used an OCSVM with the RBF kernel, 10-fold cross validation, and the top two selected
features from the ReliefF algorithm. Our timing tests that measure the computational cost per
segment of the time series data were slightly higher for this experiment. The entire workﬂow
still takes less than 0.0169 seconds per segment and the portion of the workﬂow containing
the OCSVM runs at less than 0.0007 seconds per segment. The algorithm was trained and
cross validated with the same dataset described in Section 2.1. Figure 8a shows results from
an OCSVM with a 2-second frame size that achieved a 83.6% overall accuracy and less than a
total 16.4% misses and false alarms. Figure 8b displays the OCSVM results with a 3-second
frame size which resulted in a slightly better overall accuracy of 86.5% and 13.4% total misses
and false alarms.

(a)

(b)

Figure 8: Confusion matrix results from our experiments with an OCSVM using 10-fold cross
validation for (a) 2-second and (b) 3-second frame sizes.
Results are listed in Table 4 for each of the 1, 2, 3, 5, and 10-second frame sizes. Even
though the results are slightly reduced from our experiments with a two-class SVM, the results
show the OCSVM is able to separate our normal from anomalous data observations with an
accuracy of over 83% and 89% F1-score.
Table 4: OCSVM 10-fold cross-validated results.
Metric
Accuracy
Speciﬁcity
Precision
Recall
F1-score

1 Second
0.857
0.641
0.909
0.913
0.911

2 Second
0.836
0.600
0.898
0.896
0.897

3 Second
0.865
0.667
0.916
0.916
0.916

5 Second
0.866
0.714
0.926
0.905
0.915

10 Second
0.869
0.750
0.934
0.900
0.917

Figure 9 shows the results of using an OCSVM for 2-second and 3-second frame sizes. Since
we used the ReliefF algorithm to reduce the dimensions, the plots represent the actual feature
values for the 1st and 2nd dimensions (versus the PCA reduced data used in Section 3.1). The
data points are plotted in black and the support vectors and potential outliers are encircled
in red. The color bar describes the values for our contours that provide separating boundaries
between the normal observations and the anomalies. As with the previous experiment with a
binary SVM, the OCSVM results indicate the ability to detect anomalous data observations.

584

Crack Detection in Earth Dam and Levee . . .

Fisher, Camp, and Krzhizhanovskaya

(a)

(b)

Figure 9: OCSVM results where the yellow contour shows the separation boundary around the
set of normal data observations for (a) 2-second and (b) 3-second frame sizes.
Table 5 lists the mean outlier rate from the predicted class versus the actual outlier rate. The
best performers are the 2-second and 3-second frame sizes with a slight decrease in performance
as the frame size increases.
Table 5: OCSVM 10-fold cross-validated mean predicted versus actual outlier rates and the
diﬀerence in performance (percentages). The features listed are the top two selected by the
ReliefF algorithm for each speciﬁc frame size (see Table 1 for feature descriptions).
Predicted
Actual
Diﬀerence
Features

4

1 Second
20.00%
20.36%
-0.36%
ZC, RG

2 Second
20.43%
20.29%
0.14%
ZC, RG

3 Second
20.21%
20.22%
0.00%
ZC, RMS

5 Second
22.10%
20.29%
1.81%
ZC, RMS

10 Second
23.18%
20.29%
2.90%
ZC, RMS

Conclusions and Future Work

Both of our experiments show that we can separate normal from anomalous data observations. We used experimental data from a laboratory earth embankment (80% normal and 20%
anomalies), extracted nine features from decomposed segments of the time series data, and
trained binary and one-class SVMs. We plan to continue our research for the development
of a robust, generalized, automatic anomaly detection scheme that can be used to identify a
developing problem or internal erosion event. To support the long-term health assessment of
earth levees, our novel approach requires additional research. Further investigation of one-class
learning and unsupervised techniques is required to address our speciﬁc one-sided classiﬁcation
problem. One-class learning is appropriate for our problem space, since it works well in the
absence of anomalous data examples or in a situation where it is not possible to construct a
fully representative training set of all possible non-normal observations. Unsupervised anomaly
detection may also be appropriate for our domain since the model needs to perform in a continuous monitoring situation. There can also be background and spurious noise in seismic data
that is caused by adjustment of equipment and machinery; earthquakes, helicopters, airplanes,
585

Crack Detection in Earth Dam and Levee . . .

Fisher, Camp, and Krzhizhanovskaya

or nearby cars and trucks. We plan to research de-noising techniques (e.g., wavelet de-noising)
before extracting the features. This process will help make a distinction between noise or
outliers in the data and true anomalies. Finally, to create a robust, generalizable approach,
our workﬂow must be tested on diﬀerent types of earth dam and levee passive seismic data
sets. Additional data that is available for our experimentation include: IJkdijk full-scale test
embankment and Colijnsplaat real-world levee (both located in the Netherlands).
Acknowledgments. This work is supported in part by National Science Foundation Grant
OISE-1243539.

References
[1] W. Belcher, T. Camp, and V. V. Krzhizhanovskaya, “Detecting erosion events in earth dam and
levee passive seismic data with clustering,” Proceedings of the 14th International Conference on
Machine Learning and Applications (ICMLA), pp. 903–910, 2015.
[2] “US Bureau of Reclamation,” http://www.usbr.gov, accessed: 2015-10-23.
[3] M. Foster, R. Fell, and M. Spannagle, “The statistics of embankment dam failures and accidents,”
Canadian Geotechnical Journal, vol. 37, no. 5, pp. 1000–1024, 2000.
[4] “Aging water resource infrastructure in the United States,” http://www.usbr.gov/newsroom/
testimony/detail.cfm?RecordID=2441, accessed: 2015-10-23.
[5] “Piping and internal erosion failure, Tunbridge Dam, Tasmania, Australia,” http://www.
geoengineer.org/gallery/Earthﬁll+-+Rockﬁll+Dams/Tunbridge+Dam/, accessed: 2015-10-23.
[6] A. L. Pyayt, A. P. Kozionov, I. I. Mokhov, B. Lang, R. J. Meijer, V. V. Krzhizhanovskaya, and
P. M. Sloot, “Time-frequency methods for structural health monitoring,” Sensors, vol. 14, no. 3,
pp. 5147–5173, 2014.
[7] L. Dabbiru, J. V. Aanstoos, M. Mahrooghy, W. Li, A. Shanker, and N. H. Younan, “Levee anomaly
detection using polarimetric synthetic aperture radar data,” Proceedings of the IEEE International
Geoscience and Remote Sensing Symposium (IGARSS), pp. 5113–5116, 2012.
[8] L. Dabbiru, J. V. Aanstoos, and N. H. Younan, “Earthen levee slide detection via automated
analysis of synthetic aperture radar imagery,” Landslides, pp. 1–10, 2015.
[9] D. Han, Q. Du, J. V. Aanstoos, and N. Younan, “Classiﬁcation of levee slides from airborne synthetic aperture radar images with eﬃcient spatial feature extraction,” Journal of Applied Remote
Sensing, vol. 9, no. 1, pp. 097 294–1–097 294–10, 2015.
[10] V. Chandola, A. Banerjee, and V. Kumar, “Anomaly detection: A survey,” ACM Computing
Surveys (CSUR), vol. 41, no. 3, pp. 1–72, 2009.
[11] R. V. Rinehart, M. L. Parekh, J. B. Rittgers, M. A. Mooney, and A. Revil, “Preliminary implementation of geophysical techniques to monitor embankment dam ﬁlter cracking at the laboratory
scale,” Proceedings of the 6th Annual International Conference on Software Engineering (ICSE),
2012.
[12] O. Lartillot and P. Toiviainen, “A Matlab toolbox for musical feature extraction from audio,”
Proceedings of the 10th International Conference on Digital Audio Eﬀects, 2007.
[13] M. J. Rubin, “Eﬃcient and automatic wireless geohazard monitoring,” Ph.D. dissertation, Colorado School of Mines, 2014.
[14] A. Ben-Hur and J. Weston, “A user’s guide to support vector machines,” Data Mining Techniques
for the Life Sciences, pp. 223–239, 2010.
[15] I. Jolliﬀe, Principal component analysis. Wiley Online Library, 2002.
ˇ
[16] M. Robnik-Sikonja
and I. Kononenko, “Theoretical and empirical analysis of ReliefF and RReliefF,” Machine learning, vol. 53, no. 1-2, pp. 23–69, 2003.

586

