Procedia Computer Science
Volume 80, 2016, Pages 1780–1790
ICCS 2016. The International Conference on Computational
Science

Using Ontology Engineering Methods to Improve
Computer Science and Data Science Skills
Svetlana Chuprina1, Vassil Alexandrov2, and Nia Alexandrov3
1

Perm State University, Bukireva Str. 15, 614990, Perm, Russia
chuprinas@inbox.ru
2
ICREA-Barcelona Supercomputing Centre, Barcelona, Spain
vassil.alexandrov@bsc.es
3
Barcelona Supercomputing Centre, Barcelona, Spain
nia.alexandrov@bsc.es

Abstract
This paper focuses on issues of ontology construction process, Computing Classification System and
Data Science domain ontology all used to help not only IT-students but any IT-specialists from
industry and academia also to tackle the problems addressing the Big Data and Data Science skills
gap. We discuss some methodological aspects of ontology design process and enriching of existing
free accessible ontologies and show how suggested methods and software tools help IT-specialists
including master students to implement their research work and participate in real world projects. The
role of visual data exploration tools for certain issues under discussion and some use cases are
discussed.
Keywords: Ontology Engineering Methods, Data Science Skills, Computer Science Skills, Data Science
Ontology, Computing Classification System Ontology, Bridging Talent Gap, Visual Data Exploration Tools

1 Introduction
Nowadays, it is evident that both industry and academia have met a growing gap in Computational
Science research skills and Data Science (DS) skills in particular. The situation is escalated by a
rapidly growing technological diversity, and because the advance of more and more new methods that
require the massive data processing in particular. The success of Big Data initiatives will depend upon
the ability of companies and organizations to find the right talent, as well as the talent with the right
abilities and to effectively integrate them into the business infrastructure (Chuprina, 2015).
There is no unique definition what is a Data Scientist although everybody knows that the Data
Scientist skill set is a rare and highly multidisciplinary. Moreover different industries use Data
Scientists for different purposes. So the role of a Data Scientist is very complicated and difficult to
understand. We agree with a common and well-known point of view that main aim of a Data Scientist

1780

Selection and peer-review under responsibility of the Scientiﬁc Programme Committee of ICCS 2016
c The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V.

doi:10.1016/j.procs.2016.05.447

Using Ontology Engineering Methods to Improve CS and DS Skills

Svetlana Chuprina, et al.

is “to find meaning in the chaos of Big Data”. But this is a very common point of view and it is a very
complex problem to choose a comprehensive subset from large set of technologies to teach the
students to find Big Data meaning mentioned above. It is necessary also to take into account that any
Faculty or Department that deals with the training of highly qualified IT-professionals and are going to
open a new specialization in DS area, when choosing a profile of training and/or a focus of study,
must take into account not only the needs of the employers, but also an existing infrastructure of the
University, a presence of relevant professionals and teachers who have sufficient experience in DS
training, as well as many other factors.
Up to now, there is no generally accepted methodology to help universities to tackle these
problems especially for such diverse domain of educational training as a Data Science. In addition,
from our point of view, it is not enough to launch new programs in Big Data and Data Science in order
to meet the growing demand in DS specialization. Because DS projects usually are interdisciplinary it
is necessary also to make changes in existing and more traditional IT educational programs (for
example, within the remit of existing courses of Master Programs, in our case “Applied Mathematics
and Computer Science”) to introduce some introductory DS courses and new more advanced courses
aimed at developing the special collaborative skills to work together in a team with professionals from
DS. The authors have long experience in training master and postgraduate students in this field (for
more detail, see (Alexandrov & Alexandrov, 2015; Chuprina, 2015) and to engage them in real-word
industry projects.
The authors have taken part in Severo Ochoa project (https://www.bsc.es/about-bsc/press/bsc-inthe-media/bsc-severo-ochoa-scholarships-high-performance-computing/),
which
is
a
very
interdisciplinary project. Some problems under discussion were around “What data scientist skills
does it take for a Big Data professional to work in collaboration within data science projects?”
Taking into account a big difference in backgrounds of master/postgraduate students, we stand in
solidarity that it is very important to use some special methodology to automate an explicit visual
representation building of these backgrounds in terms of concepts and relationships related to DS
knowledge area context. We use for these purposes ontology engineering methods and suggest
exploring the ontologies of personal student skills by its mapping to ACM Computing Classification
System
(http://www.acm.org/about/class/2012/)
and
Data
Science
Ontology
(http://DataScienceOntology.com) to obtain clearer understanding of the needs of personal educational
paths or pathways in each particular case. In some cases we have not only extended the ontologies
mentioned above but also have made changes, for example, in the Data Science Ontology performing
pre-conversion of the ontology into OWL standard format representation.

2 Data Scientist vs Data Engineer and Other Computer Science
Skills
We have no aim to give a definitive answer to the question “What are the major differences
between Data Scientist and Data engineer”? Moreover, it seems to us that there is no definitive answer
to this question. But some demystifying of the Data Scientist’s skills and responsibilities is necessary
to explain our point of view how it can be facilitated the training of students to be Data Scientist or to
work effectively in collaboration with professionals from DS.
At the beginning, we demonstrate in Table 1 a brief matching of some definitions, responsibilities
and skills of Data Scientist vs Data Engineer according to “Job Comparison – Data Scientist vs Data
Engineer vs Statistician” (Saswat, 2015).

1781

Using Ontology Engineering Methods to Improve CS and DS Skills

Who is Who

Responsibilities

Skills

Svetlana Chuprina, et al.

Table 1: Data Scientist vs Data Engineer (adapted from (Saraswat, 2015))
Data Scientist
Data Engineer
These people use their analytical and These people ensure uninterrupted flow
technical capabilities to extract meaning of data between servers and applications.
insights from data
They are responsible for data architecture
x Design, construct, install, test and
x Develop and plan required analytic maintain
highly
scalable
data
project in response to business needs
management systems
x Contribute to data mining (DM) x Improve
data
foundational
architectures, modeling standards, reporting, procedures, guidelines and standards
and data analysis methodologies
x Integrate new data management
x Collaborate with stakeholders to technologies and software engineering
integrate data mining results with existing tools into existing structures
systems
x Create custom software components
x Monitor DM system performance and and analytics applications
implement efficiency improvements
x Database design
x Programming
x Production coding
x Mathematics
x Data Collection
x Business Understanding
x Data Warehousing
x Statistics
x Data Transformation
x Data Visualization
x Work diligently with data
x Machine Learning
x Attention to detail

This table does not reflect some latest trends in the massive data analysis, which will become
increasingly valuable in the long term. Not only applying Data Mining and Machine Learning to Big
Data analysis are very useful, but also other practically relevant methods from the field of Artificial
Intelligence (AI) are important tackling Big Data analytical problems.
According to (Council, 2013) a number of challenges in both data management and data analysis
require new approaches to support the Big Data era. These challenges span generation of the data,
preparation for analysis, and policy-related challenges in its sharing and use, contextual semantic
search, which use for their tackling among others the modern AI tools and techniques, and as we point
in ontologies as the models for information representation and analysis in particular. A challenge is to
merge the benefits of different technologies that are being integrated and used to drive toward more
systematic and valuable approaches in massive data analytics.
For example, most technologies applied to social networking, which is a growing source of
massive data, do a little more than collect data with simply counting the frequency of messages, key
words, hashtags, etc. and provide simple visualizations. Truly making use of this data requires scalable
clustering techniques, real-time ontology abstraction, and on-the fly thesauri creation for extracting the
complete network associated with a topic of interest (Council, 2013).
So the demand for data scientists with the wider range of multidisciplinary skills to understand and
make decisions based on the analysis of Big Data is increasing. According to the well-known
McKinsey Global Institute research study, by end of 2018 the US alone may face a 50% to 60% gap
between supply and requisite demand of deep analytic talent. And this forecast is representative of the
general state-of-the-arts. We know (see, for example, the review “Data Science Revealed: A DataDriven
Glimpse
into
the
Burgeoning
New
Field”
of
EMC,
http://www.emc.com/collateral/about/news/emc-data-science-study-wp.pdf) that “trends tend to follow
a cycle, where the initial opportunity leads to ever increasing demand for a certain set of skills, while
later demand wanes as many of those initial skills are automated by even newer tools”.
In order to remain competitive in the world of Data Science, the universities need not only launch
new DS education specialties or increase the number of DS graduates but also to make changes in the
curricula of some other widespread educational specializations like Computer Science, Business

1782

Using Ontology Engineering Methods to Improve CS and DS Skills

Svetlana Chuprina, et al.

Intelligence, Business Analytics and others to train specialists, which must be ready to develop new
software and upgrade the existing tools that are conducive to the data-driven decision making. The
graduates from mentioned above specializations must also have some high-performance skills to work
within cross-functional teams that include a variety of roles, such as programmers, statisticians, data
scientists, data engineers, graphic designers, and others. Besides that, the data science toolkit is more
varied and more technically sophisticated than the BI toolkit. DS professionals use not only SQL, but
also advanced statistical packages, NoSQL databases, big-data tools like Hadoop, advanced
visualization tools like Tableau, and others.
Taking into account a different students’ backgrounds in a computing area one of the possible
ways to help universities to close the gap in DS multidisciplinary skills is to use some special
educational methodic not only to improve a learning process especially focused on the big data
analytics students’ skills development but also to give them a more strict identification state of the art
of their current skills and competences in an explicit form and means/instruments to compare them
with the necessary subset of DS skills. Because ontologies have a great potential to accumulate the
knowledge in a systematic form and to depict it in clear graphic form ontologies in our opinion are
very suitable for these purposes.
We have had good experiences in the use of ontology engineering methods for different purposes
within the educational process and students research work according to varied learning objectives
(Alexandrov & Alexandrov, 2015; Alexandrov, N. Cherenkova & Chuprina, 2010; Chuprina &
Statsenko, 2010; Chuprina, 2015; Ryabinin & Chuprina, 2015b). According to the topic of this paper
we also suggest using a domain or an application ontology not only as a subject of study but also as a
learning tool helping students to construct their own ontological profile within DS area and related
educational trajectory.

3 Methodological aspects of Ontology Design Training
In this paper we describe how we teach students to build their research domain ontology, how it
can help them to improve their Computer Science skills and enable them to improve their research
work and take part in real-world projects. According (Gómez-Pérez, Fernández-López, & Corcho,
2007), ontology engineering is “the set of activities that concern the ontology development process,
the ontology life cycle, and the methodologies, tools and languages for building ontologies”. It must
be well-organized process supervised by the teacher or the specialist from industry with a good
experience in ontology engineering. At the beginning of this section, we give some methodological
recommendations about how to help students having different backgrounds and different specialties to
learn ontology engineering methods and construct their own first ontology. Then we discuss some use
cases and describe our suggestions how to transfer the existing experience in the improvement of
students’ Computer Science skills by means of research domain ontology construction of the DS field.
We believe that our suggestions can help students to meet the requirements for the new DS
specializations.
One of our aims is to teach the students from the different IT-specializations (and not only IT) to
construct their own research area domain ontology. We suggest to involve a learning of ontology
engineering methods at the Bachelor level not only for Computer Science professionals training but
also for every IT-specialist training and even, ideally for any university Bachelor program (at 4-th year
of education) to help students to improve her/his research skills and to get the methodological basis for
further collaborative skills development to work in an interdisciplinary projects.
We recommend beginning with the brief Introduction to Ontologies and Semantic Web (see, for
example, http://www.obitko.com/tutorials/ontologies-semantic-web/introduction.html) and discuss the
Thomas Gruber ontology definition as "explicit specification of conceptualization". Then instead of
more formal declaration we give a simple clear understandable example showing the necessity of

1783

Using Ontology Engineering Methods to Improve CS and DS Skills

Svetlana Chuprina, et al.

semantic contextual search and the role of ontology to enrich the query for more relevant ranking of
retrieval results similar to the following query (without inverted commas or any other quotes): <Red
List of Perm>.
As the left part of Figure 1 shows, the first (!) and seven references from the top positions of the
first page of ranking (and a number of next ones not shown in this picture) of this query retrieval
results are not pertinent (data of access via Google search engine is 30.01.2016). To do our demo
ontology more applicable and reusable we integrate it with the data base of regions (<DB of regions>)
and use it’s interpretation for automated transformation of source query text about Red List of any
region to the follows “Red List” + <Name of Region> during the pre-processing. In our case the
source query is automatic transformed to the query “Red List” + Perm. The right part of Figure 1
demonstrates example of demo ontology “Red List of Regions” and the related retrieval results which
are more pertinent to the source query due to the automated pre-processing.
After that, because ontology enables “to share common understanding of the structure of
information among people or software agents” (Noy & McGuinness, 2001) we discuss the issues
related to the features of ontology representation of knowledge such as following:
 enabling reuse of domain knowledge;
 making domain assumptions explicit;
 separating domain knowledge from the operational knowledge;
 analyzing domain knowledge and others.
Any student from any specialization including Data Scientist and Data Engineer must after the first
lesson to prepare the list of definitions, main concepts related to its research domain and to send this
list to the educator. The teacher can select one or two domain area descriptions that are more
understandable for most students and at the next lesson can demonstrate all the life cycle steps on
ontology development beginning with requirement and domain analysis. It is possible to use for this
purpose the results of ontology development of the previous year students.
First of all, it is necessary to determine the domain of interest and scope. In our case we suggest
bachelors to construct such domain ontology that can be used as a basis of their graduation work
overview chapter. Additionally, we recommend using the result of identification step as a glossary of
graduation research work (bachelor/master thesis).
The main steps of the life cycle of ontology development are as follows:
1. Determine the domain and scope of the ontology.
2. Consider reusing existing ontologies.
3. Enumerate important terms in the ontology (identification step).
4. Define the classes and the class hierarchy.
5. Define attributes and relationships.
6. Define the restrictions of the properties.
7. Create instances.

1784

Using Ontology Engineering Methods to Improve CS and DS Skills

Svetlana Chuprina, et al.

Physeter macrocephalus - The IUCN Red List of
Threatened ...
www.iucnredlist.org/details/41755/0
Range Description: The Sperm Whale has a large
geographic range (Rice 1989). It can be seen in nearly all
marine regions, from the equator to high latitudes, ...
Salamandrella keyserlingii - The IUCN Red List of ...
www.iucnredlist.org/details/59114/0
It is listed in the Red Data Books of the Middle Urals (Perm
and Sverdlovsk provinces of Russia) and the Yamal-Nenets
Autonomous County (Russia), Altaiskii ...
[PDF]Astragalus wolgensis - The IUCN Red List of
Threatened ...
www.iucnredlist.org/pdflink.20024492
Surveys in 2007 in Perm Region shown the species did not
experience any significant change and the population
remained stable, therefore, any measures to ...
[DOC]Botanical Garden of the Perm State University,
Russia: its ...
www.psu.ru/.../Botanical_Garden_of_the_Perm...
The oldest in the Urals botanical garden of the Perm
University (Perm Botanical .... Now the living collection of
the Red List plants of the Perm region totals 47 ...
[PDF]European Red List of Birds 2015
www.birdlife.org/.../22718550_anthus_hodgso...
The European Union (EU27) Red List assessments were
based principally on .... Changes of range borders of some
bird species in Perm Territory at XX century.
About Perm region
www.visitperm.ru/en/about/.../rastitelnyy-mir.p...
Perm region occupies the dark coniferous taiga zone. Two
sub-zones ... Over 60 plant species are included into the
Red List of Perm region. They include the ...
List of current Permanent Representatives to the
United ...
https://en.wikipedia.org/.../List_of_current_Per...
This is a list of the current Permanent Representatives to
the United Nations at United Nations ..... International
Committee of the Red Cross, Walter A. Füllemann ...

IUCN Red List maps
maps.iucnredlist.org/
Explore and discover Red List species ranges and
observations. Not found: perm
Salamandrella keyserlingii - The IUCN Red List of ...
www.iucnredlist.org/details/59114/0
The IUCN Red List of Threatened Species(tm), 2015- .... It is
listed in the Red Data Books of the Middle Urals (Perm and
Sverdlovsk provinces of Russia) and the ...
[PDF]Astragalus wolgensis - The IUCN Red List of
Threatened ...
www.iucnredlist.org/pdflink.20024492
The IUCN Red List of Threatened Species™ is produced and
managed by the ... Surveys in 2007 in Perm Region shown the
species did not experience any ...
Geronticus eremita - The IUCN Red List of Threatened
...
www.iucnredlist.org/details/22697488/0
Red List Category & Criteria: Critically Endangered C2a(ii) ver
3.1 ..... during 2009 were halted by delays in obtaining
permissions from the Turkish authorities, ...
[DOC]Botanical Garden of the Perm State University,
Russia: its ...
www.psu.ru/.../Botanical_Garden_of_the_Perm...
The oldest in the Urals botanical garden of the Perm
University (Perm Botanical .... Now the living collection of the
Red List plants of the Perm region totals 47 ...
About Perm region
www.visitperm.ru/en/about/.../rastitelnyy-mir.p...
Perm region occupies the dark coniferous taiga zone. Two
sub-zones ... Over 60 plant species are included into the Red
List of Perm region. They include the ...

Figure 1: The example of automated pre-processing of source query to achieve more pertinent results due to the
demo ontology “Red List of Regions”

1785

Using Ontology Engineering Methods to Improve CS and DS Skills

Svetlana Chuprina, et al.

The step 2 “Consider reusing existing ontologies” is very important because if suitable existing
ontology is found then its reusing can significantly reduce the time of ontology development. The
existing ontologies may be a requirement if student’s system development within graduation research
work needs to interact with other applications that have already committed to particular ontologies or
controlled vocabularies; a lot of ontologies are already available in electronic form and can be
imported into an ontology-development environment that the students are using. So it is necessary to
discover potential reuse candidates, evaluate their usability, and customize ontology to be reused,
integrate and merge student’s ontology under development to the target ontology.
During the ontology reusing consideration a special attention should be given to the issues of
ontology reusing limits such as mismatches (do not exist), finding “Right Ontology” (difficult to find),
inconsistency and incompleteness (doesn’t fit), modularity (needs only a part of ontology), integration
(alignment, mapping, merging).
At the conceptualization phase (step 4 and step 5) the knowledge of the domain of interest is
structured via the designing of conceptual graph with nodes representing the concepts (terms are
described on the step 3) and links representing the relationships between related concepts. First of all,
it is recommended to construct the taxonomy relations (“is-a”, “class-subclass”). After building
taxonomy of concepts other types of relations are established. Based on our experience we recommend
restricting the set of relationships’ types and suggesting students try to use in addition to the ‘is-a”
relations only the follows types of relations: “a-part-of”, “has”, “synonym”, “use”, and to monitor the
amount of every relations’ type used. In masters educational program not only domain ontologies but
also application ontologies are constructed to improve the adaptability of developed systems and shells
within masters research work. In addition of the above mentioned such types of relations as “elementof-set”, “input”, “output” (for specifications of input and output parameters) are used.
We recommend not to use such type of relations as “see also” during the first steps of creation and
interactive improvement of student’s ontology because our practice demonstrates that students are
very likely to use overwhelmingly this relation type and without bothering to find out whether another
type of relationship is more appropriate.
Formalization phase adds taxonomic and ad-hoc to the common terminology yielding lightweight
(for bachelors) but formal ontologies. The implementation of ontology we recommend to do within
suitable visual ontology editor. As the most accessible ontology editors are intended for ontology
engineers we use ONTOLIS, which is an adaptable visual editor intended for domain experts and
casual users (Chuprina, 2015; Ryabinin & Chuprina, 2015a, 2015b) and can import ontology
specification in OWL standard. Inter alia, the recent version of ONTOLIS allows saving a needed part
of ontology as a new separate ontology.
Ones more activities involved in life cycle of ontology are developed: knowledge acquisition and
evaluation, the educator monitors the first one and makes the second one by itself. The refining of first
ontology is repeated until consensus between the teacher and the student is reached. The process of
interactive improvement of ontology is an adaptation of the Delphi method, a technique for collecting
views of several stakeholders.

4 Using ACM Computing Classification System and Data
Science Ontology to Improve Computer Science Skills
At the “Consider reusing existing ontologies” phase (step 2) we propose to use the mentioned
above ACM Computing Classification System (CCS) or Data Science Ontology as target ontology,
depending on the specifics of the students’ research subject area. We show bellow how to refine and
expand this ontology resources, and what to do if student do not find the right or similar concept
within them, or it is available but is used repeatedly in different contexts.

1786

Using Ontology Engineering Methods to Improve CS and DS Skills

Svetlana Chuprina, et al.

The 2012 ACM Computing Classification System has been developed as a poly-hierarchical
ontology that can be utilized in semantic web applications. It is integrated into the search capabilities
and visual topic displays of the ACM Digital Library and various other libraries, companies, and
publishers such as Springer, IEEE, and Emerald have made use of the ACM CCS. The full CCS
classification tree has flat and interactive views and is freely available for educational and research
purposes in these downloadable formats: SKOS (xml), Word, and HTML. As we recommend for
students using the OWL standard to represent ontology it is necessary firstly to find a suitable place in
the context of parents' concepts hierarchy and nearest siblings and to depict this hierarchy within
ONTOLIS environment.
If somebody doesn’t find the needed place it is necessary to find similar concepts in terms of their
meaning or in terms of similarity of their contexts. Let's see related use case. For example, the
research area of one Master's Student is Competitive Intelligence (CI). There is no “Competitive
Intelligence concept in CCS, but there are some concepts, which have the term “Intelligence” as a part
of its designation. One of them is “Business intelligence”, but this term is represented by several nodes
with the same name in different contexts as it is shown on the Figure 2.
x Applied computing
xEnterprise computing
x Business process management

x
x
x
x
x

Business process modeling
Business process management systems
Business process monitoring
Cross-organizational business processes
Business intelligence

x Information systems
x Information retrieval
x Retrieval tasks and goals

x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x

Question answering
Document filtering
Recommender systems
Information extraction
Sentiment analysis
Expert search
Near-duplicate and plagiarism detection
Clustering and classification
Summarization
Business intelligence

Figure 2: A part of ACM CCS with the different context of the same concept – “Business Intelligence”.

An exploration of parents' concepts hierarchy and nearest siblings including close study of their
definitions helps the student to acquire a deeper understanding of the context of his/her research, an
additional understanding of “Business Intelligence vs Competitive Intelligence” issues, and maybe
there is a need for further consultation with his supervisor to choice the adequate ontology context.
Due to the limitations on the scope of the paper’s volume we show only one example of a student
ontology, which also demonstrates the role of visualization tools. Figure 3 shows application ontology
created by MSc student, which is integrated with ACM CSS terms and is used in a real-world project,
intended to visualize the dynamics of potash mine excavations. Figure 4 represents a screen short of
the end-user interface of a Master’s student mobile application that was automatically generated based
on ontology represented on Figure 3.
How to use our experience in ontology engineering methods teaching to help the Computer
Science students to become a Data Scientists and/or help the Computer Science students to tackle the
DS problems by development more comprehensive assistant/supported tools? We suggest to use the
ontology engineering methods for this purposes and by means of capabilities of visual ontology editor
ONTOLIS to map the Master’s students (or any other specialists) ontology profiles, which is a strong
explicit specification of their current IT skills to the Data Science Ontology.

1787

Using Ontology Engineering Methods to Improve CS and DS Skills

Svetlana Chuprina, et al.

Figure 3: A part of student’s application ontology integrated with ACM CSS terms within ONTOLIS

Figure 4: Mobile application interface automatically generated with the help of the ontology represented on
Figure 3

1788

Using Ontology Engineering Methods to Improve CS and DS Skills

Svetlana Chuprina, et al.

Figure 5: A part of Data Science Ontology by Sean McClure (http://www.datascienceontology.com)

Figure 6: A part of Data Science Ontology showed in Figure 5 within ONTOLIS environment

Within Severo Ochoa project we have begun to create New Data Science Ontology (NDSO) to
help teachers and students as well as researches both in industry and academia to find an explicit form
of their personal trajectory to become Data Scientist and to understand their own gap. We use Data
Science Ontology created by Sean McClure as target ontology (see Figure 5) and we automatically

1789

Using Ontology Engineering Methods to Improve CS and DS Skills

Svetlana Chuprina, et al.

transform this ontology to OWL format (Figure 6 shows the part of this ontology within ONTOLIS).
In future we have the plans to expand and to improve this ontology.

5 Conclusion
The aim of this paper has been to clarify the issues of students’ ontology construction process and
using Computer Classification System and Data Science domain ontology to help not only IT-students
but also any IT-specialists from industry and academia also to tackle the problems addressing the Big
Data and Data Science skills gap. Thanks to Sean McClure (Data Scientist, ThoughtWorks) who is the
author of our target Data Science Ontology within Severo Ochoa project we have an opportunity to
refine and to improve this ontology to give students and other specialists the means for explicit and
strong identification of their Computer Science Skills in a form of personal ontology profile in
comparison with the needed subset of DS skills.
Data science is a rapidly changing field, and so every student must be prepared to keep up with the
state of the art. Due to a big amount of open ontology repositories for different domain areas (see, for
example, http://taxonomies.labs.crossref.org/?page_id=11, http://mmisw.org/orr/, etc.) our approach is
suitable to students who are not IT specialists to help them to take part in collaborative work within
interdisciplinary projects.

References
Alexandrov, N., & Alexandrov, V. (2015). Computational Science Research Methods for Science
Education
at
PG
Level.
Procedia
Computer
Science,
51,
1685–1693.
http://doi.org/10.1016/j.procs.2015.05.305
Alexandrov, N. Cherenkova, N., & Chuprina, S. (2010). Methods to Assess Students’ Experiences in
an Immersive 3D VR Environment. In Proceedings of the 13th Interactive Computer Aided
Learning International Conference ICL2010 (pp. 1248–1254).
Chuprina, S. (2015). Steps towards Bridging the HPC and Computational Science Talent Gap Based
on Ontology Engineering Methods. Procedia Computer Science, 51, 1705–1713.
http://doi.org/10.1016/j.procs.2015.05.308
Chuprina, S., & Statsenko, N. (2010). Using ontology and metadata to integrate elearning resources
and administrative information system of university. In 9th European Conference on eLearning
2010, ECEL 2010 (pp. 171–178).
Council, N. R. (2013). Frontiers in Massive Data Analysis. http://doi.org/18374
Gómez-Pérez, A., Fernández-López, M., & Corcho, O. (2007). Ontological Engineering: With
Examples from the Areas of Knowledge Management, e-Commerce and the Semantic Web.
(Advanced Information and Knowledge Processing). Secaucus, NJ, USA: Springer-Verlag New
York, Inc.
Noy, N. F., & McGuinness, D. L. (2001). Ontology Development 101: A Guide to Creating Your First
Ontology. Stanford Knowledge Systems Laboratory.
Ryabinin, K., & Chuprina, S. (2015a). Development of ontology-based multiplatform adaptive
scientific visualization system. Journal of Computational Science, 10, 370–381.
http://doi.org/10.1016/j.jocs.2015.03.003
Ryabinin, K., & Chuprina, S. (2015b). Using Scientific Visualization Tools to Bridge the Talent Gap.
Procedia Computer Science, 51, 1734–1741. http://doi.org/10.1016/j.procs.2015.05.376
Saswat. (2015). Job Comparison - Data Scientist vs Data Engineer vs Statistician. Retrieved from
http://www.analyticsvidhya.com/blog/2015/10/job-comparison-data-scientist-data-engineerstatistician/

1790

