Procedia Computer Science
Volume 80, 2016, Pages 1601–1611
ICCS 2016. The International Conference on Computational
Science

A New Approach to Ocean Eddy Detection,
Tracking, and Event Visualization
–Application to the Northwest Paciﬁc Ocean–
Daisuke Matsuoka1 , Fumiaki Araki1 , Yumi Inoue1 , and Hideharu Sasaki1
Japan Agency for Marine-Earth Science and Technology (JAMSTEC), Yokohama, Japan
{daisuke,arakif,inouey,sasaki}@jamstec.go.jp

Abstract
High-resolution ocean general circulation models have advanced the numerical study of ocean
eddies. To gain an understanding of ocean eddies from the large volume of data produced by
simulations, visualizing just the distribution of eddies at each time step is insuﬃcient; timevariations in eddy events and phenomena must also be considered. However, existing methods
cannot accurately detect and track eddy events such as amalgamation and bifurcation. In this
study, we propose a new approach for eddy detection, tracking, and event visualization based on
an eddy classiﬁcation system. The proposed method detects streams and currents in addition
to eddies, and it classiﬁes detected eddies into several categories using the additional stream
and current information. By tracking how the classiﬁed eddies vary over time, it is possible
to detect events such as eddy amalgamation and bifurcation as well as the interaction between
eddies and ocean currents. We visualize the detected eddies and events in a time series of
images (or animation), enabling us to gain an intuitive understanding of a region of interest
hidden in a high-resolution data set.
Keywords: Ocean eddy, ocean general circulation model, feature extraction and tracking, visualization

1

Introduction

Ocean eddies play an important role in transferring heat, energy, and material in the ocean.
They also aﬀect global ocean dynamics, weather conditions, and commercial activities such as
ﬁsheries [8]. Understanding ocean eddies has implications for both human activities and ocean
sciences, and satellite observational data have been used in many ocean eddy studies [18, 10].
Recent advances in supercomputing technology have also allowed the development of Ocean
General Circulation Models (OGCMs) for investigating global ocean dynamics [5, 15]. Sasaki
et al. succeeded in using a high-resolution OGCM to reproduce mesoscale (O(100 km)) and
submesoscale (O(10 km)) eddies and to reveal their global and seasonal variability [14]. Such
high-resolution numerical studies have advanced our understanding of eddies, but issues such
Selection and peer-review under responsibility of the Scientiﬁc Programme Committee of ICCS 2016
c The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V.

doi:10.1016/j.procs.2016.05.491

1601

Ocean Eddy Detection, Tracking and Event Visualization . . .

Matsuoka, Araki, Inoue and Sasaki

as eddy generation mechanisms, statistical properties, and inﬂuences on ﬁshery remain to be
explored.
Data visualization is an indispensable technique for helping scientists understand the meaning of numerical simulation results. This is especially true for data sets generated by highresolution OGCMs, which reproduce such a vast number of eddies that it is diﬃcult to use
traditional visualization methods to address “when, where, [and] what kind of phenomena have
occurred” [20, 13, 21, 7]. Visualizing events such as eddy creation, dissipation, amalgamation,
and bifurcation in addition to visualizing position information makes it possible to more intuitively understand eddy behavior. In order to visualize all these events, it is ﬁrst necessary to
detect eddies and track how they change over time.
A number of eddy detection methods have been proposed in the ﬁeld of physical oceanography (e.g. [17, 9, 19, 3, 12]). These methods can identify the core regions and center points of
eddies, however, the outer boundary is not precisely determined during eddy interaction events
such as amalgamation and bifurcation (will be described in detail in 3.1). Thus, most eddy
tracking methods based on these techniques [2, 4] cannot detect eddy amalgamation and bifurcation events; these technique also cannot automatically detect interactions between eddies and
ocean currents. The visualization research community has published a number of studies about
feature tracking, event detection, and visualization [16, 11]; the application of these studies to
ocean eddies has not previously been explored.
In this study, we propose a new method for eddy detection, tracking, and event detection
that is able to treat eddy amalgamation, bifurcation, and interactions with ocean currents.
Furthermore, we show how eddies and eddy events can be visualized to yield an intuitive understanding of the timing, location, and types of eddy events occurring. The manuscript is
organized as follows. In section 2, we present the ocean simulation data used for this study.
In section 3, we describe the conceptual framework and methods for our approach to eddy detection, tracking, and event detection. In section 4, we demonstrate our proposed visualization
method. Finally, a summary of this work is provided in section 5.

2

Data set

The ocean simulation data used in this study is produced by the OGCM for the Earth Simulator
(OFES) [5]. The OFES uses a ﬁnite diﬀerence method to solve the Navier-Stokes equations,
the equation of continuity, the advection-diﬀusion equation, and the sea water equation of state
to determine the time variation of velocity ﬁelds, density, pressure, temperature, and salinity in
the ocean. The original version of OFES is a quasi-global model (it excludes the north and south
polar regions) with a horizontal resulution of 1/10◦ . We performed the northwest Paciﬁc model
of OFES [15] with 1/30◦ horizontal resolution in order to more accurately resolve mesoscale
eddies. The entire simulation domain for this model is shown in Figure 1(a), which depicts
the simulated relative vorticity; the analysis domain of this work is indicated by the black
dashed rectangle within this panel. Panels (b), (c), and (d) in Figure 1 depict the simulated
current speed (velocity magnitude), sea surface height (SSH), and the Okubo-Weiss parameter,
respectively, within the analysis domain. The Okubo-Weiss parameter W is calculated by
velocity ﬁeld (u, v) and is deﬁned as
W = s2n + s2s − ω 2 ,

(1)

where sn = ∂u/∂x − ∂v/∂y and ss = ∂v/∂x + ∂u/∂y are the normal and shear components of
strain, and ω = ∂v/∂x − ∂u/∂y is the relative vorticity.
1602

Ocean Eddy Detection, Tracking and Event Visualization . . .

Matsuoka, Araki, Inoue and Sasaki

Figure 1: Ocean simulation data for January 1, 2001. Panel (a) shows the relative vorticity for
the entire simulation domain (the analysis domain is indicated by the dashed black rectangle).
The remaining panels show only the analysis domain and display: (b) current speed (magnitude
of the velocity), (c) sea surface height (SSH), and (d) the Okubo-Weiss parameter.
Note that these variables are shown in just two dimensions; this is not intended to be a study
of the three-dimensional conﬁguration of eddies and currents. The simulation reproduces a large
number of eddies in the vicinity of the Kuroshio Current, a strong ocean current indicated by
the red solid line in Figure 1(b), which is why we selected this region for our analysis domain.

3
3.1

Methods
Basic Conceptual Framework

Ocean eddies are streams of water rotating around a central point; they are classiﬁed as either
warm or cold depending on their temperature relative to the surrounding water. An example
warm eddy is indicated by the black dashed box in Figure 1(b), with typical physical properties
shown in Figure 2. Panels (a), (b), (c) and (d) in Figure 2 depict the velocity ﬁeld, SSH,
current speed, and the Okubo-Weiss parameter, respectively. The right side of panels (b),
(c) and (d) shows how these variables vary across the eddy. In the Northern Hemisphere,
warm eddies ﬂow clockwise and display an upward convex structure, whereas cold eddies ﬂow
counterclockwise with a downward convex structure; these rotation directions are reversed in
1603

Ocean Eddy Detection, Tracking and Event Visualization . . .

Matsuoka, Araki, Inoue and Sasaki

the Southern Hemisphere.
The center of a warm eddy can be easily detected because it is a critical point in the velocity
ﬁeld, a local maximum in the SSH, and a local minimum in the Okubo-Weiss parameter.
Accurately identifying an eddy’s outer boundary is not as easy. Intuitively, the outer boundary
of the eddy in Figure 2(a) is indicated by a red dashed oval (the boundary between fast ﬂow
region of eddy and the surrounding area), and the location of the peak current speed is indicated
by the yellow dashed oval in Figure 2(a).
Previous studies have used two types of eddy boundary detection methods: threshold-based
and geometry-based. The most widely used threshold-based method uses the Okubo-Weiss
parameter, which compares relative vorticity to strain; a negative value of the Okubo-Weiss
parameter indicates that relative vorticity dominates over strain, which tends to be true in the
inner part of an eddy [9, 19]. For our example eddy, this method places the eddy boundary
inside the yellow dashed line in Figure 2; the detected eddy is thus considerably smaller than the
actual eddy (red dashed line). Geometry-based boundary detection methods use contour lines
in SSH, deﬁning the eddy’s outer boundary to be the outermost closed contour surrounding the
center point of the eddy [3]. However, this method breaks down during certain eddy events. For
example, during an amalgamation event, the close proximity of two detected eddies causes the
outermost closed contour lines to underestimate the size of the eddies, as shown in Figure 3(a).
This limitation is similar to that of the winding angle method [12] which detects the largest
semi-closed streamline within a vector ﬁeld. The many other eddy detection methods [1, 22]
based on the above techniques suﬀer from similar problems.
In order to accurately detect and track eddies during amalgamation and bifurcation events,
we separate the detection of an eddy’s inner and outer regions in this study. This approach is
based on the fact that the interior of an eddy has a convex shape and is surrounded by a fast
ﬂowing outer region. The inner region of an eddy will have a negative Okubo-Weiss parameter,
so we deﬁne the boundary of the upward or downward convex inner region including a eddy’s
center point with the negative Okubo-Weiss parameter. To deﬁne the boundary for the eddy’s
outer, fast ﬂowing region, we use a current speed threshold parameter. Our approach then uses
the combined inner and outer regions to deﬁne the eddy, as shown in Figure 3(b); during the
amalgamation event shown in the ﬁgure, the outer boundaries determined from the fast ﬂow
region correspond well to the actual eddy boundaries.

3.2

Eddy Detection

The ﬁrst step in eddy detection is to identify the center point of each eddy from SSH and
velocity ﬁeld data. Local maxima and minima in SSH are detected using a 9×9 grid ﬁlter,
shown in Figure 4(a); although the hybrid detection method [22] uses a 5×5 grid ﬁlter, the size
of our ﬁlter is determined by the target eddy size (eddies larger than 30 km for this study).
These ﬁlters detect the local maxima and minima points from which SSH value decreases (for
warm eddy) or increases (for cold eddy) toward the outside eight direction as shown in Figure 4
(a). Some local maxima and minima occur outside of eddies, so only points with negative values
of the Okubo-Weiss parameter are considered to be eddy center points; this is consistent with
the hybrid detection method [22]. The resulting warm and cold eddy center points are indicated
by red and blue points in Figure 4(b), respectively.
Next, the inner regions of the eddies are detected using SSH contour lines; the outermost
closed contour line deﬁnes an eddy’s inner region boundary using a SSH threshold parameter.
Scanning the value of a inﬂextion point of SSH from the eddy’s center point toward the outside
during the entire 360 degree, the highest SSH value on the inﬂextion points is determined as the
1604

Ocean Eddy Detection, Tracking and Event Visualization . . .

Matsuoka, Araki, Inoue and Sasaki

Figure 2: Example physical properties of a warm eddy: (a) velocity ﬁeld, (b) sea surface height
(SSH), (c) current speed, and (d) Okubo-Weiss parameter. The red dashed oval in panel (a)
represents the eddy’s outer boundary, while the yellow dashed oval indicates the location of the
peak current speed. The right-hand plots in panels (b), (c), and (d) are traces along the line
A-A’, the white dashed line in panel (a), for each physical property.

Figure 3: Detection of eddies during an amalgamation event using (a) an SSH-based method and
(b) our method. In panel (a), the red area indicates the eddy detected by the SSH contour, and
the red dashed line indicates the actual eddy boundary (intuitively extracted by the authors).
In panel (b), the red area indicates the inner eddy region and the green area indicates the fast
ﬂowing, outer eddy region.

threshold value for inner region boundary. We then want to detect streams by ﬁnding areas of
fast ﬂow relative to the local current speed. For our analysis, we use a current speed threshold
of 0.6 m/s in order to investigate eddies in the vicinity of the Kuroshio Current (which has
a typical speed of over 0.6 m/s). The resulting detected eddies and streams are depicted in
Figure 4(c); red, blue, and green regions indicate warm eddies, cold eddies, and stream regions,
respectively. Streams of especially large size (here, their horizontal area are 50,000km2 and
1605

Ocean Eddy Detection, Tracking and Event Visualization . . .

Matsuoka, Araki, Inoue and Sasaki

Figure 4: Eddy detection sequence: (a) ﬁlter for detecting warm eddy centers (top) and cold
eddy centers (bottom), (b) identiﬁed eddy centers with negative Okubo-Weiss parameters (red
indicates a warm eddy, blue indicates a cold eddy), and (c) detected warm eddies, cold eddies,
streams, and currents.

Figure 5: Eddy classiﬁcation system: (a) eddy, (b) eddy with streams(s), (c) eddies within the
same stream, (d) eddy with current, and (e) eddy with current and stream.
over) are deﬁned as current regions and are shown in yellow.
Based on how they relate to streams or currents, the detected eddies are classiﬁed into the
following ﬁve types: (a) eddy, (b) eddy with stream(s), (c) eddies within the same stream, (d)
eddy with current, and (e) eddy with current and stream. These ﬁve types are illustrated in
Figure 5. Types (a) and (b) are distinguished by the presence or absence of a stream region.
Type (c) eddies can be used to identify amalgamation and bifurcation events, and types (d)
and (e) are used for detecting the interaction between eddies and ocean currents.

3.3

Eddy Tracking and Event Detection

Once eddies have been identiﬁed, the next step is to apply a feature tracking algorithm to detect
variations in individual eddies and events over time. While several feature tracking methods
have ever been proposed [2, 4], we adopt the overlapping method because it is easy to implement
and has a low computational cost [16]. The use of the overlapping method for ﬁve types of
eddies (simpliﬁed to one-dimension rather than two) is shown in Figure 6 and described below.
1606

Ocean Eddy Detection, Tracking and Event Visualization . . .

Matsuoka, Araki, Inoue and Sasaki

Figure 6: A conceptual representation of eddy tracking using the overlapping method in onedimension for ﬁve types of eddy events.
This method automatically correlates eddies between the previous and current time steps using
their spatial overlap as follows:
• continuation – An eddy from the previous time step corresponds to just one eddy in the
current time step (no interaction with other eddies).
• amalgamation (or merge) – Two eddies from the previous time step correspond to one
eddy in the current time step.
• creation (or birth) – An eddy in the current time step does not correspond to any
eddies in previous time step.
• dissipation (or death) – An eddy from previous time step does not correspond to any
eddies in the current time step.
• bifurcation (or split) – An eddy from the previous time step corresponds to two
eddies in the current time step.
This method cannot be applied to data sets with coarse temporal resolution because identical
features in previous and current step will not spatially overlap. However, our data has a 1 day
time step, and eddies move at most 10 km over 1 day; this movement is much smaller than
the eddy size we consider (30 km and larger), therefore we can assume that eddies will always
spatially overlap between time steps.
We use the eddy feature tracking described above along with our eddy classiﬁcation system
(Figure 5) to track the evolution of eddies over time and identify eddy events. For example,
by identifying “eddies within the same stream” (shown in Figure 5(c)), eddies undergoing
amalgamation and bifurcation events can be detected. Feature tracking then allows us to
identify the individual eddies from before and after these events, shown in Figures 7(a) and (b),
demonstrating that this type of eddy is an intermediate stage. In the same way, the “eddy with
current and stream” (Figure 5(d)) and the “eddy with current” (Figure 5(e)) classiﬁcations
represent times when the ocean current has temporarily trapped an eddy during an interaction;
Figures 7(c) and (d) show these two types of eddies joining and separating from the ocean
current.
1607

Ocean Eddy Detection, Tracking and Event Visualization . . .

Matsuoka, Araki, Inoue and Sasaki

Figure 7: Event detection based on eddy tracking and classiﬁcation: (a) amalgamation, (b)
bifurcation, (c) merge to current and (d) separation from current.

4

Results

Numerical simulation results generated by high-resolution OGCMs reproduce such a large number and wide variety of eddies that it becomes diﬃcult to use traditional visualization methods
to identify interesting phenomena. In this study, we have proposed a method for eddy detection, tracking, and event detection that can be used to produce visualization images to help
researchers intuitively understand the region of interest.
Our visualization technique uses diﬀerent colors and brightness levels to indicate diﬀerent
phenomena; this approach is commonly utilized in ocean sciences [6]. Static warm eddies, cold
eddies, streams, and currents (those with no events occurring) are colored by slightly dimmed
(brightness = 50%) red, blue, green and yellow pixels, respectively. Bright colors (brightness =
100%) indicate eddies (and the stream regions around them) during events where no dissipation
occurs, such as splitting or merging with each other or the ocean currents. Eddies that have
dissipated since the previous time step are depicted in dark colors (brightness = 10%) in the
current time step.
Figure 8 shows such a visualization for the amalgamation of two eddies. Two separate
stream regions around two independent eddies merge into one stream around two separate
eddy centers, and then the two eddies merge completely. The eddies and streams during and
after the amalgamation event are highlighted using bright colors while the rest of the region
remains dark. This visualization of the region during eddy amalgamation and bifurcation events
makes it easier to intuitively understand the energy exchange occurring.
The separation of a warm eddy from the Kuroshio Current is visualized in Figure 9. The
warm eddy is initially trapped within the Kuroshio Current, then it separates from the current,
and ﬁnally it becomes an isolated warm eddy with a stream region; the warm eddy is represented
by a bright red color at the time of its separation. This visualization shows how a warm eddy
1608

Ocean Eddy Detection, Tracking and Event Visualization . . .

Matsuoka, Araki, Inoue and Sasaki

Figure 8: Visualization of an eddy amalgamation event over three time steps.
can penetrate from the south into the north area of the Kuroshio Current. When this happens,
the Kuroshio Current is disconnected, as shown by the white dashed oval from July 30-31, 2001.
Although we show only the sequential images here, we can combine similar images over long
time periods to create a movie which very clearly shows the cold and warm water exchange in
this ocean system by highlighting the interaction between ocean currents and eddies.

Figure 9: Visualization of a warm eddy’s separation from the Kuroshio Current.

5

Summary and Discussion

We have proposed a new method of eddy detection, tracking, event detection, and visualization
based on a hybrid deﬁnition of eddies using SSH, velocity ﬁelds, eddy classiﬁcation, and feature
tracking. We applied our method to high-resolution ocean simulation data, and we succeeded in
identifying eddy events such as amalgamation, bifurcation, creation, continuation and dissipation. We also readily identify interactions between eddies and ocean currents, such as mergers
and separations. Furthermore, we use highlighted colors to visualize regions of interest where
eddy events occur to aid in forming an intuitive understanding of information-dense numerical
simulation data.
In addition producing useful visualizations, our proposed method can also be used to produce
and store data about eddies and eddy events. These results can be provided in an easily
searchable database so oceanographers can identify eddies with speciﬁc properties and perform
relevant statistical analyses. For example, an analysis of eddies including nutrient salt and
ocean current with a school of ﬁsh could be used to investigate the relationship between eddies
and ﬁshery.
In this study, we used a current speed threshold value to extract streams and currents
from the data, taking the typical speed of the Kuroshio Current into consideration. For this
reason, our proposed method might not be immediately applicable to ocean areas other than
1609

Ocean Eddy Detection, Tracking and Event Visualization . . .

Matsuoka, Araki, Inoue and Sasaki

the northwest Paciﬁc. In order to apply our proposed method to a global scale, it is necessary
to improve our proposed method with regard to the current and stream detection.
Our proposed eddy detection and tracking method is a post processing approach applied
after numerical simulations are run. Using this approach to track submesoscale structures at
smaller temporal and spatial scales would require simulation data with very high temporal
resolution; doing this in post processing is not realistic because it would require too much disk
space for data storage. In the future, in-situ processing, where feature detection and tracking
are carried out on a supercomputer during the numerical simulation, will likely be key to better
understanding the mechanisms driving submesoscale ocean structures.

References
[1] F. J. Beron-Vera, Y. Wang, M. J. Olascoaga, G. J. Goni, and G. Haller. Objective detection of
oceanic eddies and the agulhas leakage. Journal of Physical Oceanography, 43:1426–1438, 2013.
[2] D. B. Chelton, M. G. Schlax, R. M. Samelson, and R. A. Szoeke. Global observations of large
oceanic eddies. Geophysical Research Letters, 34, 2007.
[3] F. Fang and R. Morrow. Evolution, movement and decay of warm-core leeuwin current eddies.
Deep-Sea Research II, 50(12):2245–2261, 2003.
[4] E. Mason, A. Pascual, and J. C. McWilliams. A new sea surface height-based code for oceanic
mesoscale eddy tracking. Journal of Atmospheric and Oceanic Technology, 32:1181–1426, 2014.
[5] Y. Masumoto, H. Sasaki, T. Kagimoto, N. Komori, A. Ishida, Y. Sasai, T. Miyama, T. Motoi,
H. Mitsudera, K. Takahashi, H. Sakuma, and T. Yamagata. A ﬁfty-year eddy-resolving simulation
of the world ocean: Preliminary outcomes of ofes (ogcm for the earth simulator). Journal of the
Earth Simulator, 1:35–56, 2004.
[6] D. Matsuoka, F. Araki, S. Kida, H. Sasaki, and B. Taguchi. Visualization for ocean general
circulation model via multi-dimensional transfer function and multivariate analysis. Transaction
of the Japan Society for Simulation Technology, 4(4):168–175, 2012.
[7] D. Matsuoka, F. Araki, and Y. Yamashita. Multiple scatter plots-based multi-dimensional transfer
function and its application to ocean data visualization. Journal of Advanced Simulation in Science
and Engineering, 2(2):292–308, 2015.
[8] J. C. McWilliams. The nature and consequence of oceanic eddies. Eddy-Resolving Ocean Modeling,
edited by M. Hecht and H. Hasumi, AGU Monograph, pages 5–15, 2008.
[9] A. Okubo. Horizontal dispersion of ﬂoatable particles in the vicinity of velocity singularities such
as convergences. Deep Sea Research and Oceanographic Abstracts, 17:445–454, 1970.
[10] A. Pascual, Y. Faugere, G. Larnicol, and P. Y. Le Traon. Improved description of the ocean
mesoscale variability by combining four satellite altimeters. Geophysical Research Letters, 33(2),
2006.
[11] F. Reinders, F. H. Post, and H. J. W. Spoelder. Visualization of time-dependent data using feature
tracking and event detection. The Visual Computer, 17:55–71, 2001.
[12] I. Ari Sadarjoen and F. H. Post. Detection, quantiﬁcation, and tracking of vortices using streamline
geometry. Computers & Graphics, 24(3):333–341, 2000.
[13] F. Samsel, M. Petersen, G. Abram, T. L. Turton, D. Rogers, and J. Ahrens. Visualization of
ocean currents and eddies in a high-resolution global ocean-climate model. In Proceedings of
the International Conference on High Performance Computing, Networking, Storage and Analysis
2015, November 2015.
[14] H. Sasaki, P. Klein, B. Qiu, and Y. Sasai. Impact of oceanic scale-interactions on the seasonal
modulation of ocean dynamics by the atmosphere. Nature Communications, 5(5636), 2014.

1610

Ocean Eddy Detection, Tracking and Event Visualization . . .

Matsuoka, Araki, Inoue and Sasaki

[15] H. Sasaki, M. Nonaka, Y. Masumoto, Y. Sasai, H. Uehara, and H. Sakuma. An eddy-resolving
hindcast simulation of the quasi-global ocean from 1950 to 2003 on the earth simulator. High
Resolution Numerical Modeling of the Atmosphere and Ocean, pages 157–186, 2008.
[16] D. Silver and X. Wang. Volume tracking. In Proceedings on IEEE Visualization ’96, October
1996.
[17] J. Villasenor and A. Vincent. An algorithm for space recognition and time tracking of vorticity
tubes in turbulence. CVGIP: Image Understanding, 55(1):27–35, 1992.
[18] G. Wang, J. Su, and P. C. Chu. Mesoscale eddies in the south china sea observed with altimeter
data. Geophysical Research Letters, 30(21), 2003.
[19] J. Weiss. The dynamics of enstrophy transfer in two-dimensional hydrodynamics. Physica D,
48:273–294, 1991.
[20] S. Williams, M. Petersen, P. T. Hecht, V. Pascucci, J. Ahrens, M. Hlawitschka, and B. Hamann.
Adaptive extraction and quantiﬁcation of geophysical vortices. IEEE Transactions on Visualization
and Computer Graphics, 17(12), 2011.
[21] J. Woodring, M. Petersen, A. Schmeißer, J. Patchett, J. Ahrens, and H. Hagen. In situ eddy analysis in a high-resolution ocean climate model. IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer
Graphics, 22(1):857–866, 2015.
[22] J. Yi, Y. Du, Z. He, and C. Zhou. Enhancing the accuracy of automatic eddy detection and the
capability of recognizing the multi-core structures from maps of sea level anomaly. Ocean Science,
10:39–48, 2014.

1611

