Procedia Computer Science
Volume 80, 2016, Pages 1846–1855
ICCS 2016. The International Conference on Computational
Science

Reducing Data Uncertainty in Surface Meteorology using
Data Assimilation: A Comparison Study
A. Farguell1 , J. Mor´e2 , A. Cort´es1 , J.R. Mir´o2 , T. Margalef1 , and V. Altava2
1

HPCA4SE research group, Computer Architecture and Operating Systems department,
Universitat Aut`
onoma de Barcelona, 08193 Bellaterra, Spain
{angel.farguell;ana.cortes;tomas.margalef}@uab.cat
2
Servei Meteorol`
ogic de Catalunya,
08029 Barcelona, Spain
{jmore;jrmiro;valtava}@meteo.cat

Abstract
Data assimilation in weather forecasting is a well-known technique used to obtain an improved
estimation of the current state of the atmosphere (analysis). The Meteorological Service of
Catalunya (SMC) is seeking for a real time high resolution analysis of surface parameters over
Catalonia (north-east of Spain), in order to know the current weather conditions at any point of
that region. For this purpose, a comparative study among several data assimilation experiments
based on LAPS (Local Analysis and Prediction System) and STMAS (Space-Time Multiscale
Analysis System) and multi-regression technique designed at SMC, has been performed to determine which one delivers best results. The comparison has been done using as true state
independent observational data provided by the Spanish Meteorological State Agency (Agencia Estatal de METeorologia, AEMET). The results show that the multi-regression technique
provides more accurate analyses of temperature and relative humidity than the LAPS/STMAS
experiments, mainly due to the fact that multi-regression methodology only uses observations
and consequently the model biases are avoided.
Keywords: Data Uncertainty, Meteorology, Data Assimilation, Numerical Methods

1

Introduction

Weather forecast at high resolution is a complex problem that requires deep studies. There
exist meteorological models (such as WRF, Weather Research and Forecasting model) that try
to predict the evolution of meteorological variables and provide an estimation of the state of the
atmosphere at a given time instant. These models take advantage of the physical balances and
patterns consistency to provide their estimations. However, these estimations are complemented
and compared with real observations to compensate the deviations of the models and to improve
the estimation of the variables evolution [2]. This process is widely used in the area and is called
1846

Selection and peer-review under responsibility of the Scientiﬁc Programme Committee of ICCS 2016
c The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V.

doi:10.1016/j.procs.2016.05.475

Reducing Data Uncertainty in Surface Meteorology

A. Farguell et al.

data assimilation. The real observations and the model estimations are combined to generate
the analysis corresponding to the state of the atmosphere in that particular time instant. So,
the weather forecast modelling with data assimilation constitute the usual way of carrying out
the weather prediction. The main components in a data assimilation process are:
• Background: The state before the data assimilation process that generally uses the
output of the previous forecast (assuming consistency in time).
• Observations: The value of the variables in its true state, it means measured in a
meteorological station.
• Analysis: The result of the data assimilation process. It can be used as background and
it can be compared with independent observations data to determine the correctness of
the assimilation process.

Figure 1: Diagram of a data assimilation
process

Figure 2: Experimental study data workﬂow
Figure 1 depicts the data assimilation scheme used in this work. It should be considered that
the meteorological models provide their estimated values for diﬀerent meteorological variables
at a given spatial and temporal resolutions, and the observed values in meteorological stations
usually are obtained in diﬀerent point and with diﬀerent time intervals. So, there are several
methods that can be used to assimilate the observed data into the analysis. In this work, a
comparison study is carried to determine the best data assimilation method. Therefore, the
paper is organised as follows: Section 2 presents the most commonly used data assimilation
methods. Section 3 introduce a new data assimilation method based on multi-regression. Section 4 presents a particular case study used to carry out the comparison between the diﬀerent
data assimilation methods and section 5 summarizes the results. Finally, section 6 presents the
main conclusions of this work.

2

Data assimilation methods

Data assimilation in weather forecast is the process of incorporating real observations into a
numerical model in order to obtain the best estimate of the current state of the atmosphere
1847

Reducing Data Uncertainty in Surface Meteorology

A. Farguell et al.

(analysis). The ﬁrst component of the data assimilation process is the calculation of the background. ECMWF (European Centre for Medium-Range Weather Forecasts) provides to SMC,
a grid of 55 km with 12 pressure vertical levels. Then, using a spatial interpolation process in
three dimensional space, a 27 km grid with 31 mass vertical levels or η vertical coordinates (the
coordinates, which are used in the model equations) is generated. They are deﬁned as:
η=

ph − pht
μ

where μ = phs − pht , ph is the hydrostatic component of the pressure, phs is the hydrostatic
pressure value along the surface boundary (it changes depending on the land or orography)
and pht is the hydrostatic pressure value along the top boundary (it is a constant). Therefore,
η varies from 1 at the surface to 0 at the upper boundary of the model domain. After that,
the Weather Research and Forecasting (WRF) model is run at the parent domain (27 km
grid length) up to 72 hours using the interpolated data of ECMWF as boundary conditions
[8][9]. In a similar way, a second run of WRF model is performed for a smaller domain using
a ﬁner grid (9 km grid length) up to 48 hours. This nested run uses the coarser resolution
outputs as boundary conditions. Finally, a third simulation for the same lead time is run in a
smaller domain, this time for a 3 km grid. This ﬁnal data will be our background in the data
assimilation methods [6].

Figure 3: Representation of one-way nesting in SMC (from [6])
Local Analysis and Prediction System (LAPS) LAPS is a numerical data assimilation
system that combines a lot of information from diﬀerent data sources and it ﬁnally returns a high
temporal resolution analysis in a ﬁne grid. It is ideal in the context of real time predictions
over Catalonia. This data assimilation system is used in a lot of tools in SMC and it is an
important part of some forecasting models because it is computationally eﬃcient. Finally, it is
necessary to check the variables because LAPS does not consider the interactions and there are
some variables which are not independent each other. Basically, LAPS is based on a successive
correction technique with Barnes weighting. In a successive correction method, the background
variables are modiﬁed by the observations in an iterative manner [1][4]. The ﬁeld at grid point
(i, j) is updated according to:
K

xm+1
i,j

=

xm
i,j

+

k=1

m
(k))(ok − xm
(wi,j
k )
K

k=1

(1)
m (k)
wi,j

+

2

where xm
i,j is the background value of the variable at the grid point (i, j) and the iteration number
m, ok is the observation k of the K points inside the radius of inﬂuence that surrounds the grid
1848

Reducing Data Uncertainty in Surface Meteorology

A. Farguell et al.

m
point (i, j). wi,j
(k) is the value of the weighting function that depends on the observation k
and the grid point (i, j), and 2 is an estimate of the ratio of the observation error to the ﬁrst
guess ﬁeld error. Therefore, if it assumes that the observations are perfect, then 2 = 0.
In Barnes weighting:
m
wi,j
(k) = e

−di,j (k)2
2R2

(2)

where di,j (k) is the distance between the grid point (i, j) and the observation k and R is the
radius of inﬂuence. Then, in each iteration, the equation 1 is calculated using 2, the analysis
becomes the background of the next iteration and the radius of inﬂuence decreases. Therefore,
each iteration improves the result because it ﬁts better with ﬁner scale structure. The process
stops when ”ﬁne scale structure and ﬁt to observations become commensurate with observation
spacing and instrument errors”1 .
Space-Time Multiscale Analisys System (STMAS) STMAS is a multigrid numerical
data assimilation method, based on a simpliﬁed 3-Dimensional VARiational Analysis (3DVAR)
technique, which is iteratively applied in a reﬁnement process (like LAPS). One important
diﬀerence between 3DVAR and STMAS is that the last one performs a univariate analysis,
that is, it runs with each variable independently. So, at the end of the process it should be
necessary to apply some physical constraints, because it does not consider the interactions
between variables. Therefore, STMAS takes some good things from 3DVAR, but still has some
important limitations.
First of all, 3DVAR is a variational method that consists in weighting the observations
according to statistical information regarding their errors [5]. The aim is to minimize a cost
function J(x) that is the Jacobian of x ∈ Rn vector where n is the number of grid points:
1
(x − xb )T B −1 (x − xb ) + (H(x) − xo )T R−1 (H(x) − xo )
(3)
2
where xb is the vector of background values (dimension n), xo is the vector of observation values
(dimension p), H is the operator that transforms the coordinates of x from analysis ﬁeld to
observation points (it goes from dimension n to dimension p), and B and R are respectively the
covariance matrix of background error and observations error (respectively, dimension n × n
and p × p). The STMAS uses the formula of 3DVAR (equation 3) but applying it in an iterative
way. The cost function in the k step is:
J(x) =

J (k) (X (k) ) =

1
X (k)
2

T

B (k)

−1

X (k) + Q(k)

T

R(k)

−1

Q(k)

(4)

where B (k) and R(k) are respectively the covariance matrix of background error and observations
error in the step k and Q(k) = H (k) X (k) − Y (k) is the diﬀerence between the observation matrix
(Y ) and the model matrix in the observation space (HX) in the k step where the observation
matrix in the ﬁrst step is:
Y (1) = Yo − H (1) Xb
where Yo is the matrix with the values of the real observations and Xb is the matrix with the
values of the background. And in the rest of the steps, the observation matrices are:
Y (k) = Y (k−1) − H (k−1) X (k−1) , ∀k = 2, . . . , K
1 From

the Ph.D. of Christopher A. Hiemstra [3].

1849

Reducing Data Uncertainty in Surface Meteorology

A. Farguell et al.

Then, in each step, it calculates X (k) such that J (k) is minimum and ﬁnally, the solution is:
K

X = Xb +

X (k)

k=1

In the ﬁrst part of the equation 4, there is no covariance matrix of the background error
because it assumes that the variables are independent and their covariance matrix is the identity.
For this reason, at the end of the STMAS, it is necessary to check the relationship between the
variables imposing basic physical constraints [10].
At that point, an bearing in mind that xt is the true model state, xb is the prior or background estimate of the same model state and xa is the corresponding analysis, the main goal
is to ﬁnd a correction δx such that:
xa = xb + δx
being xa as close as possible to xt . The previous described data assimilation processes provide
good analysis (xa ), that is, good approximation of the true state (xt ). In order to determine
the quality of the obtained analysis, they should be compared to an independent data set,
which is assumed to be the true model state (xt ). Consequently, assuming that the independent
observations are correct, one can evaluate the error of the proposed data assimilation approaches
using the following error function: = |xt − xa |.

3

New multi-regression method

This method is diﬀerent from the others because it uses a multi-regression of the observations in
each instant of time, instead of using classical data assimilation techniques. In some contexts,
it seems better because with this method there are not bias problems from the model and it is
much simpler than the previous methods. Although for some variables like wind or rain, ﬁnding
a multi-regression equation is much more complex.
The multi-regression equations of temperature (T) and relative humidity (RH) at each
instant of time t are:
Tt = at · h + bt · ln(d) + ct · lat + dt · lon +

t

and
RHt = αt · h + βt · ln(d) + δt · lat + γt · lon + μt
where at , bt , ct , dt , αt , βt , δt and γt are constants in each instant of time t, h is the height,
d is the distance to the sea, lat the latitud and lon the longitud of a place in Catalonia and
t and μt are the errors of the regression. With this equations and the observations of Automatic Weather Station Network (Xarxa d’Estacions Meteorolgiques Automtiques, XEMA),
the aim is to ﬁnd for each t the parameters at , bt , ct , dt , αt , βt , δt and γt that minimize t and μt .
So, the parameters at , bt , ct , dt , αt , βt , δt and γt are estimated for each t using the method
ˆ t , βˆt , δˆt and γˆt such that for all i
of least squares. The result of this method is a
ˆt , ˆbt , cˆt , dˆt , α
station:
(i)
t

1850

(i)
at · h(i) + ˆbt · ln(d(i) ) + cˆt · lat(i) + dˆt · lon(i) )
= Tt − (ˆ

Reducing Data Uncertainty in Surface Meteorology

A. Farguell et al.

and
(i)
(i)
μt = RHt − (α
ˆ t · h(i) + βˆt · ln(d(i) ) + δˆt · lat(i) + γˆt · lon(i) )

are minimum.
The clue is to apply the Kriging method in order to interpolate the errors anywhere using the
(i)
(i)
known errors t and μt . And then, with these errors and the previous estimated constants,
it is possible to estimate the temperature (T) and relative humidity (RH) in the time t using
the equations:
Tt = a
ˆt · h + ˆbt · ln(d) + cˆt · lat + dˆt · lon + ˆt
and
RHt = α
ˆ t · h + βˆt · ln(d) + δˆt · lat + γˆt · lon + μ
ˆt

4

Experimental study

The experimental study reported in this section, has been done using hourly real observations
and forecast data from the whole year 2012. The operational WRF forecasts delivered by the
SMC has been used as background data. The data assimilation process has been performed
using more than 150 automatic weather stations (AWS) of the SMC (XEMA). In order to compare the obtained results, an independent set of observations provided by AEMET in the area of
interest (Catalonia) has been used (77 stations) for veriﬁcation. Before that, several checkings
were considered to ensure the consistency between the both observational data sources.
The data workﬂow shown in ﬁgure 2 is conducted for 4 diﬀerent experiments: LAPS,
STMAS, STMAS4 and Multiregression technique. Note that the STMAS4 experiment is a
modiﬁed version of the STMAS method explained in section 2 that consists in introducing the
orography eﬀect in matrix B and the station representativeness in matrix R (only for temperature). In particular, the orography eﬀect is considered by limiting the radius of inﬂuence over
those points that their altitude diﬀer in less than 200 m to the real station. Regarding the
station representativeness, the instrumental error is weighted according to the height diﬀerence
between the station and the orography of the model background, reducing in that way the
contribution of the second term in equation 3 for those stations.

5

Experimental results

The forecast and analysis data is delivered by the model in a complete grib ﬁle format. In
order to retrieve only the data of the required variables, the gribapi package has been used
[7]. The comparison study has been performed using the following data assimilation schemes:
LAPS, STMAS, STMAS 4 and the proposed multi-regression method. All the results reported
in this section, are depicted using the same graphical aspect. The error value is included in the
vertical axis and the time in the horizontal one. Each depicted plot has the background (blue
line) and the four compared data assimilation methods each one represented with a diﬀerent
colour. LAPS is depicted by a red line, the yellow line shows STMAS, the green line corresponds
to STMAS 4 and the multi-regression method is the cyan line. Bearing in mind the evaluated
1851

Reducing Data Uncertainty in Surface Meteorology

A. Farguell et al.

(a) Mean of temperature errors with absolute value (b) Mean of temperature errors without absolute
in 2012
value in 2012

Figure 4: Results of temperature errors in 2012

error function ( = |xt − xa |), an ideal result will be the one that provides an value equal to
0. Therefore, the plotted line closer to 0, will determine the data assimilation technique that
performs better for the corresponding measured variable.

Temperature All the eﬀorts to improve the STMAS technique have been focus on the improvement in the temperature analysis. The results show good results for this methodology
(ﬁgure 4a and table 1). Nevertheless, the results are better in a less complex and computationally less expensive technique such as a multi-regression (Vincents method). However, perhaps
the problem is a bias in the background model. Therefore, in order to see if the problem is that,
it calculates the same previous results but using the error without absolute value (picture 4b and
table 1). It is possible to see that normally the multi-regression method overestimates the real
temperature value and STMAS 4 underestimates it. However, it seems that multi-regression
method is the best one.

Relative Humidity The relative humidity is not independent of temperature. So, the improvements in STMAS also modify the relative humidity in some way. So, the relative humidity
improves too (ﬁgure 5a and table 1). It does the same as the previous graphic for relative humidity and the result is the picture 5b, where it seems that the best method is the multi-regression
method. But, it is less clear than for temperature.

Wind In the case of the wind, it is not possible to do a regression for the wind only with the
observations. So, in that case, the results are only with methods of data assimilation (ﬁgure 6a
and table 1). It seems that the wind is more complex and maybe LAPS is the best option in
that case. In picture 6b, it seems that the best methods are LAPS.
In the table 1, there is a summary of the Mean Error and Mean Absolute Error of all
variables and all processes in 2012. The results are similar to the previous ones.
1852

Reducing Data Uncertainty in Surface Meteorology

A. Farguell et al.

(a) Mean of relative humidity errors with absolute (b) Mean of relative humidity errors without absolute value in 2012
value in 2012

Figure 5: Results of relative humidity errors in 2012

(a) Mean of wind speed errors with absolute value (b) Mean of wind speed errors without absolute
value in 2012
in 2012

Figure 6: Results of wind errors in 2012

Variable
Temperature
Relative
Humidity
Wind

Type of error
Mean Absolute
Error
Mean Error
Mean Absolute
Error
Mean Error
Mean Absolute
Error
Mean Error

Background

LAPS

STMAS

STMAS4

Multiregression

2.3157

1.6978

1.7301

1.6150

1.5074

-0.6204

-0.2629

-0.3676

-0.3148

-0.2612

12.1261

8.1387

7.6377

7.6656

7.5594

-4.6598

-3.1842

-2.1956

-2.6809

-3.0946

1.5882

1.3451

1.3868

1.3868

-

0.9105

0.4628

0.5133

0.5133

-

Table 1: Summary of the error executing all processes in 2012
1853

Reducing Data Uncertainty in Surface Meteorology

6

A. Farguell et al.

Conclusions

Real time high resolution analysis in weather forecast is quite diﬃcult to obtain because the
process to obtain it is quite computational intensive. However, this study and the data obtained
is quite useful to determine more accurate surface meteorological variables at regional weather
forecast services level. For that reason, light computational alternatives have been proposed
to be able to be deployed at real time. In this work, the classical data assimilation strategies
STMAS and LAPS are compared to three STMAS variations and the proposed multi-regression
approach. The results shown that STMAS 4 performs well because it has all variables included
inside the method and all relations between variables are included in it. This enhanced STMAS
version provides similar results that the proposed multi-regression method. In some cases, the
multi-regression method is more reliable than the STMAS 4 because multi-regression method
does not include the bias of the model. However, modelling the variables with a multi-regression
model is very diﬃcult (like the case of the wind). Due to its low complexity, the multi-regression
data assimilation approach could serve as a good alternative in providing real time analysis with
a high degree of conﬁdence.

7

Acknowledgments

This work has been supported by Ministerio de Econom´ıa y Competitividad (Spain) under contracts number TIN2011-28689-C02-01 and TIN2014-53234-C2-1-R, and by the Catalan Government under grant 2014-SGR-576. The authors also want to thanks AEMET for the data
provided.

References
[1] Local Analysis and Prediction System. Laps readme. [online], last visit 20 of June 2015. http:
//laps.noaa.gov/software/README.html#SFC(LSX).
[2] F. Bouttier and P. Courtier. Data assimilation concepts and methods. Meteorological Training
Course Lecture Series, 2002.
[3] Christopher A. Hiemstra, Glen E. Liston, Roger A. Pielke, Daniel L. Birkenheuer, and Steven C.
Albers. Comparing Local Analysis and Prediction System (LAPS) Assimilations with Independent
Observations. PhD thesis, Department of Atmospheric Science, Colorado State University, March
2006.
[4] Steven E. Koch, Mary DesJardins, and Paul J. Kocin. An interactive barnes objective map analysis
scheme for use with satellite and conventional data. Journal of climate and applied meteorology,
22(9), September 1983.
[5] Ionel M. Navon. Data assimilation for numericalweather prediction: A review. Department of
Scientiﬁc Computing, 2009.
[6] INTRANET RAM of SMC. Servei meteorologic de catalunya (catalan meteorological service), last
visit 20 of June 2015. A local page with a lot of information.
[7] Python package gribapi. Explanation about the functions inside the package gribapi. [online], last
visit 20 of June 2015. software.ecmwf.int/wiki/display/GRIB/Python+package+gribapi.
[8] Weather Research and Forecasting model oﬃcial website. User’s guide for advanced research wrf
modeling system version 3.7. [online], last visit 26 of March 2015. www2.mmm.ucar.edu/wrf/users/
docs/user_guide_V3/contents.html.

1854

Reducing Data Uncertainty in Surface Meteorology

A. Farguell et al.

[9] William C. Skamarock, Joseph B. Klemp, Jimy Dudhia, David O. Gill, Dale M. Barker, Michael G.
Duda, Xiang-Yu Huang, Wei Wang, and Jordan G. Powers. A description of the advanced research
wrf version 3. National Center for Atmospheric Research, June 2008.
[10] S. Koch Y. Xie and J. Mcginley. A spacetime multiscale analysis system: A sequential variational
analysis approach. Monthly Weather Review, 139, April 2011.

1855

