Available online at www.sciencedirect.com

Procedia Computer Science 9 (2012) 857 – 865

International Conference on Computational Science, ICCS 2012

Epirur_Cattle: A spatially explicit agent-based simulator of beef
cattle movements
"Hong Liu, Phillip Schumm*, Anton Lyubinin, Caterina Scoglio"
"Kansas State University, Manhattan, Kansas, 66506, USA"

Abstract
We present Epirur_Cattle, a spatially explicit agent-based simulator for synthesizing beef cattle movements and forecasting
zoonotic disease spread in the American beef cattle industry. Farm, ranch, and feedlot operators make decisions on cattle trades
according to cattle weights and market conditions. Contact networks of cattle are generated by geographical proximity and
disease is spread through a simple compartmental model on the dynamic contact structures. An analysis of the network metrics of
the contact networks and the aggregated contact networks provides insight into the influence of the network dynamics on the
epidemic dynamics. Using farm data based on the Kansas cattle industry, our experiments show a tri-modal distribution of total
case counts that becomes bi-modal for weaker diseases. These results are explained by the interaction of the disease and trading
processes. We show how simple network metrics, such as the average node degree, can track the complex trading processes
which shape the evolution of the disease at an agent level.
"Keywords: Cattle epidemics; Agent-based simulation; Network metrics."

1. Introduction
Contagious disease spreads rapidly through long distance movement of cattle and mixture of cattle from
different sources in the beef cattle industry. Learning from the FMD outbreaks in UK in 2001 and 2007, the EU
members build databases to tracks beef cattle movement at an individual basis. Empowered with data of such a high
quality, researchers are able to analyze and model the cattle movement in Europe at all scales and scenarios, to
predict zoonotic disease spread at the finest granularity, and to provide optimal control strategies in an epidemic
emergency [14][7][8][10][15][9][13].
An outbreak of highly contagious disease in beef industry in US will have a far more severe consequence. It has
been estimated that an outbreak of FMD in US will result in national trade losses as large as $3 billion [19].
However, tracking of cattle movement within one state is not mandate in US [1]. Sizes, locations, and types of beef
farms and information on cattle trades are also protected from disclosure to the public. So researchers have neither
detailed data on individual cattle transport nor aggregated data at the operator level to analyze and model the cattle
movement, or further to measure the impacts of animal disease outbreaks and to develop optimal control and
mitigation strategies. a

*

Corresponding author. Tel.: +1-785-532-4690
E-mail address: pbschumm@ksu.edu.

1877-0509 © 2012 Published by Elsevier Ltd. Open access under CC BY-NC-ND license.
doi:10.1016/j.procs.2012.04.092

858

Hong Liu et al. / Procedia Computer Science 9 (2012) 857 – 865

The Epirur_Cattle simulator aims at providing realistic beef cattle movements and epidemic predictions in lack
of publicly available fine-grained data on cattle trades and transport. Our assumption is that the operation modes of
beef cattle industry in US are stable and observable. The Epirur_Cattle simulates the entire life cycles of beef cattle.
Because the movement of beef cattle is largely determined by their owners, our models include two types of agent
models, one for cattle and one for different types of operators. We consult experts and researchers in beef industry
and interview farmers and stockers about their operations patterns to build our agent models for operators.
The architecture of the simulator is developed with the design goal of providing a framework that supports the
diversity in operation scenarios, cattle behavior, and disease spread pathways. This is needed to improve prediction
power with increasing complexity and expanded functionality. We enable contagious, airborne, vector-transmitted,
chronic, etc, disease spread pathways. The agent based models provide maximal heterogeneity so that the simulator
is most useful for complex scenarios.
This paper is divided into 5 sections. In Section 2 we discuss related work. We describe our design and models of
the simulator in Section 3. The results of a simulation involving two Kansas counties are shown and the network
metrics related to the epidemic dynamics are analyzed in Section 4. We conclude in Section 5.
2. Related Work
Study of disease spread as a discipline of epidemiology dates back to the Greek physician Hippocrates around
400 BC. Mathematical models are the keys to analyze epidemic dynamics and to develop control strategies.
Epidemic models should be as simple as possible to disclose the key mechanism that generates the epidemic
dynamics while accurately enough to describe the observed patterns [3]. Researchers build models of different
scales based on the quality of available data and the level of understanding of the system [6][4]. In the special case
of the FMD outbreak in UK in 2001, researchers argue over what level of modeling is appropriate to give good
predictions of epidemic dynamics and sound suggestions on control strategies, and the use of “black box”
approaches that do not take into consider the biological background of epidemics results in overkill of animals
which would affect the industry for many years [5][4].
The scales of epidemic models range from the roughest-grained homogeneous mixing models, meta-population
models, structured models, network models, to finest-grained agent-based models [16]. EU member's detailed data
on individual livestock give a boost on studying epidemics using network approaches [14][7][8][10][15][9][13].
Network approaches give fine-grained and straightforward descriptions of disease spread paths and the key features
of epidemic dynamics such as the epidemic threshold [11][12] that are biased from homogeneous assumptions due
to the structures of the networks.
The authors of [2] developed an elaborate stochastic, spatially explicit, state-transition model to simulate spread
of highly contagious animal disease in the US using only statistical models of cattle movement. The lack of cattle
movement data in US impedes the scientific exploration of network characteristics in cattle contacts and their
epidemic implications. Fortunately, the cattle industry is established under its biological constraints and stays
comparatively stable over years [20] [21]. Agent-based model in this case is the appropriate level of description of
the beef cattle system and generates the synthetic contact networks and flow networks for predictions of epidemic
dynamics. Researchers have made effort in building models that generate predictions on farm locations that fit well
with real data [22][23]. These GIS layers are useful input parameters for agent-based simulations.
Few agent-based models of livestock movement exist up to now. [17] models cattle movements in Australia
from farm to farm through a saleyard, and the farm agents make decision based on the livestock price and the
number of stock on the farm. From our investigation, however, we find that frequent transport of cattle according to
price fluctuation is unrealistic at least in US beef industry. Livestock is live, and cannot be purchased and sold as
one does with stock. [18] aims at developing a comprehensive model to synthesize beef cattle movement in New
Mexico, utilizing a thorough understanding of the life cycles for commodity livestock. While their ultimate goal is
the same with ours, they stall at the phase one. Our simulator is also different from theirs in many other aspects:
their design goal does not include an extensible framework, they lack an epidemic model, and they do not have an
agent model for cattle.
3. Design Goals
The center of our design is to give a flexible framework that supports the diversity of operation scenarios in beef

Hong Liu et al. / Procedia Computer Science 9 (2012) 857 – 865

859

cattle industry and various disease-spread pathways, so that the simulator is able to provide progressively accurate
predictions of zoonotic disease spread given more sophisticated agent models and disease spread models. As a first
approximation, we adopt conceptually clear models for the beef cattle industry without incorporating many
operations types and parameters, so that the prediction the simulation reflects the fundamental biological and
logistical constraints that rule the work patterns in the industry. We generate contact networks by geographical
proximity between agents, flow networks that represent shipments between locations, and a geographic data file for
use in Google Earth to show the cattle movements and epidemic dynamics when an epidemic model is applied.

Fig. 1. The life cycle of beef cattle

3.1. Beef cattle system models
Understanding the strategies of operators is crucial to our beef cattle models. [24]-[27] provide a general picture
on beef cattle industry in US. The annual report of the statistics of beef cattle industry shows consistency in farm
numbers and the distributions of sizes and numbers of stock. We also consult beef cattle experts and do field study
in a local farm and a stocker ranch. Through our investigations, we conclude that operators tend to follow strict
patterns over years and it is appropriate to choose the cattle weight as the key parameter in operators' decision
making of purchase and sale. Our simulator assumes that the stability of the beef industry continues for the near
future.
Our beef cattle system is composed of three parts: cow/calf producers, stockers, and feedlot operators. Here a
large number of farms keep certain cows which are replaced in a slow rate. In spring the cows breed a new
generation of calves that stay at the farm for 6 to 9 months and are sold via sale barns to stockers, when their
weights reach 600 pounds. Steer and heifer stay at the stockers' premises for four to six months and gain weight up
to 900 pounds. Then feeders are sold at sale barns gain to feedlot. The life cycle of beef cattle is shown in Figure 1.
To simulate the life cycle of beef cattle, our simulator is composed of the following components: cattle
population turnover, cattle growth model, cattle roaming model, operator models, and the trading system. When the
simulation starts in springs, each cow breeds at a given probability one calf. Then the calves start to grow fat and old
according to a stochastic growth model, which will bring them to 600 pounds by expectation in fall. Steer/heifer and
feeders gain weight in the same way but by different growth rates. Each operator has a list of nearby sale barns.
Each week, three types of producers pick cattle whose weights are higher than the thresholds and move them to a
randomly chosen local sale barns. Stockers and feedlot owners also go to a randomly chosen sale barns to buy cattle.
Besides gaining weight, cattle spend all their time roaming within the location they reside in, either a farm or a
sale barn. We adopt a random walk model to simulate cattle roaming. Cattle of different herds therefore can be
mixed up in two ways. One is by contacts of herds in adjacent farms; the other is by mixing at sale barns. Our
simulator is spatially explicit, cattle therefore are considered in contact once the distance between two cattle is
within a threshold, no matter whether they are confined in the same premises or no. In this way we are able to take
both account of the cattle trading flows and the geographic factor.
3.2. Contact networks and flow networks
The system model generates the beef cattle movement among operation premises. The flow networks are
generated aggregated with premises as nodes and shipments between premises as flows, as shown in Figure 2. The
contact networks are generated each step with cattle as nodes, and edges indicate that the distance between two
cattle is within a threshold, as shown in Figure 3. To compute the contact network, the simulator divides the map
into lattice and handles irregular premises shapes by rasterization.

860

Hong Liu et al. / Procedia Computer Science 9 (2012) 857 – 865

40

4

3
35

12
8
6
6

9
6

30

25
35

40

45

50

55

60

65

Fig. 2. Sample components of a Flow Network with (a) premises represented as nodes; (b) and cattle flows as quantities associated with each link
representing a movement.

1
0.8

0.6
0.4

0.2

0
-0.2

-0.4
-0.6

-0.8

-1
-1

-0.8

-0.6

-0.4

-0.2

0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

1

Fig. 3. Sample component of a Contact Network with individual cattle represented as nodes and pair-wise contact as links. Although the cattle are
constantly wandering within the premises, here they are visualized around a circle.

Hong Liu et al. / Procedia Computer Science 9 (2012) 857 – 865

861

Because we use a random walk model for cattle roaming at each location, the average node degree and the size
of the largest component are enough to characterize the dynamics of the contact networks generated each step. The
degree of a node is the number of links adjacent to it, the average of which is commonly known as the average node
degree for a given network. A component of a network is a set of nodes connected by links and many components
can exist within a single network. The simulator outputs the contact network as well as the average node degree of
the contact network, the size of the largest component, and the average degree of the largest component.
There are many ways to characterize the network dynamics caused by shipments between different locations.
One method is to use the flow network. While flow network provides a straightforward mathematical model for
epidemiology especially when the simulation runs at a granularity of meta-population, it fails to capture contacts by
geographical proximity in our spatially explicit simulation because disease spread is possible even if there are no
physical shipments between adjacent locations. Another method is to measure the differences between two
subsequent contact networks. This method is also problematic because within one location the contact network still
changes over time, so the different memberships in cliques in two contact networks may be caused either by
shipments between different locations, or by random walk within one location. We find one method that is
conceptually clear, of the granularity at an agent level, easy to compute, and helps capture epidemic behavior caused
by parallel trading via sale barns is to use the aggregated contact networks. During trading days, susceptible cattle
are moved among locations and are exposed to infected animals, the aggregated contact networks for one day
instead of for one step take into account of the contact one cattle has in all shipments as well as from neighboring
locations. Therefore we output the same set of metrics for the aggregated contact network that is the union of the
contact networks over a full day.
3.3. Epidemic model
We consider a hypothetical disease which is spread by physical contact. The epidemics can therefore be
simulated using the contact networks. At each step, the cattle agents can be classified into one of four disease states:
Susceptible (S), Infected (I), Recovered (R), or Immune (M). Each individual is initialized to one of these states at
the beginning of the simulation and transitions to the infected state (from any other) are driven by exposure through
contact, while all other transitions are driven by time. The transition from S to I for an agent can occur with
probability * t when contact is established between a susceptible agent and an infected agent. In the model, is
the rate of infection, is the rate of recovery (the expected number of days for an agent to transfer from I to R), and
the remaining rates we leave unnamed.
4. Simulation of two Kansas counties
We conducted a set of simulations involving beef cattle operators in two adjacent Kansas counties, where
51.72% of premises are farms, 28.28% are stockers, 10% are feedlots, and the remaining are sale barns. The data on
farm locations and sizes are synthesized from [22]. The simulation runs over one year and involves up to 100,000
cattle. The simulation step size was set to 0.25 days. At the beginning of the simulation, one seed is randomly added
to a farm. The aforementioned epidemic model is used with = 1/(40 days) [14], and all other rates besides are set
to zero. We explored 26 values of beta, running 40 trials at each value. In the synthetic data, very few locations are
adjacent; therefore the simulation mainly captures the disease spread by mixing of herds at sale barns. The first sales
of steers and heifers from the calving farms don’t occur until roughly day 150 and then feeders will begin to move to
feedlots after approximately another 6 months. These seasonal trading patterns significantly define the results we
collected from the set of simulations. The simulation outputs highlighted two interesting aspects of the disease
spreading process, namely, a tri-modal distribution of epidemic sizes and a dependency of the disease dynamics on
the underlying trading process.
4.1. Outbreak tri-modal distribution
The simulation results are characterized by a tri-modal distribution of epidemic sizes when the epidemic ratio
beta/mu is sufficiently large. Each simulation is initialized with a single infected animal. If this case fails to break
out in the farm and infect a notable number of other cattle, then we consider this case to be in the first of the three
modes (0-10 cases total). The second possibility is that an outbreak may infect the majority of the cattle within a

862

Hong Liu et al. / Procedia Computer Science 9 (2012) 857 – 865

single small farm, but not significantly breakout to anywhere beyond the initial farm (11-199 cases total). The third
event is a massive outbreak that touches many premises and infects several cattle. We count the number of each
classification of total cases that appear in the simulation results and present these in Figure 4 against 18 values of the
inverse of the epidemic ratio. Starting at / = 0.03, we find that the second and third type of outbreak are
converging in the total number of cases, therefore we combine them into a single category. The actual outbreak sizes
.
are shown in Figure 5, where the average outbreak size and plus/minus a standard deviation are plotted against

Fig. 4. Frequencies of outbreaks sorted by 3 ranges of total cases [0, 10], [11, 199], and [200, infinity) and then 2 ranges [0, 10] and [11, infinity).
The total number of trials for each value of
is 40. Total cases for eight values of
are not displayed due to visualization complexity.

Fig. 5. Outbreak sizes are plotted versus the inverse of the epidemic ratio. (a) The within farm and larger outbreak sizes are displayed by their
averages (solid lines) and plus and minus a standard deviation (dashed and dot-dashed lines). (b) The 11-199 outbreak type and the 11+ type are
re-plotted to enable visualization of their characteristics.

Hong Liu et al. / Procedia Computer Science 9 (2012) 857 – 865

Fig. 6. Histograms of outbreak sizes at three different levels of

863

: (a) 0.007, (b) 0.040, and (c) 0.100.

The convergence in the outbreak sizes can be seen in Figure 5, but it appears much more explicitly in
examining the distributions at different values of
. Figure 6 emphasizes this through three distributions taken at
different values of mu/beta. Note that the horizontal axis on Figure 6a is logarithmic in scale. In Figure 6a, each
outbreak is either less than 100 or greater than 10,000 in total cases. In Figure 6b, it become difficult to distinguish
between the outbreaks that only reach a single farm and those that also move into a few additional farms. In Figure
6c, half of the trials (20 out of 40) resulted in zero new cases beyond the initially infected animal.
These distributions are driven by the trading dynamics. In the case where a disease begins to spread through a
farm, it may still be as long as 5 months (until roughly day 150) before the farmer trades any cattle. This time
window may allow the disease to die out within the farm and never reach the sale barns. Therefore it is not only
, but also the recovery rate plays a significant role in whether a disease
important to consider the epidemic ratio
can survive long enough to break out when cattle go to auction.
4.2. Epidemic dynamics
A common objective in examining hypothetical epidemic outbreaks is to figure out what the conditions are for a
=0.007, where approximately half
disease to break out into a large epidemic (or not to). We examine the case of
(21 of 40) of the trials result in large outbreaks and the remainder are contained to a single farm (See Figure 6a). To
explore this, we plot the trial results in two plots sorted by whether the disease went beyond a single farm or not.
Figure 7 presents the total infected cattle for each trial plotted versus time in days with the smaller outbreaks in the
top panel and the larger in the lower panel. From Figure 7 and further results it appears that the critical question is
whether the cases that remain when the trading begins will successfully start the larger epidemic.

Fig. 7. The total number of cattle infected versus time for 40 trials at
= 0.007. The 19 outbreaks that did not escape from the initial farm are
plotted in the top panel and the 21 that did escape are plotted in the lower panel.

864

Hong Liu et al. / Procedia Computer Science 9 (2012) 857 – 865

Fig. 8. (a) The new cases of infected cattle versus time for 40 trials at
= 0.007. (b) The average degree of the contact network for 40 trials at
= 0.007. Note that the contact network is significantly disconnected, yielding averages much below 1. The 19 outbreaks that did not escape
from the initial farm are plotted in the top panels and the 21 that did escape are plotted in the lower panels.

The curves in both panels of Figure 7 are very similar previous to the first trading days, but differ drastically
beyond then. What can be seen in Figure 8 is that the new infections are driven by the trading behavior as it is
captured through the average node degree. Figure 8 examines the occurrence of newly infected cases versus time
and compares them to the average degree of the contact network. The new infection curves are similar during the
early days and again differ as one set of trials dies out and the other survives. There are slight tendencies for the
surviving curves to have slightly lower and slightly delayed peaks with respect to the ones in the upper panels in
Figures 7 and 8a, but these observations are not statistically significant given the number of trials we have
conducted. In the current settings of the simulator, the impact of a large-scale outbreak on the trading dynamics is
not significant as can be seen in a comparison of the upper and lower panels of Figure 8b. We examined the other
network metrics available as output of the simulator, but they failed to yield any conclusive insights. The typical
driver of an epidemic is the mixing of susceptible and infectious individuals. Here the mixing is driven mainly by
trading; however the disease doesn’t really take off until around day 250 (in most of the trials), as until then, the
fraction of infected individuals has not grown to a sufficient level to explode.

5. Conclusions
We developed a spatially explicit agent-based simulator for synthesizing beef cattle movements and forecasting
zoonotic disease spread in a feedlot-based beef cattle industry. Using a compartmental disease model and economic
models for the beef cattle industry, we can analyze the fundamental properties of cattle movements constrained by
the biological and logistical characteristics of the industry. Through time, the simulator outputs include the total
population, the susceptible, infected, recovered, and immune individuals, the flow and contact networks, and their
metrics. Having obtained a set of synthetic data which describes cattle premises across Kansas, we conducted a set
of simulations involving beef cattle operators in two adjacent Kansas counties that explored 26 values of the
infection ratio. In the simulator’s results, we observe a tri-modal distribution of total case counts that becomes bimodal as the disease parameters are weakened. Within our results, we explored what the conditions are for a disease
to break out from a small farm to a large epidemic. We observed that a long recovery rate is crucial for the survival
of a disease within a farm until the next trading period arrives. If a disease spreads and recovers too fast, it can easily
extinguish itself and not reach the markets. If it fails to reach the markets or if the trading activity is too low, then
the disease will not reach a significant proportion of the population. The importance of the trading dynamics is
clearly seen. We demonstrated that merely the average node degree is sufficient to track the complex trading
processes which are then reflected in the evolution of the disease and the dynamics of the system at an agent level.

Hong Liu et al. / Procedia Computer Science 9 (2012) 857 – 865

865

Acknowledgements
The authors would like to express their gratitude to Dr. Ted Schroeder, his collaborators, and local farmers and
stockers for helpful insights into the beef cattle industry and for useful data. This work was supported by the
National Agricultural Biosecurity Center at Kansas State University.

References
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
13.
14.
15.
16.
17.
18.
19.
20.
21.
22.
23.
24.
25.
26.
27.

D.l. Pendell, G.W. Brester, T.C. Schroeder, et al, Animal Identification and Tracing in the United States, Am J Agr Econ, 2010
N. Harvey, A. Reeves, M. A. Schoenbaum, et al, The North American Animal Disease Spread Model: A simulation model to assist decision
making in evaluating animal disease incursions, Preventive Veterinary Medicine 82, 2007
N. C. Grassly, C. Fraser, Mathematical models of infectious disease transmission, Nature Reviews Microbiology Vol. 6, 2008
R.P. Kitching, M.V. Thrus
thematical models: an illustration from the 2001 foot and mouth
disease epidemic in the United Kingdom, Rev. sci. tech. Off. int. Epiz., 25 (1), 2006
R.P. Kitching, A.M. Hutber, and M.V. Thrus
-and-mouth disease with special consideration for the clinical and
epidemiological factors relevant to predictive modelling of the disease, The Veterinary Journal 169, 2005
N. Goldenfeld and L. P. Kadanoff, Simple Lessons from Complexity, Science Vol 284 2, 1999
M. Nöremark, N Håkansson, S Sternberg Lewerin, et al. Network analysis of cattle and pig movements in Sweden: Measures relevant for
disease control and risk based surveillance, Preventive Veterinary Medicine, 2011
-Lopez, A.M. Perez, and J.M. Sanchezapplication of social network and cluster detection analyses for
temporal-spatial characterization of animal movements in Salamanca, Spain, Preventive Veterinary Medicine 91, 2009
F.M. Baptista, T. Nunes, V. Almeida, et al, Cattle movements in Portugal – an insight into the potential use of network analysis, Revista
Portuguesa de Ciências Veterinárias 103, 2008
F. Natale, A. Giovannini, L Savini, et al, Network analysis of Italian cattle trade patterns and evaluation of risks for potential disease spread,
Preventive Veterinary Medicine 92, 2009
Y. Wang, D. Chakrabarti, C. Wang, et al, Epidemic Spreading in Real Networks: An Eigenvalue Viewpoint, in Proceedings of 22nd
International Symposium on Reliable Distributed Systems, 2003.
P. Van Mieghem, J. Omic, R. Kooij, Virus Spread in Networks, IEEE/ACM Transactions on Networking, 2009
M. Bigras-Poulin, R.A. Thompson, M. Chriel, et al, Network analysis of Danish cattle industry trade patterns as an evaluation of risk
potential for disease spread, Preventive Veterinary Medicine 76 (2006) 11–39
M. C. Vernon and M.J. Keeling, Representing the UK’s cattle herd as static and dynamic networks, Proc. R. Soc. B (2009) 276, 469–476
P. Bajardi, A. Barrat, F. Natale, et al, Dynamical Patterns of Cattle Trade Movements, PLoS ONE Vol 6 Issue 5, 2011
Barrat, M Barthelemy, and A Vespignani, Dynamical processes on complex networks, Cambridge Univ Press, 2008
D.J. Miron, I. V. Emelyanova, G. E. Donald, et al, Agent Based Model of Livestock Movements,
necsi.org/events/iccs7/papers/3ec28186ab38e734407e69d07574.pdf
C.W. Ross, R. J. Glass, J. Harger, et al, Development of an Agent-Based Epidemiological Model of Beef Cattle, www.sandia.gov
E.S. Marshall, T.E. Carpenter, and C. Thunes, Results of a survey to estimate cattle movements and contact rates among beef herds in
California, with reference to the potential spread and control of foot-and-mouth disease, JAVMA, Vol 235, No. 5, 2009
http://www.agcensus.usda.gov/Publications/2007/Full_Report/
http://www.ers.usda.gov/Publications/LDP/
R. Miller, K. Geter, B. Corso, et al. Farm location and animal population simulator: A system for estimating farm and animal populations.
Poster presented at the GISVet 2007 Conference, 2007.
M. Bruhn, J Cajka, G Smith, et al, Generating Realistic Livestock and Poultry Operations to Support Development of Infectious Disease
Control Strategies
Bill R. McKinnon and Henry S. Snodgrass, Getting Started in the Cattle Business in Virginia, Publication 400-790, Virginia Tech
University.
http://www.cattletoday.com/archive/2001/August/CT163.shtml
http://beefmagazine.com/mag/beef_article/
David P. Anderson, James G. Robb, and James Mintert, The Cattle Cycle,
http://www.cals.arizona.edu/arec/wemc/cattlemarket/CatlCycl.pdf

