Available online at www.sciencedirect.com

Procedia Computer Science 9 (2012) 1206 – 1210

International Conference on Computational Science, ICCS 2012

Dynamic Data Driven Methods for Self-aware Aerospace Vehicles
D. Allairea , G. Birosc , J. Chambersb , O. Ghattasc , D. Kordonowyb , K. Willcoxa
a Department

of Aeronautics and Astronautics, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA
b Aurora Flight Sciences, Cambridge, MA
c Institute for Computational Engineering and Sciences, University of Texas at Austin, Austin, TX

Abstract
A self-aware aerospace vehicle can dynamically adapt the way it performs missions by gathering information about
itself and its surroundings and responding intelligently. Achieving this DDDAS paradigm enables a revolutionary new
generation of self-aware aerospace vehicles that can perform missions that are impossible using current design, ﬂight,
and mission planning paradigms. To make self-aware aerospace vehicles a reality, fundamentally new algorithms are
needed that drive decision-making through dynamic response to uncertain data, while incorporating information from
multiple modeling sources and multiple sensor ﬁdelities.
In this work, the speciﬁc challenge of a vehicle that can dynamically and autonomously sense, plan, and act is considered. The challenge is to achieve each of these tasks in real time—executing online models and exploiting dynamic
data streams—while also accounting for uncertainty. We employ a multiﬁdelity approach to inference, prediction and
planning—an approach that incorporates information from multiple modeling sources, multiple sensor data sources,
and multiple ﬁdelities.
Keywords:
DDDAS, multiﬁdelity, statistical inference

1. Introduction
Seeing, feeling, and thinking aerospace vehicles can adapt the way they perform missions by gathering information about themselves and their surroundings and responding intelligently. The vehicle will respond to events and to
degradation over time in the same way as a self-aware organism—sprinting when healthy and under favorable conditions, and slowing down as it ages and degrades. The ability to sense system anomalies allows a vehicle to rely more
heavily on healthy systems to complete missions. This self-aware aerospace vehicle can perform missions that are
impossible using current design, ﬂight, and mission planning paradigms.
A self-aware aerospace vehicle has a number of beneﬁts. The ability to sensel will allow decisions to be made
mid-mission. For example, a launch vehicle approaching maximum dynamic pressure can use information regarding
current system health to compensate underperforming systems with healthier systems. Under oﬀ-nominal conditions
or health states, modiﬁcations to the mission or ﬂight planning can be implemented to perform the mission based on
responsive adaptation by the vehicle to its state. For an aging aircraft that must operate for twenty, thirty, or even ﬁfty
Email address: dallaire@mit.edu (D. Allaire)

1877-0509 © 2012 Published by Elsevier Ltd. Open access under CC BY-NC-ND license.
doi:10.1016/j.procs.2012.04.130

D. Allaire et al. / Procedia Computer Science 9 (2012) 1206 – 1210

1207

years, the ability to tailor or restructure its everyday ﬂight to minimize wear, fatigue, or environmental degradation
adds years to its life and reduces the maintenance required to keep the aircraft ﬂight-worthy. Additionally, the aircraft
will ﬂy to its capability, performing missions beyond its traditional design envelope. Figure 1 shows the results of an
initial study to estimate the beneﬁt of a condition-aware airframe [1]. It was found that the airframe could operate
at 130% of the designed performance at the beginning of its life and could extend its lifetime by 400% without
changing any other feature. This was achieved by replacing traditional damage tolerant design with real-time health
and capability assessment of the airframe. This capability extended to the entire air vehicle could revolutionize the
performance of aerospace vehicles.

Maximum Loading (g)

Evolution of max loading with time averaged over 1000 radomized damage distributions
4

3.5

3

2.5

0

0.5

1

1.5

2
Lifetime

2.5

3

3.5

Figure 1: Condition-Aware Capability. The potential beneﬁt of condition-awareness in terms of maneuver loading over the vehicle lifetime for an
airframe is shown in blue compared with the traditional design shown by the black box [1].

During the 1990’s, calls were made for intelligent ﬂight [2] and collaborative artiﬁcial intelligence [3] to create
systems that were naturally able to emulate human decision-making to ease the interaction of operators from autonomous tasks. However, while complex control systems have been created to allow operation of highly dynamic
aerospace vehicles, and vehicle health management architectures have been developed to increase their reliability
and safety, the vision of an intelligent vehicle that can sense, plan, and act [4] remains beyond current systems or
architectures. Current vehicle health management architectures developed by NASA [5] and the Department of Defense [6] determine the health state of a vehicle. However, the architectures remain uncoupled from the potential
capability of the vehicle to make on-the-ﬂy decisions using harvested information; instead these systems are used to
increase mission reliability and vehicle availability only. The fundamental ﬂight laws of the aerospace vehicle cannot
be modiﬁed by current systems, which are instead set a priori during the design. This design paradigm, where sensory
input checks, but does not form the basis for capability, is suboptimal. Instead, vehicle performance is limited at
all times according to extreme environments and physical degradation in order to avoid this diﬃcult yet rewarding
dynamic data-driven problem. Unlike such approaches, our approach not only senses vehicle state, but also couples it
to vehicle performance parameters.
In the next section, we describe an adaptive structural response model, adapted using vehicle-speciﬁc dynamic
data. In Section 3 we describe development of a resource allocation procedure for dynamic online management of
multiﬁdelity structural response models and sensor data. We conclude in Section 4 with a discussion of ongoing and
future work.

1208

D. Allaire et al. / Procedia Computer Science 9 (2012) 1206 – 1210

2. Adaptive Structural Response Model
An adaptive structural response model provides a representation of the physical aerospace vehicle that changes as
the vehicle degrades and predicts the capability of the vehicle to perform actions. Figure 2 depicts the components
of the model. In order to adapt the model based on real-time degradation, various types and quantities of sensors are
placed on the vehicle that continuously monitor aspects of its health, loading, and environment. These sensors include
distributed strain sensors to measure local strain/stress ﬁelds throughout the airframe, structural health monitoring
sensors to measure changes in the structure, temperature sensors to determine environmental temperatures that can
alter the structural stiﬀness and strength of the vehicle, distributed pressure sensors to measure local loading on the
structure, and inertial sensors to measure body accelerations and rotations that induce loading in the structure. The
locations of these sensors are determined by physical access constraints and the criticality of the location to the overall
structure capability to all actions that the vehicle would perform to complete a mission. The rates at which these sensed
variables are measured depends not only upon the physical characteristics of the sensor and storage space within the
data acquisition unit onboard the vehicle, but also on the rate that the variable will change and the impact of that
variable rate of change on the overall capability. Because the overall capability is determined by the sum of localized
capabilities, sensor measurement rates must also take into consideration the criticality of the measurement location.
Therefore, the measurement rates can be determined by the desired ﬁdelity of overall structural capability for any
given action.

Figure 2: Adaptive structural response model is updated as the vehicle degrades and predicts the capability of the vehicle to perform actions.

The various sensors inform a model of the vehicle that is adapted through our multiﬁdelity inference methods.
The prediction and planning modules interrogate the updated model to predict the response of the vehicle, which
can be divided between static response (i.e., the ability of the vehicle to survive the performance of an action) and
the dynamic response (i.e., the change in the vehicle geometry through the action). The structural response model
is based on a ﬁnite element modeling approach. We derive projection-based reduced-order models for rapid online
estimation of structural response. In the context of the ﬁnite element model, the static response is the stress or strain
at elements compared with their corresponding strength, and the dynamic response is the stiﬀness and mass of the
elements, which can change with degradation. The sensor data described then adapts that model based on degrading
events, which are monitored.
The multiﬁdelity nature of our DDDAS process enters through our use of a variety of structural response models
and a variety of update frequencies. During times when resources are low, modiﬁcations to ﬂight limits are based
on low-ﬁdelity modeling. In times when more resources are available, more detailed analysis is performed to more
precisely assess the impact of damage on material limits and overall structural/vehicle state. For example, during
the oﬄine phase (e.g., on the ground between ﬂights), we use our highest ﬁdelity structural models (ﬁnite element
models). These high-ﬁdelity models are updated with damage information that has occurred during the previous ﬂight.
During the online (ﬂight) phase, we use reduced-order models that permit rapid execution. Vehicle state information
is used to update the low-ﬁdelity models with time-sensitive inference methods. The reduced-order model modiﬁes
estimated ﬂight limits based on the dynamically sensed health of structure.

D. Allaire et al. / Procedia Computer Science 9 (2012) 1206 – 1210

1209

Open research challenges include the development of multiﬁdelity structural response models, including an understanding of how to incorporate damage eﬀects in the lower-ﬁdelity models. Uncertainties in the sensed health of
the structure must also be accounted for. We will approach these challenges by considering a ﬁnite element model
coupled to data- and physics-based failure models. High ﬁdelity models will use the historical sensor data captured
during previous missions to update the vehicle speciﬁc structural model. Such models will reanalyze the structure and
update material allowables. The modiﬁed allowables will be uploaded to the on-board reduced-order models. These
models will utilize real-time sensor data to calculate the instantaneous structural state of the vehicle and update the
ﬂight envelopes, accounting for system uncertainties (e.g., possible false sensor readings, conﬂicting sensor information, etc.). The up-to-the-second ﬂight envelope can permit a central avionics computer to access a database of safely
achievable maneuvers in order to carry out the assigned mission.
3. DDDAS Methods
The distinguishing feature of our proposed research is a multiﬁdelity approach to achieving the DDDAS paradigm.
By “multiﬁdelity” we mean an approach that draws upon information from multiple modeling options and multiple
sensor data sources. These modeling and sensing options each have diﬀerent levels of ﬁdelity and diﬀerent resource
requirements. For example, a low-ﬁdelity model may give rapid but low-conﬁdence estimates that can be used to
provide some indication of a load limit. This estimate could be reﬁned by higher-ﬁdelity models and additional data
in order to provide a more conﬁdent prediction before the decision must be executed.
At the core of our evolving DDDAS process is a decision-making hub that controls model execution, data gathering, and model adaptation to support the inference, prediction and planning tasks. Our research is developing the
resource allocation procedure that supports this decision-making. The decisions to be made include: when and what
to measure from sensors, when and which structural response models to use, and what are the current quantities of
interest. For example, if an event has occurred that threatens the integrity of the wing just prior to a pull-up maneuver,
the load limit of the wing is a quantity of interest. Depending on the time until the maneuver and available computational resources (both of which may be uncertain), the resource allocation procedure makes decisions on how to gather
information from models and data most eﬃciently to determine the load limit with an acceptable level of conﬁdence
prior to the maneuver.
More formally, consider the problem of estimating a quantity of interest q at a given set of conditions x, with a
speciﬁed level of conﬁdence and within a speciﬁed amount of time. For this, assume that we have a set of models
M = {M1 , . . . , Mk } we may use to estimate the quantity of interest, and that we will only choose one model to make the
estimate. These models are multiﬁdelity in the sense that some may be better than others at estimating the quantity of
interest. In general, we may measure our conﬁdence in our estimate of q by some dispersion measure D(Q(x)), where
Q represents the probability distribution of q. To note the dependence on the model used to estimate the quantity of
interest, we write the dispersion measure as D(Q Mi (x)), where i ∈ {1, . . . , k}. The smaller the dispersion measure, the
higher we consider the ﬁdelity (with respect to the quantity of interest) of the model used to estimate it. Assuming
there is some amount of time T and some amount of available computational resources R, we would like to exercisel
the highest ﬁdelity model that does not require more than the available computational resources or take longer than
the allowable time to execute. Formally, we wish to solve the following:
M ∗ = arg min

D(Q M (x))

M∈M

subject to

t M ≤ T , r M ≤ R,

where t M and r M are respectively, the time and computational resources required to execute model M. The M ∗ we
ﬁnd, and how we ﬁnd it, in general depends on the dispersion measure we use.
For the case of a real system, the problem described above is complicated by the fact that execution times, resources required, and input conﬁgurations are uncertain at the time of such decisions. Thus, our general resource
allocation procedure is based on Bayesian statistical decision theory, where minimization of expected loss is the key
driver in the decision-making. Let X be the uncertain input conﬁguration at which we wish to know a quantity of
interest q. Also, let R M and T M be the uncertain amount of computational resources and time required to execute
model M, and deﬁne θ = [X, R M , T M ]. Let a be some action we may take to estimate q, such as using a model from

1210

D. Allaire et al. / Procedia Computer Science 9 (2012) 1206 – 1210

the set M as before, using some combination of these models, using experimental data, etc. Let the set of possible
actions be denoted as A. We again measure our conﬁdence with some dispersion measure D(Q(x)), but now we have
to consider that we are not certain about x. Thus, we formulate a loss function, taking into account the variability of
D(Q M (X)), as well as that of R M and T M , which we denote as L(θ, a). This loss function must take into account losses
associated with poor estimates of q as well as violations of the time and resource constraints given in the deterministic
formulation and the subsequent losses that may occur as a result. The loss function is thus problem dependent. If π(θ)
represents the distribution of θ at the time of decision making, then our goal is to identify a Bayes action aπ ∈ A such
that aπ = min Eπ [L(θ, a)].
The decision-making problem incorporates global sensitivity analysis to identify how much information may be
obtained from a given resource (be it sensor data, high-ﬁdelity models, low-ﬁdelity models, or some combination
thereof). The combination of estimated information, computational resources required, and time required for a particular set of modeling or sensing resources factors into the expected loss calculation. Depending on the time available
prior to requiring an estimate, diﬀerent procedures will be employed by the procedure in an attempt to quickly identify
actions that are close to optimal. For example, we might use a greedy approach, where a subset of resource options
(perhaps based on historical data) are selected to be analyzed and the best is chosen to estimate the load limit. Another
possibility is a multiﬁdelity approach to the decision problem, where reﬂex-like decisions use low-ﬁdelity models/data
with low conﬁdence to provide some indication of the load limit (which at times may be all that is required), with
subsequent updates by higher ﬁdelity information up to the time permitted to make an estimate.
4. Future Work
Our future research will develop new multiﬁdelity approaches to perform the methodological components of the
DDDAS process: inference to estimate vehicle state, prediction of ﬂight limits, and planning to achieve mission
objectives. While methods exist to achieve each of these tasks in a deterministic oﬄine setting enabled by high
performance computing, we need fundamentally new approaches to move to the dynamic data driven setting while
also accounting for the eﬀects of uncertainty. We will develop multiﬁdelity approaches to state estimation that fuse
information from multiple data sources and multiple models. We will use a reduced-order modeling framework
to achieve inference in real time, together with higher ﬁdelity models in the oﬄine phase. We are also developing
machine learning techniques that are scalable on GPU and manycore architectures, such as a new approach for nearestneighbor interpolation in very high dimensions. We will also develop new methods for rapid online updating of models
using dynamic data. Our approach uses a stochastic process model to capture model inadequacy. Dynamic data are
used to update the mean and covariance of the stochastic process in a sequential manner using fast online algorithms.
This updating will be tied to the resource allocation process to determine what time and computational resources are
available for the update.
References
[1] D. Kordonowy, O. Toupet, Composite Airframe Condition-Aware Maneuverability and Survivability for Unmanned Aerial Vehicles, AIAA2011-1496, presented at Infotech@Aerospace, St. Louis, Missouri, March 29–31 (2011).
[2] R. Stengel, Toward intelligent ﬂight control, IEEE Transactions on Systems, Management, and Cybernetics 23 (6) (1993) 1699–1717,
doi:10.1109/21.257764.
[3] B. Grosz, Collaborative systems, American Association for Artiﬁcial Intelligence, 0738-4602-1996, pp. 67–85 (1996).
[4] H. Asada, J.-J. Slotine, Robot Analysis and Control, Wiley, 1986.
[5] A. Srivastava, R. Mah, M. Claudia, Integrated vehicle health management, Technical Plan, Version 2.03, NASA Aeronautics Research Mission
Directorate Aviation Safety Program (2009).
[6] B. Glass, Integrated system vehicle health management (ISVHM) architecture design: ISHM impact study and architecture design, AFRLRB-WP-TR-2008-3148.

