Available online at www.sciencedirect.com

Procedia Computer Science 9 (2012) 1867 – 1869

International Conference on Computational Science, ICCS 2012

Fourth Workshop on using Emerging Parallel Architectures
Bertil Schmidta* and Douglas Maskellb
a

Institut für Informatik, Johannes Gutenberg University Mainz, Germany
School of Computer Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore 639798

b

Abstract
The Fourth Workshop on Using Emerging Parallel Architectures (WEPA), held in conjunction with ICCS 2012, provides a
forum for exploring the capabilities of emerging parallel architectures such as GPUs, FPGAs, Cell B.E., Intel M.I.C. and multicores to accelerate computational science applications.

Keywords: Computational Science, Parallel Computer Architectures, GPGPU, CUDA, OpenCL, Reconfigurable Computing, Heterogeneous
Multi-cores, High Performance Computing

1. Introduction
Welcome to the Fourth Workshop on Using Emerging Parallel Architectures (WEPA). This workshop has been
motivated by the significant transformation of the computing landscape in recent years with the emergence of more
powerful processing elements such as CUDA-enabled GPUs, FPGAs, and M.I.C. On the multi-core front, Moore's
Law has transcended beyond the single processor boundary with the prediction that the number of cores will double
every 18 months. Going forward, the primary method of gaining processor performance will be through parallelism.
Multi-core technology has visibly penetrated the global market. Accordingly to the Top500 lists, the HPC landscape
has evolved from supercomputer systems into large clusters of multi-core processors. Furthermore, GPUs, FPGAs
and heterogeneous multi-cores have been shown to be viable computing alternatives, where certain classes of
applications witness more than one order of magnitude improvement over their GPP counterpart. Therefore, future
computational science centres will employ resources such as FPGAs, GPUs and M.I.C. architectures to serve as coprocessors to offload appropriate compute intensive portions of applications from the servers. This workshop
provides a forum for exploring the capabilities of emerging parallel architectures to accelerate computational science
applications.
The technical program was put together by the Workshop Chairs Bertil Schmidt and Douglas Maskell and 34
members of a distinguished program committee. Submissions were reviewed by at least three experts in the field.

* Corresponding author. Tel.: +65-67906107; fax: +65-67926559.
E-mail address: asbschmidt@ntu.edu.sg.
1877-0509 © 2012 Published by Elsevier Ltd. Open access under CC BY-NC-ND license.
doi:10.1016/j.procs.2012.04.227

1868

Bertil Schmidt and Douglas Maskell / Procedia Computer Science 9 (2012) 1867 – 1869

Based on the reviews, five papers were selected for presentation at the workshop and inclusion in the workshop
proceedings.
We wish to thank the program committee members for submitting thoughtful reviews and all authors who
submitted high-quality manuscripts.

2. Workshop Organizers
x

x

Workshop Co-Chairs:
x Bertil Schmidt (Johannes Gutenberg University Mainz, Germany)
x Douglas Maskell (Nanyang Technological University, Singapore)
Program Committee:
x Josef Weidendorfer (TU Munich, Germany)
x Jan-Philipp Weiss (KIT, Germany)
x Robert Strzodka (MPI Informatik, Germany)
x Thomas Steinke (ZIB, Germany)
x Dan Negrut (University of Wisconsin, USA)
x Stefan Kramer (JGU Mainz, Germany)
x Yongchao Liu (JGU Mainz, Germany)
x Andreas Kloeckner (NYU, USA)
x Alexander Heineke (TU Munich, Germany)
x Bingsheng He (Nanyang Technological University, Singapore)
x Andre Brinkmann (JGU Mainz, Germany)
x Dominik Goeddeke (TU Dortmund, Germany)
x Manfred Schimmler (University of Kiel, Germany)
x Simon See (NVIDIA)
x Neil Bergmann (University of Queensland, Australia)
x Alexandros Stamatakis (Heidelberg Institute for Theoretical Studies, Germany)
x Dominique Lavenier (IRISA, France)
x Jaroslaw Zola (Iowa State University, USA)
x Scott Emrich (University of Notre Dame, USA)
x Ananth Kalyanaraman (Washington State University, USA)
x Gerrit Voss (Fraunhofer@NTU, Singapore)
x Weiguo Liu (Fraunhofer@NTU, Singapore)
x John Paul Walters (USC Information Sciences Institute East, USA)
x Witold Rudnicki (University of Warsaw, Poland)
x Mathieu Giraud (INRIA, France)
x Stan Scott (QUB, UK)
x Chris Clarke (University of Bath, UK)
x Arpith Jacob (IBM Research, USA)
x Rob Farber (ICHEC, Ireland)
x Deming Chen (UIUC, USA)
x Lars Wienbrandt (University of Kiel, Germany)
x Rick Siow Mong Goh (A*STAR Institute of High Performance Computing, Singapore)

3. List of accepted Papers
1.
2.

Speeding up spatial database query execution using GPUs, B. Simion, S. Ray, A.D. Brown
An FPGA Implementation of an Investment Strategy Processor, C. Starke, V. Grossmann, L. Wienbrandt,
M. Schimmler

Bertil Schmidt and Douglas Maskell / Procedia Computer Science 9 (2012) 1867 – 1869

3.
4.
5.

1869

Engineering parallel sorting for the Intel SCC, N. Melot, C. Kessler, K. Avdic, P. Cichowski, J. Keller
Benchmarking data and compute-intensive applications on modern CPU and GPU architectures, M.
Ciznicki, M. Kierzynka, P. Kopta, K. Kurowski, P. Gepner
CUDA: Compliling and optimizing for a GPU platform, G. Chakrabarti, V. Grover, B. Aarts. X. Kong, M.
Kudlur, Y. Lin, J. Marathe, M. Muphy, J.-Z. Wang

