Available online at www.sciencedirect.com

Procedia Computer Science 9 (2012) 1543 – 1552

International Conference on Computational Science, ICCS 2012

OntoPHC: AN ONTOLOGY APPLIED FOR
PRIMARY HEALTH CARE
Eduardo C. Moraes 1,2, Kellyton Brito2, Silvio Meira2
1Instituto Federal de Alagoas IFAL - Maceió-AL Brazil,
2Centro de Informática(Cin) Univerdade Federal de Pernambuco (UFPE)
{ecm2,kcb,silvio}@cin.ufpe.br

Abstract
Today new researches create a considerable amount of knowledge and scientific expertise related to health problem. There is a
lth
process in the daily routine. Within this wealth of information is almost impossible to less experienced health professionals store
all specific knowledge of their areas, and there is still the problem of difficulty of fast and easy access to knowledge in health,
because this knowledge is mainly internalized in people minds and are not explicitly organized and documented. The use of
ontologies is a proposal to represent knowledge in a more rich and detailed way and is a very interesting way to share and reuse
formally represented knowledge. Ontology is a representation that can be understood by humans and processed by computers; it
is useful to define the common and mathematically based vocabulary in which shared knowledge is represented. This paper
describes the development of an ontology to represent part of the Brazilian knowledge in the Primary Health Care and creates a
semantic web system to serve as a basis for health professionals better control their routine activities and serves as an information
source for health professionals.
Keywords: Semantic Web, Ontology, Primary Health Care, Knowledge Management, Knowledge Engineering

1

Introduction

Today new researches create a considerable amount of knowledge and scientific expertise related to health problem.
This knowledge is essential for analysis, validating and efficient detection, storage and share for new researches. It
thus became clear that the adequate use of this knowledge is quite a major task.
This paper describes the development of a semantic-based system and an ontology representing knowledge for
Brazilian Primary Health Care Program.
We observed the ontology can be an important source of relevant knowledge for health professionals experienced in
computers. They have few difficult after training, to use the Protégé ontology editor(http://protege.stanford.edu/).
New users were trained using the ontology, and with this tool could describe the information flow and the main
processes in terms of a conceptual framework. Beyond a web system developed with python/Django was created to
support health professionals routines based on Brazilian primary health care program.
The Brazilian Government is investing in primary health care to provide higher quality, lower costs and meet the
people where traditional programs cannot achieve. The government has created the Family Health Strategy, where
Family Health Program(PSF) is the main program and is part of the so-called Unified Health Care System (SUS).
1877-0509 © 2012 Published by Elsevier Ltd. Open access under CC BY-NC-ND license.
doi:10.1016/j.procs.2012.04.169

1544

Eduardo C. Moraes et al. / Procedia Computer Science 9 (2012) 1543 – 1552

According to Rosa[24]. It is one of most important programs of the Brazilian national public health, which
implements a national policy for primary care settings with the aim of reformulate part of the traditional model of
assistance to a preventive model. As its name says, its main focus is on families instead of individuals, and it is
organized around multidisciplinary Family Health Teams, formed by a core of professionals such as physicians,
nurses, dentists and social workers, as well as community health agents.
With the grown of PSF, a large quantity of knowledge about primary health care have been produced and not
represented/managed in a correct way. The evolution of computer technology has enormous potential to improve
primary care in the areas like communication between physicians and patients, information sharing among health
care providers, training and rapid access to reliable medical information for both physicians and patients. And inside
of this context this work proposes a solution. Represent primary health care content throw ontology and create a
system based on this ontology.
This paper discusses the development of the ontology OntoPHC and proposes a websystem called SemanticPHC.
This paper is composed by: Section 2 introduces the Brazilian Health Care Program, section 3 presents the how the
ontology was created and methodologies used, section 4 presents the SemanticPHC System and section 6 discuss the
contributions of this work and future works.

2

The Brazilian Health Care Program

Since 1994, the Family Health Program (PSF) has been an important pillar in the reorganization of the Unified
National Health System, whose organizational principles include universality and equity. Since 2004, when the
ities, covering some 40% of the total national
population. The PSF is centred on a family and community approach in with multiprofessional teams (including
physicians, nurses, community health agents, and oral health professionals) work under the principles of
comprehensive care[3]. Our main goal is improve the follow-up care by family physicians. They usually work in
faraway areas with few or no hospitals nearby and have to support a vast number of cases in different medical areas.
They are a link to more complete medical centers. With the grown of PSF(Brazilian family health program), a large
quantity of knowledge about primary health care have been produced and not represented/managed in a correct way.
The evolution of computer technology has enormous potential to improve primary care in the areas like
communication between physicians and patients, information sharing among health care providers, training and
rapid access to reliable medical information for both physicians and patients.

3

The OntoPHC ontology

Due to the volume of information generated by projects in the health area, which is clearly an interdisciplinary area
with health professionals from various fields such as nursing, physiotherapy, nutrition, psychology, among others.
When there is a nee
programs. Computers can expertly analyze web pages in structural terms, how to check the reference of the links
connecting the pages to each other, for example.
In the primary health field, due its interdisciplinary it is quite impossible to formalize all existing concepts. We have
observed the rise of the scientific studies about ontologies, but none of the selected studies found englobes the
Brazilian primary health experience (PSF). Before the development of the ontology a systematic literature review
was made. It founds that there were important proposals in the domain, we outstand: the proposal to create a tool to
training primary health care to medical students [2], the clinical practice guideline based ontology driven clinical
ject
decision [4] and an ontology change management system [1]. The others
primary health care with a semantic perspective/application or only cover this field very superficially. This field still
needs more related works and the Brazilian experience can help a lot. An important point is that the search did not
find any study in Portuguese language
This work has these specific goals:
1-To represent formally Primary Health Knowledge based on Brazilian Health Program (PSF) .
2-To analyze different formalisms to represent knowledge and Upper Ontologies.

Eduardo C. Moraes et al. / Procedia Computer Science 9 (2012) 1543 – 1552

1545

3-To extent the BFO Upper ontology.
4- To reuse software components and frameworks
5- To develop a semantic-based system to evaluate the ontology created.
3.1 Methodology of development of OntoPHC
During the development of OntoPHC we have followed Methontology Ontology engineering second Corcho (
2005)[16]. This section describes the phases and important activities in the development of OnToPHC according to
the steps defined by Methontology methodology.

Fig. 1 Methontology Development Process
Following Methontology methodology we will detail the conceptualisation phase. The objective of
conceptualization according to Fernandez[21] is precisely this: to organize and structure the acquired knowledge
using external representations that are independent of the implementation languages and environments. In others
words, this phase organizes and converts an informally perceived view of a domain into a semiformal specification.
Our main sources of k
number 3.295/98, ordinance number 648/2006, ordinance number 649/2006, Operational Standard for SUS (NOB
96), website of Brazilian Primary Health Care (http://dab.saude.gov.br/). Other important source of knowledge was
interviews with PSF Health Professionals from two Brazilian cities from the State of Alagoas, Penedo and Junqueiro
were essential partner of this work.
At Penedo the PSF team were composed by a Physician, an Odontologist and the manager of the medical center. At
Junqueiro by a nurse.
Preliminary interviews and meetings with the primary health care experts were done to structure the knowledge
captured and to analyse and validate with the conceptual model. They need to decide what would be the granularity
and limits of the ontology. It was a barrier to overcome, to teach to health professional why/how/what is an ontology
and how to concepts should interconnected. They have to see primary health program knowledge represented into
concepts, their properties and their relationships, to evaluate the conceptual model. Then, a need was identified,
some specific rules needed to be more detailed for applying the knowledge base. These rules shall be initially
described in natural language, to simplify their understanding by health professionals for validation. During the
creation of these rules, may have detected the need for new concepts or relationships to simplify or facilitate their
definitions such cases, it is important validation of the ontology. Besides procedures related to Primary Health care
we added into OnToPHC management data about PSF, more specifically which knowledge is necessary for answer
forms solicited by Brazilian health ministry, which monthly requires reports about the ongoing local work, and this
knowledge has no structured data and no system to support the process. The main goal is to define relevant
knowledge, how to quickly retrieve intelligent and relevant information, the possibility of do queries allowing him
to know what to do, how to manage, and which knowledge is faced by Brazilian Health Program daily.
Our main goal will be create a formal and shared knowledge based on the Brazilian experience in primary health
care.

1546

Eduardo C. Moraes et al. / Procedia Computer Science 9 (2012) 1543 – 1552

Some competency questions were created. Competency questions by Fernandes[21] are the basis for a rigorous
characterization of the knowledge that the ontology has to cover. They specify the problem and what constitutes a
good solution. Some Competence Questions:
1- How is composed the PSF Health Team ?
2- What are the main subprograms of Family Health Program ?
3- How is the procedure and treatment for a Diabetic person ?
4- What are the main routine activities for the Woman Health Program?
5- How many families a Health Team should cover?

3.2 Implementation
After the conceptualisation step, the implementation step starts, and is into this step the ontology is implemented.
The OnToPHC was created using OWL-DL (Description Logic). The idea of OnToPHC was to define the roles,
legal terminology, procedures and relations that influence the Primary health Care domain, based in Brazilian
experience in PSF.
The OnToPHC ontology was developed following the bottom-up strategy proposed by Van der Vet (2002)[22].
This strategy results in well-structured ontologies. This methodology is defined over a set of terms specific to
identify more general concepts. This type of approach allows us to have a broader vision of the initial terms of
ontology. The ontology was created in Portuguese language.
The first step in conceptualization was build the glossary of terms: The terms were obtained from meetings with
Health experts, from Governmental documents(laws, manuals, and ordinances) and from Family Health Portal
http://dab.saude.gov.br/), no other ontology about this domain was reused because no one was found with relevant
knowledge about the domain. The next step was integrate the concepts and define the binary relations. The
OnToPHC has 131 Classes, 130 subclasses, 58 Equivalent Classes, 44 Disjoint axioms, 20 Object properties and 8
data properties.

Fig. 2 OntoPHC Header
Lines 1 to 3 of the figure above represent the namespace for the ontology OntoPHC, and lines 4 to 10 represent
the identification of the namespace for the language RDF, RDF Schema, XML Schema and OWL. Namespace are
alias to other resources, it usually links to the W3C(World wide Web Consortium) reference. Line 11 represents the
BFO upper ontology import. The OntoPHC attributes are of type owl: OBJECTPROPERTY that defines the
relationships between the concepts defined in ontology and owl: DatatypeProperty that allows restrictions to be
established as cardinality and instances that an attribute can have.

Figure 3. Example of Object Property

Eduardo C. Moraes et al. / Procedia Computer Science 9 (2012) 1543 – 1552

1547

The example above shows the object property is diagnosed by, and analysing the code above we realize the
defined relationship (line 4), the relationship of each domain class (line 5) and the class range (line 6). The first three
lines are comments, they are important for a better understanding but do not mean anything. The Family Health
Program is composed by the union of many subprograms. Some of them are temporary, others no. In this research
we represent formally knowledge about these subprograms.
ommended

Figure 4. Rule Example
Here we established a relationship between the classes Patient, Symptom and Glycemia Exam as follow. Patient-1
is an individual of class Patient who has some symptoms, (they were represented as Excessive Thirst, Fatigue,
Excessive Urinate). Excessive Thirst, Fatigue, Excessive Urinate are individuals of the Symptom Class and have an
object type property called Has symptom connecting to Patient 1. Is recommended is defined as an object type
property and has value Glycemia exam. This patient may be suffering of Diabetes.
The OnToPHC was created using OWL-DL (Description Logic) and modelled with Protégé Framework
(protege.stanford.edu) version 4.0.1 that allows to automatically generate the code OWL ontology.
Evaluation is an important phase of the development process. The evaluation activity judges the developed
ontologies, software and documentation against a frame of reference. Ontologies should be evaluated before they are
used or reused. There are two kinds of evaluation, the technical one, which is carried out by developers, and users
evaluation.
To evaluate the OnToPHC we have used two mechanisms. Metric-based techniques and user evaluation.
The metric-base technique has used a new inference machine (reasoner), Protégé version 4.1 innovate and now it
comes with a new reasoner called HermiT. Hermit reasoner defined OntoPHC as ALCHI(D) as figure 4 shows.

Fig 4. Metric-based Evaluation of OntoPHC
The user evaluation will be described below together with the system evaluation.

4

SemanticPHC : a semantic-based system

The need of improve the primary health care attendance and the possibility of evaluate by more users the created
ontology, motivate the development of a semantic application, aiming allow through a web browser, access the
modelled ontology and transform it into a concrete solution for Brazilian health professionals, providing an
interesting way of retrieve information and test the knowledge formalized in OntoPHC ontology.

1548

Eduardo C. Moraes et al. / Procedia Computer Science 9 (2012) 1543 – 1552

To test the applicability of OntoPHC we have use an innovative platform. We developed an application called
SemanticPHC using the DJANGO framework, and python language for translate the OWL ontology into python
classes. The application has features such as: add new families covered by the program, add citizens, add vaccine,
schedule physician, register a visit, and extract reports, retrieve data by a semantic search, navigate through classes
and subclasses, properties visualization.

Fig. 5 SemanticPHC Architecture
We have chosen DJANGO because it is an open source web application framework, written in Python, which
follows the model-template-view architectural pattern (similar to Model-View-Controller pattern). It provides a
interface (input
and presentation), permitting independent development, testing and maintenance of each one. We included our
concepts defined in our ontology OntoPHC, now will became classes of the business model.
The system is in test phase and the primary health center of Penedo is participating.
The objective of the system were two: 1- To be a source of knowledge for new users, were they can search for
concepts, routines of primary health care, roles attributions, relations between roles as modelled by OntoPHC. 2- A
system to support the daily routine based on our abstraction and modelled ontology.
The system has many features as described before, now we will detail the semantic retriever component. This
component provides the functionality responsible for enhancing the user query with related terms in order to match
relevant rules or related concepts. The objective is to contextualize the keyword into the primary health care domain.
Also it should avoid ambiguity in search return.
The semantic retriever will use the RDFLiba library and minimal python toolkit for viewing and querying
RDFS/OWL ontologies called OntoInspector b. RDFLib is the most prominent library for "Phytonic"(pure python
language) programming with ontologies.

a
b

Website: http://www.rdflib.net/
Website: http://www.michelepasin.org/artifacts/software/ontoinspector/

Eduardo C. Moraes et al. / Procedia Computer Science 9 (2012) 1543 – 1552

Figure 6

1549

Example of a Semantic query

Internally the webserver will receive the keyword and redirect it to the semantic retriever. The semantic retrieve
will search for the object properties, rules and data properties related to the keyword. If the search returns not null,
all related data will be displayed for the user.
The system has two levels of access. The administrator access can view, edit and manipulate the others users
profiles. The administrator is responsible for feed an intranet blog created to disseminate important news related to
family health program, calendar for future trainings and related news. This blog is showed in the index page of the
system. Other activity from administrator is to receive the critics and the problems by email and provide solutions.

4.1 Software Evaluation
The plan of this evaluation follows the model proposed according to Wohlin et al. (2000)[29], the experimental
process can be divided into the following main activities: the definition is the first step, where the experiment is
defined in terms
of problem, objective and goals. The planning comes next, where the design of the experiment is determined, the
instrumentation is considered and the threats to the experiment are evaluated. The operation of the experiment
follows from the design. In the operational phase, measurements are collected, analysed and evaluated in the
analysis and interpretation. Finally, the results are presented and packaged in the presentation and package.
In order to define the experiment, the GQM paradigm defined by Basili et al., (1994)[30] was used. The GQM is
based upon three pillars: GOALS , Questions and Metrics.
Now we will present our experiment definition using the GQM paradigm.
Goal:
According to the paradigm, the main objective of this study is:
To analyse the system developed for the purpose of evaluating it with respect to the relevancy of the tool from the
point of view of primary health professionals in the context of Brazilian Primary Health Care.
Questions:
In addition, the questions to be answered are:
Q1. Does the ontology can be a source of knowledge and is useful to the primary health care professionals ?
Q2. Does the tool is useful to primary health care professionals in their daily routine?
Q3. Do the subjects have difficulties to use the system?
Metrics:
M1. Usefulness of OntoPHC: P1 - The amount of knowledge that is acquired from ontology in three minutes; P2
- The number of procedures that was retrieved by subjects in one hour;

1550

Eduardo C. Moraes et al. / Procedia Computer Science 9 (2012) 1543 – 1552

M2. Usefulness of SemanticPHC: The relation between the increment of use the system and not use the paper
forms;
M3. Difficulty to use the system: In order to evaluate the difficulty of the subjects is necessary to identify and
analyze the difficulties found by users, it could be misunderstanding or weakness of the system model and to define
improvements.
process. Thus, two metrics related to difficulty will measure this issue:
Subjects that had difficulties of system understanding;
SemanticPHC;
These metrics have no well-known values for them. So arbitrary values were chosen, based on practical
experience and previous work. Thus, values above 30% for DM and 20% for DU were considered as an indicative
that the process, in this particular step, is too difficult and should be improved.

4.2 The Planning
Following Basili work [30]after the definition of the step, the planning is started. The definition determines the
foundations for the experiment, the reason for it, while the planning prepares for how the experiment is conducted.
We planned the case study as follows:
Context. The objective of this study is to evaluate the viability of using the SemanticPHC tool in primary health
care. The analysis will be conducted in a primary health center located in Penedo.
Subjects. The subjects of the study will be the primary health staff. The staff is composed by physician, nurse and
health agents.
Instrumentation. All subjects received a questionnaire (Q1) on his/her education and experience, in addition to
questions about strong and weak points of the tool.
Criteria. The quality focus of the study demands criteria that evaluate the benefits obtained by the use of the
Ontology and the tool and the difficulties of the users. The criteria will be evaluated quantitatively through the
amount of effort to understand the system, and the time to retrieve knowledge from the ontology.
Null Hypothesis. This is the hypothesis that we want to reject with a high significance as possible. In this study, the
null hypothesis determines that the use of SemanticPHC tool in primary heal care does not produce benefits that
justify its use and that the subjects have difficulties to use the tool.
Independent Variables. In a study, all variables in a process that are manipulated and controlled are called
independent variables. The independent variables are the tool, the experience of the subjects, the technology and the
staff size.
Qualitative Analysis. The qualitative analysis aims to evaluate the usefulness of the tool and the quality of the
material used in the study. This analysis will be performed
through questionnaire Q1.
Internal Validity. Considers whether the experimental design is able to support conclusions on causality or
correlations[29]. The internal validity of the study is dependent of the number of subjects. This study is supposed to
have at least five subjects to guarantee a good internal validity.
External Validity. The external validity of the study measures its capability to be affected by the generalization,
i.e., the capability to repeat the same study in other research groups[29]. In this study, a possible problem with
extern
Construct Validity. The validation of the construction of the study refers to the relation between the theory that is
to be proved and the instruments and subjects of the study. This validity is concerned with the relationship between
the treatment and the outcome, and determines the capability of the study to generate conclusions[29].
This conclusion will be drawn by the use of qualitative analysis due our main concern is the relevancy of the
ontology and usefulness of the tool.
The Instrumentation
health care were selected.
Instrumentation. Before the experiment can be executed, all experiment instruments must be ready. In this study,
we used the questionnaire Q1.
The Operation

Eduardo C. Moraes et al. / Procedia Computer Science 9 (2012) 1543 – 1552

1551

Experimental Environment. The case study was conducted during September-November 2011, at Penedo primary
health care center. The case study was conducted directly by one nurse, and by four health agents.
Training. The training was performed according to plan: three high level meetings, divided in two hours among two
weeks; 6 hours of subject specific training; and 16 hours of tool usage by the subjects.
The Analysis and Interpretation
Training Analysis. The training was divided in two steps. Step1- Training for the use of Protégé Tool, Step 2Training for the use of SemanticPHC Toll. The subjects and all people involved considered the training essential to
the usage of the tool. They related too about the three initial high level meetings were very important, to gain
knowledge avoid misunderstandings.
Four subjects considered the use of the Protégé tool very difficult mainly due three things: 1- Its knowledge in
English language. 2-The knowledge in computer usage. 3- The ontology paradigm, which is different from what the
health professional are used to work. Two subjects who directly used the tool considered the training time were not
enough to an appropriate tool understanding. Besides, both considered themselves not dedicated enough to learn.
Qualitative Analysis. The qualitative analysis is based on the answers defined for the Questionnaire.
Usefulness of ONTOPHC. The subjects reported that the ontology was useful and cover relevant concepts. Based on
Questionnaire Q1. 60% of the subjects classified the ontology as useful and 20% classified as Very Useful. And
20% classified as Very few useful.
Usefulness of SemanticPHC. The subjects reported that the tool was useful to electronically register the process of
primary health care. Beyond, the tool can improve answers to the reports solicited by Brazilian Health Ministry, they
ask for a concept and the system can find not trivial rules retrieved by a semantic search on OntoPHC. Based on
Questionnaire Q1. 80% of the subjects classified the tool as very useful and 20% classified as Useful.
Difficulty to use the system. In order, the subjects reported difficult of the infrastructure:
1. The Internet connection is very low and difficult the use if the system is not locally installed. Most of the medical
primary health center from far away areas has no Internet connection or it has limitation
2. As described above some primary health center has no computers too.
Another difficult reported was the difficulty for using the Protégé Tool, and the English language. One difficulty
reported is the afraid from some health professionals of using computer systems. Another difficulty reported was
locomotion of the health agents.
They suggest the possibility of using the tool in mobile phones or smartphones or PDA to provide orientation to
health agents into the field, not only in the medical center. And based on our previous defined metric for difficulty
of the system, (DU) due the results of our, metric our goal was achieved and the usage of tool was considered not
difficult.

5 Conclusion and future works
Nowadays there is a real need for knowledge management in healthcare due the explosion of information. Primary
Health care is a rich domain in semantic relationships between entities and it often needs expressivity in modelling
knowledge. Ontology-based approach is a new and interesting trend to support the sharing and reuse of formally
represented knowledge among systems.
To develop an ontology is no simple task and it is necessary to use methodologies, methods, processes, tools and
development languages in order to the development become more reliable and accurate. And an initiative from a
country like Brazil with a huge program to cover the primary health problem, with no represented knowledge, and
still with no work process, destitute of knowledge representation. We can conclude that OnToPHC is consistent and
expressive due its formal development according to Description Logic metrics and users evaluations.
The Brazilian Family Health Program is achieving important results, rising health indicators, ris
coverage. This project englobes variables like procedures, roles, professionals and actions that influences the PHC
domain. Other goal was achieved, the objective of apply the formal knowledge in the system SemanticPHC for
semantic clarification of Family Health's domain, which still is lacking of terminology standardization and involves
a lot of concepts with subtle differences.
Future works of OnToPHC may be the reuse of the ontology for others ontologies or applications associated with
semantic knowledge.
A future work is the inclusion of more detailed medical formal terminology, the reuse of biomedical ontologies like
Snomed. Other interesting future work may be the creation of medical guidelines. These clinical guidelines can be

1552

Eduardo C. Moraes et al. / Procedia Computer Science 9 (2012) 1543 – 1552

used by any health professional, they search for short description of a word and the system shows related terms,
orientation and a graphical report with the relations between the words.

6

References

[1] S.R. Abidi, S.S.R. Abidi, S. Hussain, and M. Shepherd, Ontology-based modelling of clinical practice guidelines: a clinical decision support
system for breast cancer follow-up interventions at primary care settings, Studies in health technology and informatics 129 (2007), no. 2, 845.
[2] G. Antoniou and F. Van Harmelen, A Semantic Web Primer, Mit Press, 2004.
[3] R. Aquino, N.F. de Oliveira, and M.L. Barreto, Impact of the Family Health Program on infant mortality in Brazilian municipalities,
American Journal of Public Health 99 (2009), no. 1, 87.
[4] F. Baader, D. Calvanese, D.L. McGuinness, D. Nardi, and P.F. Patel-Schneider, The description logic handbook: theory, implementation, and
applications, CambridgeUniversity Press New York, 2003.
io da Sa´ude (2007).
[6] S. Bechhofer, C. Goble, and I. Horrocks, DAML+ OIL is not enough, Proceedings of the First Semantic Web Working Symposium (SWWS
01), 2001, pp. 151 159.
[7] T. Berners, J.H. Lee, and O. Lassila, The semantic web, Scientific American 284 (2001), no. 5, 34 43.
[8] T. Berners-Lee, Semantic Web-XML2000 http://www. w3. org/2000, Talks/1206-xml2k-tbl/slide10-0. html.
[9] T. Berners-Lee, R. Fielding, and L. Masinter, Uniform Resource Identifiers (URI): Generic Syntax, (1998).
[10] O. Bodenreider and R. Stevens, Bio-ontologies: current trends and future directions,Briefings in Bioinformatics 7 (2006), no. 3, 256.
[11] R.J. Brachman and J.G. Schmolze, An overview of the KL-ONE Knowledge Representation System, Cognitive Science 9 (1985), no. 2,
171 216.
[12] V.K. Chaudhri, A. Farquhar, R. Fikes, P.D. Karp, and J.P. Rice, OKBC: A programmatic foundation for knowledge base interoperability,
Proceedings of the National Conference on Artificial Intelligence, JOHN WILEY & SONS LTD, 1998,pp. 600 607.
[13] , Open knowledge base connectivity 2.0. 2, Draft standard proposal (1998).
[14] World Wide Web Consortium, Owl semantics.ontology web language. world wide web consortium, Tech. report, 2004.
[15] World Wide Web Consortium Consortium, Rdf vocabulary description language 1.0:Rdf schema, Tech. report, 2004.
[16] O. Corcho, M. Fern´andez-Lopez, A. G´omez-P´erez, and A. L´opez-Cima, Building legal ontologies with METHONTOLOGY and
WebODE, Law and the Semantic Web (2005), 142 157.
[17] Oliveira G. D., An ´ Al
[18] J. de Bruijn, Using Ontologies. Enabling Knowledge Sharing and Reuse on the Semantic Web, Tech. report, Technical Report DERI-200310-29, DERI, 2003. Available from http://homepage. uibk. ac. at/ c703239/publications/DERI-TR-2003-1029. pdf.
[19] J. de Bruijn and S. Heymans, On the Relationship between Description Logic-based and F-Logic-based Ontologies, Fundamenta
Informaticae 82 (2008), no. 3, 213 236.
[20]F. Freitas, S. Schulz, and E. Moraes, Survey of current Terminologies and Ontologies in Biology and Medicine, RECIIS Electronic Journal in
Communication, Information and Innovation in Health 3 (2009), no. 1, 7 18.
[21] M. Fernandez, A. Gomez-Perez, and N. Juristo, Methontology: from ontological art towards ontological engineering, Proceedings of the
AAAI97 Spring Symposium Series on Ontological Engineering, 1997, pp. 33 40.
[22] P.E. van der Vet and N.J.I. Mars, Bottom-up construction of ontologies, Knowledge and Data Engineering, IEEE Transactions on 10 (2002),
no. 4, 513 526.
[23] M.R. Koivunen and E. Miller, W3C Semantic Web Activity, the proceedings of the Semantic Web Kick/off Seminar, Finland, 2001.
ram: the
construction of a new care model, Rev. latinoam. enferm 13 (2005), no. 6, 1027 1034.
[25] D.L. Rubin, N.H. Shah, and N.F. Noy, Biomedical ontologies: a functional perspective, Briefings in bioinformatics (2007).
[26] C.N. Sciamanna, M.A. Clark, T.K. Houston, and J.A. Diaz, Unmet needs of primary care patients in using the Internet for health-related
activities, Journal of Medical Internet Research 4 (2002), no. 3.
A, M. Baldoni
and et al., Eds. Seneca Editore, Citeseer, 2007, pp. 55 64.
[29]C. Wohlin, Experimentation in software engineering: an introduction, vol. 6, Springer, 2000.
[30] V. Basili, G. Caldiera, and HD Rombach, The goal question metric approach. Encyclopedia of software engineering, 528-532, 1994.

