Available online at www.sciencedirect.com

Procedia Computer Science 9 (2012) 1073 – 1080

International Conference on Computational Science, ICCS 2012

A new application of Dynamic Data Driven System in the TalbotOgden Model for Groundwater Infiltration
Han Yua*, Craig C. Douglasb, Fred L.Ogdenc
a
King Abdullah University of Science and Technology, Thuwal 23955-6900, Saudi Arabia
University of Wyoming, School of Energy Resources and Mathematics Department, Laramie, WY 82071, USA
c
University of Wyoming, Department of Civil and Architectural Engineering, Laramie, WY 82071, USA

b

Abstract
The Talbot Ogden model is a mass conservative method to simulate flow of a wetting liquid in variably-saturated porous media.
The principal feature of this model is the discretization of the moisture content domain into bins. This paper gives an analysis of
the relationship between the number of bins and the computed flux. Under the circumstances of discrete bins and discontinuous
wetting fronts, we show that fluxes increase with the number of bins. We then apply this analysis to the continuous case and get
an upper bound of the difference of infiltration rates when the number of bins tends to infinity. We also extend this model by
creating a two dimensional moisture content domain so that there exists a probability distribution of the moisture content for
different soil systems. With these theoretical and experimental results and using a Dynamic Data Driven Application System
(DDDAS), sensors can be put in soils to detect the infiltration fluxes, which are important to compute the proper number of bins
for a specific soil system and predict fluxes. Using this feedback control loop, the extended Talbot Ogden model can be made
more efficient for estimating infiltration into soils.
Keywords: Bin; Data; Flux; Infiltration; Moisture content domain

1. Introduction
It is well known that about 99% of domestic water supply in almost every country comes from groundwater [1]
[2]. Two active research fields are the study of groundwater recharge and discharge [3] [4], which affect both the
quantity and quality of groundwater. These studies are very important in natural environments, city planning,
wildlife management, industries, and agriculture. The work in this paper mainly focuses on the recharge process,
which is crucial in preventing groundwater from being exhausted. Infiltration is the process by which water on the
ground surface enters the soil. The Richards equation [5] is a classical model to describe infiltration, but solving it
usually causes mass error and its numerical solution converges only under restrictive conditions [6]. As a
replacement for the Richards equation and based on the Green Ampt model [7], the Talbot Ogden (T O) model [8]
is a mass-conservative method to calculate the infiltration flux in different unsaturated soil systems. It is also
___________________
*Corresponding author. Tel: (+1) 307-223-1038.
E-mail: nanking.yu@gmail.com.

1877-0509 © 2012 Published by Elsevier Ltd. Open access under CC BY-NC-ND license.
doi:10.1016/j.procs.2012.04.116

1074

Han Yu et al. / Procedia Computer Science 9 (2012) 1073 – 1080

inexpensive in terms of computation. The DDDAS [9] approach seeks to optimize the T O model by incorporating
real time sensor data into running simulations.
In the T O model, the number of bins used to discretize the domain can affect the calculated flux [8]. This model
is different from traditional methods because it does not require a discretization of the spatial domain [10] [11],
which is a typical technique when solving Richards equation in software packages like Hydrus-1D [12]. The T O
model provides a method that applies to any soil system. Not only is it mass-conservative, but it is also explicit in
time. However, for any specific soil, calculation of infiltration fluxes that can approach real field data using
measured soil parameters, the correct discretization defined by number of bins required. In this paper, we show how
dynamic data can be applied to identify the correct discretization.
The T O model can also be extended by adding another moisture content axis. This extension expresses
porosities in a two dimensional moisture content domain and it keeps the spatial dimension. In this extended model,
a bounded subdomain can be chosen to approximate real porosity distribution in any soil, which helps to precisely
predict the infiltration flux.
This paper is structured as follows. Section 2 gives a detailed description of infiltration flux in the T O model,
analyses its upper bound, and constructs the extended T O model. Based on the conclusions obtained in Section 2,
we show how to obtain a correct number of bins and a proper two dimensional moisture content subdomain by
injecting dynamic data in Section 3. Our conclusions are given in Section 4.
2. An Analysis of The Talbot Ogden Model and Its Extension
2.1. Introduction to the Talbot Ogden model
There are two kinds of movement in this model: infiltration and redistribution. The discretization of the moisture
content domain is shown in Fig. 1. r and i are the residual moisture content, and the initial moisture content,
respectively. e is the effective porosity. The interval [ i, e] that we are interested in is split into n bins indexed by k.
Each bin has the same width denoted by . d is the rightmost saturated moisture content at time t. For the k-th bin,
its wetting front depth is denoted by zk. For every time step, the infiltration occurs within each bin, which describes
the vertical downward movement of water. For example, for the k-th bin in Fig. 1, it is governed by

dzk
dt

K

1
d

i

d

d

zk

K

d

.

(1)

Fig. 1. Infiltration in the Talbot Ogden model

Immediately after infiltration, redistribution occurs. This process is shown in Fig. 2. The infiltration makes some
bins to the right saturated since water tends to infiltrate through large pores. However, the capillary pressure drags
water from right bins to ones to the left. Therefore, in Fig. 2, water in the spiking bins is redistributed to the left. But
the overall amount of water is not affected by redistribution.

1075

Han Yu et al. / Procedia Computer Science 9 (2012) 1073 – 1080

Fig. 2. Infiltration and redistribution within one time step

2.2. Infiltration rate analysis

Fig. 3. Discretizing the moisture content domain into n bins

In Fig. 3, the rectangle ABCD represents one big bin and we denote it by binX. Its depth and bin width are zX and
respectively. Then binX is split into n bins, marked by bin1, bin2
n-1 and binn. All these discretized bins
zn-1 and zn. Suppose the water content in the big
have the same width . Their depths from left to right are z1, z2
bin binX is equal to that in those n bins after discretization, then we have
X,

zX

z1

X

z2

zn

.

(2)

By Equation (1), the infiltration rate discrepancy between these two cases is
n

Vnbins VOnebin
j 1

Vbin j

VbinX

K

d
d

K

d

d

j 1

i

d

d
i

n

n
j 1

1
zj
1
zj

n
zX
n2
n
j 1

From Equation (3), the following is also defined:

(3)

zj

, where z1

z2

zn

0

1076

Han Yu et al. / Procedia Computer Science 9 (2012) 1073 – 1080

Vnbins VOnebin

Vnbins VOnebin .

l1

(4)

Therefore, more bins in the model result in a greater infiltration rate.
Now, n1 bins is increased to n2 bins, where n2 and n1 are integers and n2 > n1. This case resembles the extension
from one bin to [n2/n1] bins. The difference in infiltration rates between these n1 and n2 bins can be approximated by

Vn2bins Vn1bins

l1

Vn

2

n1

bins

VOnebin .

(5)

l1

However, the infiltration rate does not grow to infinity with finer and finer discretization. It is bounded as a function
of the leftmost bin and the rightmost bin because these two bins correspond to the slowest flux and the quickest one,
respectively. If we do integration from Equation (3) under the assumption that the whole wetting front is like a line
segment, we have

lim Vnbins VOnebin
n

K

K

d

d

1

z1

z1 zn

zn

1
d

d

z1 zn

1
dz
z

z1 zn
z1
zn

ln

z1
zn

2
z1

zn

z dz

(6)

.

By calculation, the expression obtained by Equation (6) reaches its maximum if z1/zn = 8.16 and zn is fixed. The
maximum obtained can generate an upper bound to the limit in Equation (6). Note that this limit approaches zero
z1/zn
is true.
when either z1/zn
We conclude that the infiltration rate increases with the increment of the number of bins, but it is bounded if the
number of bins tends to infinity. This is important when we injecting dynamic field infiltration data. If the predicted
flux is slower than the actual one, we can increase the number bins by a finer discretization to the moisture content
domain. Reversely, if the model generates higher infiltration rate than the actual one, we must make the
discretization coarser with fewer bins.
2.3. The extension of the Talbot-Ogden model
To more accurately describe the construction of porosity or moisture content in porous media, we need to build a
porosity function of two variables. Fig. 4 shows the method to construct this function.

Han Yu et al. / Procedia Computer Science 9 (2012) 1073 – 1080

1077

Fig. 4. Measure the porosity or moisture content by two variables

Fig. 4 shows the process of measuring the volume of the void space in a representative volume of soil. First, in the
rectangular shaped pore space, the process begins with randomly taking a line segment with length a in the
horizontal direction and another one with length b in the vertical direction. The next step is to measure the void
space restricted by a in the horizontal direction. Such void space can be occupied by either liquid or air or both. It is
denoted by x, where x represents the proportion of the horizontal length of the void space to the whole length a.
Similarly, the other measure y in the vertical direction can be obtained. Therefore, the moisture content can be
rewritten as = ( x, y) = x y. In the case of an elliptical-shaped pore space, the process is almost identical, except
that a' and b' are used to denote the length of the major and the minor axes, respectively.
By this extension, the infiltration occurs in a three dimensional space consisting of two porosity axes and one
spatial dimension. The bins now become vertical long slim cubes. The infiltration in the original T O model is
calculated using Equation (1). The redistribution is directional in this extended model. Fig. 5 shows the directional
redistribution.

Fig. 5. Directional movement of water in redistribution

Algorithms based on these concepts were created and numerical experiments are undertaken to implement
infiltration based on this extended model. Note that in Fig. 5, the moisture content domain is [0, 1] [0, 1], but it is
not necessary to consider the entire unit square. We can take any subdomain covering the interval [ i e] within it to
simulate the infiltration. Fig. 6 shows a rectangular shaped subdomain ABCD within the unit square. Infiltration
happens in the green area bounded by i= x y, e= x y, and ABCD.
3. The Application of Dynamic Data Driven System in Groundwater Movement
DDDAS [9] is a paradigm in which dynamic data are used for improving a running simulation. Conversely, the
simulation can be steered to a correct direction. Using DDDAS requires real-time data acquisition and control. If
this data driven process is properly done, it increases the predicative capability of the simulation system. For
instance, DDDAS is used to optimize laser treatment of prostate cancer [13], and to forecast weather [14].
Therefore, DDDAS is often used in the context of uncertainties [9].

1078

Han Yu et al. / Procedia Computer Science 9 (2012) 1073 – 1080

Fig. 6. Directional movement of water in redistribution

If dynamic infiltration data are injected into the running T O model, different numbers of bins are obtained
corresponding to different infiltration rates. Fig. 7 shows the numerical experiments for three different soils with 50,
125, and 250 bins, respectively.

(a)

(b)

(c)

Fig. 7. Infiltration with different numbers of bins in different soils: (a) Sand, (b) Silt loam, and (c) Sandy clay.

In each picture of Fig. 7, there are two pulses of rainfall occurring and they last for the same period. Water on the
surface of ground infiltrates in different soils. The data-driven simulation can be implemented as follows.
Suppose we can detect real-time data of infiltration rates by sensors in the soil, then we initiate the T O model at
the beginning of the first rainfall with a certain number of bins, i.e. 50 bins in sand.
In the case of 50 bins, if the water does not start to accumulate on the surface of sand at the time 0.35 h, which
we define as ponding time, we need to increase the number of bins in the running simulation, i.e. to 125 bins.
This modification to the number of bins highly depends on measuring the difference between real-time data and
the current running model. If they are matching well, we keep the current discretization. Otherwise, we need to
either increase or decrease the number of bins.
When new infiltration flux data are injected into our running simulation, the number of bins should be optimized
because Fig. 7 shows the overall infiltration rates increase with the increment of the number of bins for any soil in
the T O model. This feature is more obvious and discernible for coarser soil particles like sand. After several loops
of this feedback-control process, a proper number of bins can be obtained so that we can use this identified model to
predict future fluxes in soils.
The extended model describes the infiltration under different porosity distributions. The DDDAS can help to
identify a proper porosity/moisture content or particle distribution of soil with dynamic infiltration data. This is also
like solving an inverse problem. First, we choose a rectangular subdomain as shown in Fig. 6. Second, we discretize
this rectangular shaped area to construct vertical bins as shown in Fig. 5. Note that this discretization identifies the
number of bins and we make this value unchanged. It is possible to choose a proper number of bins for different
soils by referring to [8]. We then start simulating infiltration. Meanwhile, a field experiment may begin. When the
flux data from sensor are compared with the model data in the simulation, updates can be made to the subdomain.

Han Yu et al. / Procedia Computer Science 9 (2012) 1073 – 1080

1079

We can move the rectangular subdomain in the unit square, enlarge or shrink it to a bigger or smaller size. Fig. 8
shows the simulation of infiltration for three different soils under different subdomains.

(a)

(b)

(c)

Fig. 8. Comparison of infiltration rates computed by Hydrus-1D and the extended model with different porosity distributions: (a)
Sand, (b) Silt loam, and (c) Sandy clay.

The numerical experiments in Fig. 8 show the infiltration rates are larger if the percentages of small porosities are
higher in all these three soil textures. However, the higher percentage of big porosities corresponds to a longer
ponding time. These features can be used in updating the size and the location of the subdomain after comparing the
new field data of infiltration rates with the data obtained from the running model. Fig. 8 (a) also shows the illbehaved results obtained by Hydrus-1D, which is not mass conservative. With DDDAS, once the subdomain in our
extended T O model is identified and fixed in the moisture content domain, this model can be used to estimate
fluxes in soils. Fig. 9 shows one feedback control loop driven by dynamic field data. Fig. 9 (a) describes the
application of DDDAS in the original T O model, while (b) shows its application in the extended model.
Nevertheless, to update the number of bins and the infiltration subdomain simultaneously is challenging in the
extended model. The reason is because we need to first fix either the number of bins or the rectangle-shaped
subdomain, and then alternate the other parameter.
4. Discussion and Future Work Plan

In this paper, Section 2 gives a detailed description of infiltration flux in the T O model, analyses its upper
bound, and constructs the extension of the T O model in the moisture content domain. We conclude that finer
discretization will lead to higher infiltration rates, but with bounded increment. We have also shown that the
extension in the moisture content domain makes a probability porosity distribution possible. Based on the
conclusions obtained in Section 2, we have shown how to obtain a correct number of bins and a proper two
dimensional moisture content subdomain by DDDAS in Section 3. The DDDAS can help to generate the proper
number of bins or infiltration subdomain for any soil. Therefore, it can improve predicting the infiltration and
estimating the porosity/particle distribution in soils.

(a)

(b)

Fig. 9. Application of DDDAS in the infiltration simulation: (a) Updating the number of bins in the T O model (b) Updating the
moisture content subdomain in the extended model.

In the future, it is reasonable to obtain time adaptive numbers of bins for our simulation. Since using a fixed
number of bins may not be realistic, we must consider different numbers of bins at various moments. For instance,
we can combine several bins into one bin or split one bin into several bins whenever necessary. It is also possible to

1080

Han Yu et al. / Procedia Computer Science 9 (2012) 1073 – 1080

employ this idea to the extended model. Therefore, both a correct number of bins and a proper infiltration
subdomain need to be considered simultaneously. To optimize the computation by general purpose graphics
processing units is another work remains to be done because updating the running model can be computationally
expensive.
Acknowledgements
This research was supported in part by NSF grants CNS-1018072, EAR-1045166 and EPS-1135483, the
University of Wyoming School of Energy Resources, and Award No. KUS-C1-016-04, made by King Abdullah
University of Science and Technology (KAUST).
References
1. R. J. Charbeneau, Groundwater Hydraulics and Pollutant Transport, Waveland Press, 2006.
2. V. T. Chow, D. R. Maidment, and L. W. Mays, Applied Hydrology, McGraw Hill, 1988.
3. J. J. de Vries and I. Simmers, Groundwater recharge: an overview of processes and challenges, Hydrogeology Journal. Vol. 10. No. 1
(2002) pp. 5 17.
4. W. Sanford, Recharge and groundwater models: an overview, Hydrogeology Journal. Vol. 10 (2002) pp. 110 120.
5. L. A. Richards, Capillary conduction of liquids in porous mediums, Physics. Vol. 1. No. 5 (1931) pp. 318 333.
6. W. H. Green and C. A. Ampt, Studies on soil physics, The Journal of Agricultural Science. Vol. 4. No. 1 (1911).
7. P. Perrochet and D. Berod, Stability of the standard Crank Nicolson Galerkin scheme applied to the diffusion-convection equation: Some
new insights, Water Resources Research. Vol. 29. No. 9 (1993), pp. 3291-3297.
8. C. A. Talbot and F. L. Ogden, A method for computing infiltration and redistribution in a discretized moisture content domain, Water
Resources Research. Vol. 44 (2008)
9. C. C. Douglas, Dynamic Data Driven Applications Systems
DDDAS 2008, Proceedings of the 8th International Conference on
Computational Science (ICCS) 2008. Lecture Notes in Computer Science, Vol. 5103 (2008).
10. B. H. Gilding, Properties of solutions of an equation in the theory of infiltration, Archive for Rational Mechanics and Analysis. Vol. 65
(1977), pp. 203 225.
11. M. A. Celia and E. T. Bouloutas, A general mass-conservative numerical solution for the unsaturated flow equation, Water Resources
Research. Vol. 26. No. 7 (1990), pp. 1483 1496.
12. J. Simunek, M. Sejna, and M. T. van Genuchten, The HYDRUS Software Package for Simulating the Two- and Three-Dimensional
Movement of Water, Heat, and Multiple Solutes in Variably-Saturated Media, User Manual, 1st ed., University of California Riverside,
Jr. Salinity Lab, PC Progress s. r. o., CA U. S. A., Prague Czech Republic (2007).
13. J. T. Oden, K. R. Diller, C. Bajaj, J. C. Browne, J.Hazle, I. Bbuska, and J. Bass, et al., Development of a Computational Paradigm for
Laser Treatment of Cancer, Computational Science ICCS 2006. Vol. 3993 (2006), pp. 530-537.
14. L. Ramarkrishman, Y. Simmhan, and Beth Plale, Realization of Dynamically Adaptive Weather Analysis and Forecasting in LEAD:
Four Years Down the Road, Computational Sciences ICCS 2007. Vol. 4487 (2007), pp. 1122-1129.

