Available online at www.sciencedirect.com

Procedia Computer Science 9 (2012) 1187 – 1196

Quantifying Uncertainty for Coherent Structures
S. Ravela∗
Earth Signals and Systems Group
Earth, Atmospheric and Planetary Sciences
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
54-1818, 77 Massachusetts Avenue, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA

Abstract
Field Alignment is a useful and often necessary preprocessing step in contemporary geophysical state and parameter estimation of coherent structures. In an advance, we introduce a new framework for using Field Alignment to
quantify uncertainty from an ensemble of coherent structures. Our method, called Coalescence, discovers the mean
ﬁeld under non-trivial misalignments of ﬁelds with complex shapes, which is especially diﬃcult to calculate in the
presence of sparse observations. We solve the associated Field Alignment problem using novel constraints derived
from turbulent displacement spectra. In conjunction with a continuation method called Scale Cascaded Alignment
(SCA), we are able to extract simpler explanations of the error between ﬁelds before cascading to more complex deformation solutions. For coherent structures, SCA and Coalescence have the potential to change the way uncertainty
is quantiﬁed and data is assimilated. We illustrate utility here in a Nowcasting application.
Keywords:
Data Assimilation, Coherent Structures, Field Alignment, Scale-Cascaded Alignment, Coalescence, Nowcasting,
Storm Prediction.

1. Introduction
Environmental data assimilation is the methodology for combining imperfect model predictions with uncertain
data in a way that acknowledges their respective uncertainties. It plays a fundamental role in DDDAS as the mechanism by which environmental models are updated. However, data assimilation can only work when the estimation
process properly represents all sources of error. The diﬃculties created by improperly represented errors are particularly apparent in mesoscale meteorological phenomena such as thunderstorms, squall-lines, wild ﬁres, hurricanes,
precipitation, and fronts. They also show up elsewhere, for example in reservoir applications where permeability
ﬁelds have strong contrast.
Errors in mesoscale models can arise in many ways but they often manifest themselves as errors in position. We
typically cannot attribute position error to a single source and it is likely that they are the aggregate result of errors
∗ Telephone:

+16172530997
Email address: ravela@mit.edu (S. Ravela)

1877-0509 © 2012 Published by Elsevier Ltd. Open access under CC BY-NC-ND license.
doi:10.1016/j.procs.2012.04.128

1188

S. Ravela / Procedia Computer Science 9 (2012) 1187 – 1196

in parameter values, initial conditions, boundary conditions and others. In the context of cyclones, operational forecasters resort to ad hoc procedures such as bogussing [1]. A more sophisticated alternative is to use data assimilation
methods. Unfortunately, sequential [2], ensemble-based [3] and variational [4] state estimation methods used in data
assimilation applications adjust amplitudes to deal with position error. Adjusting amplitudes does not really ﬁx position error, and can produce unacceptably distorted estimates instead. As seen in Figure 1, showing a simulated “one
dimensional front,” the true signal (dashed line) observed sparsely (blue dots) by a noisy sensor produces a reasonable
estimate (red) from an initial guess (green) when the position error is negligible. It causes disaster (right image) when
the error is relatively larger.




	


	










Figure 1: Estimation with “3DVAR” or ensemble methods works well when position errors are small (left). The analysis can be seriously distorted
when these errors are large (right).

Indeed, a growing number of researchers are pointing to the role that position errors play in spatial estimation [5,
6, 7]. The issue captured by Figure 1 appears to occur irrespective of the nature of the contemporary estimation
procedure used. Solutions have also been proposed, most notably as an optimization problem expressed in the space of
grid positions and ﬁeld amplitudes, with suitable constraints on the grid deformation (or pixel displacement) [8, 5, 9].
Rather than just adjusting amplitudes, this is a more general way of minimizing misﬁt between two spatial ﬁelds. Not
surprisingly, it can be applied to many geophysical, meteorological and oceanographic problems [8, 10, 11, 5, 12, 13,
14, 15, 9]. In Section 2, we will summarize the advances.

Figure 2: Smoothness constraint in alignment formulations is common practice. In the top row, a template (left image) is being aligned to the target
(right image), which is a rotated and translated version. The iterations of the optimization produce a complex deformation sequence. Below, SCA,
a new proposed method, automatically recovers the dominant modes of deformation by seeking the simplest explanation of the deformation ﬁrst.

However, there are many outstanding issues. This paper will focus on two, progressing from previous DDDAS

S. Ravela / Procedia Computer Science 9 (2012) 1187 – 1196

1189

work [8]. The ﬁrst issue concerns the appropriateness of constraints on grid deformation. Most methods rely on
smoothness constraints or parameterizations such as splines. Such methods are limited because even as they display
remarkable capabilities at “morphing” one pattern into another, such invariance comes at the cost of selectivity. That
is, the more complex a dissimilarity in shape between ﬁelds that an algorithm can undo, the more diﬃcult it is to
control the deformation solutions produced. In Figure 2, for example, we see that a “cross” is merely translated and
rotated (see ﬁrst and ﬁfth columns). However, snapshots of the deformation solution with smoothness constraints (top
row) depicts a complex “viscous” motion. This is not surprising but it is not appropriate either. How might we trust
such a method when observations are sparse? We propose a new method, Scale Cascaded Alignment (SCA) [9, 11, 10],
that returns the simplest possible “explanation” (see bottom row). The improved control of the deformation solution
(selectivity) without loss of a “morphing” ability (invariance) will, as we shall see, turn out to be a key beneﬁt. SCA
is discussed in Section 3.


	

	


	










Figure 3: An ensemble of one-dimensional fronts on the left with position and amplitude errors. The ensemble mean is an inappropriate mean
ﬁeld, producing a smeared bimodal front that loses the frontal shape. We introduce a method called Coalescence, which calculates the mean by
marginalizing relative position errors in the ensemble (right).

The second issue considered is uncertainty quantiﬁcation for coherent structures where SCA plays a key part.
Consider, as an illustration, an ensemble of “one dimensional” fronts that contain position and amplitude errors, as
shown in Figure 3 (left). If we were to ask what the mean front is, clearly the simplest solution is to take the mean of
these ﬁelds, that is, calculate the mean vector. That would be terribly wrong, of course, because the mean simply does
not look like any front in the ensemble. It would be terrible, for example, if the mean of an ensemble of hurricane
ﬁelds produced a mean ﬁeld with multiple vortices! The solution to this problem is not trivial, but is a fundamental
step when quantifying uncertainty by moments.
We introduce a technique called Coalescence, wherein the mean amplitude ﬁeld is calculated by marginalizing
relative position errors. The method invokes an “N-body” type solution where each member in the ensemble gravitates
to the others. In so doing, all of them discover a mean position where the amplitude mean is meaningful. This
technique is an extension of a preliminary approach to this problem [12] and we should note its validity in the presence
of complex misalignments, structural shape variability and sparsity. Coalescence is discussed in Section 4.
A large number of applications beneﬁt from these new developments including data assimilation [5], veriﬁcation [7], reservoir modeling, pattern recognition [9], and velocimetry [11, 10]. We will present storm tracking in
Section 5.
2. Methodology
Let us consider a gridded scalar ﬁeld X, and a deformation ﬁeld (or displacement ﬁeld) q, which is a vector ﬁeld,
and X ◦ q as the deformation of X by q, as shown in Figure 4. We think about a second ﬁeld Y, which may be gridded

1190

S. Ravela / Procedia Computer Science 9 (2012) 1187 – 1196

q

X

X(r – q(r))

Figure 4: A gridded ﬁeld X is deformed by applying a displacement vector ﬁeld q to its coordinates r

or not, and related to the ﬁrst ﬁeld by the observation operator h. From a suitable Bayesian formulation, one may
synthesize the following objective [5, 9]:
J(X, q) = X − X f ◦ q

T

B(X f ◦ q)−1 X − X f ◦ q + Y − h(X f ◦ q)

T

R−1 Y − h(X f ◦ q) + Λ(q)

(1)

The term B in (1) is the background error covariance, q is the displacement ﬁeld, X f the forecast, and h(·) the
observation operator and Λ the constraints on displacement. Like a pixel-wise amplitude error, the displacement or
deformation vector ﬁeld q is deﬁned at every grid coordinate. Note that (1) can be trivially extended to use an ensemble
S
by writing Je (X, q) = s J(X s , q s ), with B B( X sf ◦ q s
) also being derived from the S -member ensemble.
s=1
If we assume that the forecast distribution is perfect without position errors and suitably Gaussian, then it is trivial
to see (via a Taylor expansion of (1)) that non-zero position errors inﬂate the forecast error (amplitude) covariance.
Although non-Gaussian amplitude errors may result from position errors, we show that the covariance is always weakened (for non-zero displacements) and this is the principal problem plaguing eﬀective estimation [5]. The corrupted
amplitude covariance, especially when it is ﬂow-dependent, can no longer achieve the Cramer-Rao bound that was
achieved in a world without position errors.
Error between spatial ﬁelds are quantiﬁed and reduced in position and amplitude subspaces in (1) without explicit
detection of feature positions. However, if feature positions are available, they can be easily incorporated as boundary
conditions. Because feature positions need not explicitly be speciﬁed, situations where sparse observations are present
or feature positions are diﬃcult to specify (e.g. fronts, complex storm shapes) can be directly addressed. Because the
deformation solution is dense, non-trivial alignments can be easily represented (as opposed to a strictly Lagrangian
approach), including local skews, shears, rotations, divergence, convergence and higher modes [5].
The error between spatial ﬁelds can be jointly reduced in position and amplitude subspaces optimally if and only if
the sensitivity of the amplitude error covariance to position errors is accounted, because B is dependent on q [5]. This
is a non-trivial problem except when (a) the amplitude error covariance is assumed to be static or (b) when position
and amplitude errors are assumed to be independent or (c) jointly Gaussian. These assumptions will produce poor
results when reality does not match them (which is almost always), but they are what have been assumed in earlier
work [7, 6]. We do not make such an assumption and were the ﬁrst to show, instead, that the joint error-reduction
problem can be solved using sampling (ensemble) methods [5].
We were also the ﬁrst to show that the error between spatial ﬁelds can be reduced in position and amplitude
in two steps in a systematic way (though ad-hoc approaches were considered contemporarily), that is they arise by
considering the Euler-Lagrange equations of (1) [8, 5]. This approximation yields two numerical processes: a Field
Alignment process and an amplitude adjustment process, the latter being familiar as contemporary data assimilation
(in 3D). The Field Alignment process becomes a pre-processor, which makes practical application feasible and with
broad utility [8, 5].

1191

S. Ravela / Procedia Computer Science 9 (2012) 1187 – 1196

The Euler-Lagrange equations can be written as follows. First equation, which is iterated in deformation is:
H T R−1 (Y − Xif )
Li qi

Zi
q˜ i
q˜ i [k] =

∇Xif T [k] Zi [k] = fi [k]

(2)

H is the Jacobian of the observation operator, and qi is the instantaneous displacement in the i iteration, Li qi =
f
◦ qi−1 . Note that (2) is evaluated for each component of q˜ i ’s vector space at
dΛ/dqi , X0f = X f , q0 = 0 and Xif = Xi−1
pixel or grid point k. The second equation, in amplitude, may be written as:
th

X a = X∗f + B∗ H T (HB∗ H T + R)−1 (Y − X∗f )
X∗f

(3)
Xif

≡ X ◦ ( i qi ) is the ﬁnal deformed ﬁrst guess, which may in practice be obtained via the iteration:
=
f
a
◦ qi−1 . B∗ = B(X∗ ) is the ﬁnal covariance, and X is a “quadratic update” familiar as OI/3DVAR/KF/EKF/EnKF.
Note that (2) and (3) are approximations to a direct solution.
Dynamical Balance is better preserved when data is assimilated by ﬁeld alignment and the technique deﬁned
by (2) is easily extended to multivariate ﬁelds and vector ﬁelds [8, 5]. However, constraints must be imposed on the
nature of the deformation. We showed that constraints on the displacement ﬁeld can be simple “ﬂuid-like” ones, such
as smoothness and non-divergence, see (4), but they need to be speciﬁed at an appropriate length scale to be eﬀective,
which is often unknown. Otherwise, they produce an inappropriate, aliased explanation of the true deformation. In
contrast, we posit that by seeking the simplest explanation [9, 11], simplicity being deﬁned by the smallest spatial wave
number (or scale) a deformation is restricted to, useful and robust solutions can be produced. By cascading through
deformation scales (from translation to “turbulence”), dominant modes of misalignment can also be estimated. We
call this Scale Cascaded Alignment (SCA), discussed next.
f

f
Xi−1

3. Scale Cascaded Alignment
With smoothness, and non-divergence, two popular constraints of the Tikhonov type, the iterated alignment equation (2) reduces to:
(4)
w1 ∇2 qi + w2 ∇(∇ · qi ) − fi = 0
In what follows, we drop the explicit notation for iteration i and use q to denote the instantaneous displacement.
Let us suppose a vector ﬁeld q(p) (q x (p), qy (p))T with a Fourier transform pair Q(ω) = (Q x (ω), Qy (ω))T . Similarly,
let f ↔ F be a transform pair. We can then write a solution to (4) in wave-number space (m 0 and n 0) of the
form:
Qx
Qy

=

Ha
Hb

Hb
Hc

Fx
Fy

(5)

For the sake of simplicity, let us set w2 = 0, which leads to Laplace-Beltrami ﬂow (but the problem obviously remains
regularized). The resulting ﬁlter is the Fourier Transform of the Laplacian (Bi-Laplacian is also commonly used),
which prescribes a power-law spectrum for the instantaneous deformation.
H = Ha = Hc = −

1
w1 ||ω||22

(6)

The displacement spectrum Q is capable of producing complex deformations because the ﬁlter H admits high
frequencies. It is capable of aliasing a “simple” cause into a complex explanation, as shown in Figure 2. To control
the deformation better, we propose the following three steps:
1. Laplace Approximation of Power Law. In the viscous formulation, w1 only controls the convergence rate
(provided stability is maintained) but not the deformation spectrum. The shape of the ﬁlter can be controlled
by changing the power law itself, but here we propose a Laplace “distribution” as an approximation: e(r) =
2
βe−|r|/2α , where r is the spectral radius. This formulation overcomes the singularity in the power law and it
can reasonably approximate any power law using the parameters β (gain) and α (bandwidth), thus producing
instantaneous displacements ranging from translations to turbulence. A comparison of the original ﬁlter and the
tunable approximation is shown in Figure 5(a) for a power-law of 2 (smoothness).

1192

S. Ravela / Procedia Computer Science 9 (2012) 1187 – 1196





!!











	



	






  








	

(a) Filter approximation of power law.
Cascaded
Viscous

Error

1







0.5

0

	

0

500
Iterations




1000




(b) SCA converges better.






(c) 2D Gabor Floret.
Figure 5: Smoothness, which yields a power-law, can be approximated by the parameterized Laplace distribution, which may in turn be expressed
by a Gabor basis. The resulting algorithm, SCA, performs substantially better.

2. Gabor ﬁlter basis for deformations. The deformation spectrum is expressed using a Gabor basis (see Figure 5(b)
and Figure 5(c) in 1D and 2D respectively). Thus, we may write the ﬁlter as a weighted sum of the basis:
H i ξi

H=

(7)

i

The ﬁlter Hi is the sum of all ﬁlters at a common radius around the spectrum.
3. Scale Cascaded Alignment (SCA). We solve for the total displacement in sequence, starting with ﬁlters closest
to the origin (DC or translation) and moving higher to more complex wavenumbers. Thus we may iterate with
index j as Q j = Hi F j before continuing to a ﬁner solution using Hi+1 and so on, until all the ﬁlters organized
according to their “spectral radius” are exhausted. In general, ﬁlter at wave number 0 is translation, at wavenumber 21 accounts for global deformations, and at the highest wavenumber, total turbulence. Displacement ﬁelds
corresponding to each ﬁlter-bank are returned and their sum is the total displacement that minimizes the model
data misﬁt in position space.
SCA can be implemented as an independent Euler-Lagrange equation, or as a gradient functional in a joint
position-amplitude minimization procedure. In the former role, once it converges, the amplitude adjustment described
in (3) is performed. In Figure 5(c), we see the reduction in error proposed by SCA versus Smoothness-based Field
Alignment, for the example in Figure 2. While “viscous” alignment produces a complex explanation, SCA rapidly
converges, returning translation and rotation automatically as the dominant modes. Even as a standalone routine, SCA
has numerous applications from weather tracking to pattern recognition and we will review these in Section 5.
4. Coalescence
As noted in Section 1, the calculation of the ensemble mean with position errors is non-trivial. The ensemble of
vortices in Figure 6(a), for example, have a mean, shown in Figure 6(b), that looks like no ensemble member at all. It
does not account for the fact that the vortices are relatively displaced and not merely realizations of a Gauss-Markov
ﬁeld with a shape-distorted mean ﬁeld. In Figure 6(c), we coalesce under simple deformation constraints. The mean
in Figure 6(d) is much more realistic as a consequence. Similarly, in Figure 6(e) and (f), coalesced fronts produce a
more representative ensemble mean. We now go on to discuss a general framework for Coalescence.

1193

S. Ravela / Procedia Computer Science 9 (2012) 1187 – 1196





Figure 6: Coalescence of vortices and fronts produces a better representation of the ensemble mean.

The problem of discovering a mean position is simple if exact correspondence between ﬁelds are densely available,
but this is impractical in most problems. When correspondences are sparse, or impossible to produce because ﬁelds
are only sparsely observed, or when the deformations are nonlinear and the ﬁelds have complex shapes, the estimation
problem becomes much harder.
We devise a procedure that works under these conditions. It estimates the mean ﬁeld X by quantifying and
marginalizing the deformation q s associated with an ensemble member X sf . With a suitable probability density representation, our Bayesian formulation leads to an Expectation-Maximization (EM) problem. In the ith iteration (i > 0)
f
f
= X s,i−1
◦ q s,i−1 as the displaced ensemble member s, and Bi as the ensemble covariance.
of the EM cycle, deﬁne X s,i
Omitting, for simplicity, subscript i by writing X sf
S

J(X, {q s }|{X sf }) =

f
X s,i
, the E-step becomes:

f
(X − X sf ◦ q s )T B−1
i (X − X s ◦ q s ) + Λ s (q s )

(8)

s=1

The objective J estimates both displacement and the mean (amplitude) ﬁeld. The displacement constraint Λ s (q s )
can be smoothness, a turbulent spectrum or others. In the M-step, we minimized (8) by treating J as the negative loglikelihood. Looking for a stationary point yields two Euler-Lagrange equations. The ﬁrst one is simply an expression
for the amplitude mean for an S member ensemble:
X=

1
S

X sf ◦ q s

(9)

s

The second equation is one for deformation of each ensemble, and it is solved iteratively in the ith M-step. Allowing the displacement of ensemble member s in iteration j to be q(s j) , the second normal equation is synthesized
as:
f ( j)
B−1
− X sf ( j) )
i (Xt

Zts( j)
q˜ (s j)
q˜ (s j) [k]

=

L s q(s j)
1
∇X sf ( j)T [k] Zts( j) [k]
S t s

(10)

We deﬁne L s q s dΛ s /dq s and the incrementally displaced state vector per iteration as X sf ( j) X sf ( j−1) ◦ q(s j−1) , with
th
j > 0 and q(0)
s = 0. Please note that Bi is ﬁxed in the i M-step and (10) is evaluated at each pixel or grid point
( j)
( j)
k for each component of the vector space of q˜ s . Once (10) converges, the solution q∗s
j q s produces a mean
ﬁeld estimate Xi∗ = S1 s X sf ◦ q∗s . We then return to the next iteration of the E-step by setting q s,i = q∗s and updating
f
f
X s,i+1
= X s,i
◦ q s,i and calculating Bi+1 . We reconstruct an objective and thus alternate the E-M steps until convergence.

f
, the corresponding mean is X∞ and covariance B∞ .
The ﬁnal estimate of the ensemble is X s,∞
f
We may deﬁne Bi = B({X s,i }), that is a simple calculation from the ensemble (and represented in square-root form)
at the beginning of the ith step. However, note that q s,0 is not deﬁned and B∞ is the only appropriate covariance,
and all prior ones B1 → B∞ represent a converging sequence. We may, in fact, have a diﬀerent sequence, one

1194

S. Ravela / Procedia Computer Science 9 (2012) 1187 – 1196

that accounts for the large uncertainty in knowledge of B1 and the strong certainty of B∞ by writing, for example,
f
}) + (1 − γi )I, for a scalar γi ∈ [0, 1] and with i > 0. We ﬁnd in current experiments that the EM iterations
Bi = γi B({X s,i
converge rapidly as most position errors are eliminated in the ﬁrst M-step iterations. Consequently, we choose γ1 = 0
and γ2 = 1, but other sequences can also be developed.
An interpretation of (10) is that every ensemble member experiences a “force” from the other ensemble members
and in this way, they all gravitate to a “center of mass” or coalesce to a mean (under displacement). To the best of our
knowledge, Coalescence has not been introduced this way, but it is a foundation to quantifying ensemble uncertainty
beginning with its mean.
5. Nowcasting Storms

(a) First mode: Translation

(b) Second mode: Rotation

(c) Third mode: Shear

Figure 7: SCA automatically recovered apparent motion modes for a hurricane from Radar VIL. They correspond strongly to translation, rotation
and shear, but without such an explicit parameterization.

Many applications of Coalescence and SCA are emerging. Here, we will discuss their application in a new
DDDAS direction: Nowcasting storms.
Weather-related operational delays in US aviation run into the billions of dollars annually. At least 65% of the
aircraft delays in the US in 2009 were related to weather. Having eﬀective convective forecasts in the 0-8 hour
range can signiﬁcantly smooth out operational jitters, leading to better managed airspace and traﬃc [14, 15]. The
Nowcasting problem as it is known typically requires forecasting a quantity such as the Vertically Integrated Liquid
(VIL) that can be retrieved from radar measurements.
One way to Nowcast VIL is by using a numerical model such as the High Resolution Rapid Refresh model
(HRRR). Another way is data-driven. Time series of radar imagery are used to estimate an apparent motion, growth
and decay model of signiﬁcant convective activity (strong VIL) which is used to extrapolate current observations into
the future. As it turns out, when “warm-started” with new observations, numerical models display poor skill at short
forecast lead times. This is because the adjustments induced by observations have not largely equilibrated with the
rest of the model state. Clearly a data-driven VIL forecast will be perfect at a zero lead-time, but its performance
decays rapidly in time. The crossover point is typically 3 hours. Therefore, when issuing a 0-8hr forecast, we must
blend the data-driven extrapolation model with the numerical model, producing a rendition of truth that is better than
either source alone.
Here, we use SCA to build a data-driven apparent motion model, which oﬀers at least one advantage. By extracting the simplest explanation of the apparent motion ﬁrst and then proceeding to more complex ones at higher
wavenumbers, we can capture largescale motion “modes” for producing long term forecasts while rejecting highfrequency motions that tend to be short-lived and introduce undesirable dispersion in the long run. As an example, in
Figure 7, we see a snapshot of Hurricane Gustav’s Radar VIL, with estimated apparent motion vectors overlaid. These
vectors are calculated from radar VIL time series in the immediate past. There is one ﬁgure for each mode, increasing
in complexity from left to right. The automatically recovered modes by SCA appear to be translation, large-scale
rotation and a more localized shear. They correctly summarize the storm’s apparent motion to the west-northwest.

S. Ravela / Procedia Computer Science 9 (2012) 1187 – 1196

1195

Figure 8: Improvement in Data-Driven two hour forecast skill throughout the day for Hurricane Alex by SCA (pink) over current extrapolation
methods.

Thus, we may produce an optimal weighted combination of these modes from a predictability point of view, using
it as an “apparent velocity” ﬁeld with which to advect the current radar VIL into the future. SCA, used this way,
outperforms the existing methods in use by Lincoln Laboratory (“LLExtrap”) [14, 15], based on correlation Optic
Flow, denoted CIWS and CoSPA.
As shown in Figure 8, a 120 minute (two hour) forecast of Hurricane Alex is compared with the verifying radar
VIL throughout a diurnal cycle. The CSI1 scores for SCA is shown in pink, LLExtrap (CIWS2 ) in red and LLExtrap
(CoSPA3 ) in blue. The performance is much improved in this case (it is understood by the community that CSI scores
generally change very little even when improvements are large). This is promising, and we note that a mechanism to
optimize the weighted combination will generalize these results.
The blending problem is posed in general as a fusion of model predictions with extrapolations over a 0-8hr interval,
which naturally invokes a two-point boundary value (variational) problem. Coalescence plays a key role within this
framework for blending ﬁelds at any forecast time. For the experiment depicted here, we use LLExtrap as the datadriven extrapolation, and HRRR as the model. In Figure 9, we see the extrapolation and HRRR forecasts 225 minutes
out (middle column). Note that both VIL images have some overlap, but they largely capture diﬀerent aspects of the
storm. The verifying observations are shown in the top-right image. However, since this is a radar image over the
ocean, much of the storm is self-occluded, thus producing a small crescent instead of the full storm. The full storm
exists, of course, and can be seen from satellite, but depicting brightness temperature (not VIL), shown in bottom-right
panel of Figure 9.
We contrast two blending techniques, one produced using the current method and the other by Coalescence (left
column). Our reconstructions are more plausible by comparison, whereas the alternative is a little more unrealistic
(and ﬂagged by evaluators as a problem case). Coalescence ﬁnds a mean ﬁeld by bringing the two forecasts together
in position-space up to local convergence.
Coalescence is turning out to be useful in blending but has additional use in quantifying ensemble variability
which will be further elaborated in future work.
Acknowledgements
The author gratefully acknowledges the support of the Lincoln Laboratory via grant FA8721-05-C-0002 awarded
by the Federal Aviation Administration and Grant No. NSF DBI 0640529. The author also thanks C. Yang, T.
Langlois, K. Harrington, K. Haas and M. Wolfson for their support of this work.
Success Index = hits/(hits+false alarms+misses)
Integrated Weather System
3 Consolidated Storm Prediction for Aviation
1 Critical

2 Corridor

1196

S. Ravela / Procedia Computer Science 9 (2012) 1187 – 1196

Figure 9: Coalescence is used to blend the outputs of the HRRR model and extrapolation, improving on existing blending methodology.

References
[1] C. Davis, S. Low-Nam, The ncar-afwa tropical cyclone bogussing scheme, Tech. rep., Technical Memorandum, Air Force Weather Agency
(AFWA), http://www.mmm.ucar.edu/mm5/mm5v3/tc-report.pdf (2001).
[2] A. Gelb, Applied Optimal Estimation, MIT Press, 1974.
[3] G. Evensen, The ensemble kalman ﬁlter: Theoretical formulation and practical implementation, Ocean Dynamics 53 (2003) 342–367.
[4] A. C. Lorenc, Analysis method for numerical weather prediction, Q. J. R. Meteorol. Soc. 112 (1986) 1177–1194.
[5] S. Ravela, K. Emanuel, D. McLaughlin, Data assimilation by ﬁeld alignment, Physica D 230 (1) (2007) 127–145.
[6] J. D. Beezley, J. Mandel, Morphing ensemble kalman ﬁlters, Tellus 60A (2008) 131–140.
[7] R. N. Hoﬀman, Z. Liu, J. Louis, C. Grassotti, Distortion representation of forecast errors., Monthly Weather Review 123 (1995) 2758–2770.
[8] S. Ravela, Two new directions in data assimilation by ﬁeld alignment, Lecture Notes in Computer Science, Proc. ICCS 4487 (2007) 1147–
1154.
[9] C. Yang, S. Ravela, Spectral control of viscous alignment for deformation invariant image matching, Proceedings of International Conference
on Computer Vision 1 (2009) 1303–1310.
[10] S. Ravela, T. Langlois, W. Dupree, M. Wolfson, Data-Driven Weather Tracker Using Scale Cascaded Alignment, US Patent Application
61/442,892 (2011).
[11] S. Ravela, C. Yang, J. William, K. Emanuel, An Objective Framework for Assimilating Coherent Structures, WMO Symposium on Nowcasting (2009).
[12] S. Ravela, V. Chatdarong, How do we deal with position errors in observations and forecasts Annual?, Congress of the European Geosciences
Union (2006).
[13] J. K. Williams, Wrf-var implementation for data assimilation experimentation at mit, Master’s thesis, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
(2008).
[14] M. M. Wolfson, D. A. Clark, Advanced aviation weather forecasts, MIT Lincoln Laboratory Journal 16 (1) (2006) 31–58.
[15] W. J. Dupree, M. M. Wolfson, J. R. J. Johnson, R. A. Boldi, E. B. Mann, K. T. Calden, C. A. Wilson, P. E. Bieringer, B. D. Martin,
H. Iskenderian, FAA Tactical Weather Forecasting in the United States National Airspace, Proceedings from the World Weather Research
Symposium on Nowcasting and Very Short Term Forecasts (2005).

