Available online at www.sciencedirect.com

Procedia Computer Science 9 (2012) 1533 – 1542

International Conference on Computational Science, ICCS 2012

Multi–agent environment for modelling and analysing market
strategies
˙ nska
Paweł Kolarz, Jan Marszałek, Jarosław Ko´zlak, Małgorzata Zabi´
AGH University of Science and Technology, Al. Mickiewicza 30, 30-059 Krak´ow, Poland

Abstract
Our goal was to develop an environment which will make it possible to model and optimise supply chains and
company behaviours, as well as to test the inﬂuence of applying diﬀerent decision algorithms. The system consists of
a set of companies which cooperate and compete with one another by oﬀering and buying products and negotiating
their conditions of transactions. Throughout the presented work we focused on the realisation of the parts of the
strategic planner module. Producers tend to maximise proﬁts, among other ways, by modifying the margin of oﬀered
products.
The main aim of the applied decision algorithm is to have a feature of adapting to a given situation: to select the
best model of the simulation world and to choose the most adequate actions in the given situations. The ﬁrst aspect is
addressed by the use of an adaptive algorithm which chooses the best demand prediction algorithm in a given situation.
The second aspect is addressed by the clustering technique which identiﬁes the similar situations on the market as one
possible state and assigns with it the most proﬁtable action.
Keywords: multi–agent systems, company modelling, clustering, prediction

1. Introduction
The problem of building a beneﬁcial supply chain of management is nowadays of signiﬁcant importance.
A supply chain [1] is made up of enterprises (suppliers, focal company, customer) linked together by ﬂows of
products, services, information and ﬁnancial means, which may include production.
As long as useful decisions concerning the setting of market strategies and choice of suppliers and clients are
performed by humans, the design of an automatic model of these activities still may potentially oﬀer numerous
advantages.
Firstly, there are domains, where the automatic setting of the supply chain and market strategies could be useful,
especially in cases of activities concerning virtual goods and services in the Internet, where the response time is an
important factor.
Secondly, a development of a system where the setting of supply chains is automatic may make it possible to
analyse the behaviour of diﬀerent market settings and to evaluate strategies of activities.
Email addresses: pavelk@go2.pl (Paweł Kolarz), jjmar@o2.pl (Jan Marszałek), kozlak@agh.edu.pl (Jarosław Ko´zlak),
˙ nska)
zabinska@agh.edu.pl (Małgorzata Zabi´

1877-0509 © 2012 Published by Elsevier Ltd. Open access under CC BY-NC-ND license.
doi:10.1016/j.procs.2012.04.168

1534

Pawe? Kolarz et al. / Procedia Computer Science 9 (2012) 1533 – 1542

Our goal was to develop an environment which will make it possible to model and optimise supply chains and
company behaviours, as well as to test the inﬂuence of the application of diﬀerent decision algorithms.
The way of achieving it was to apply the decision algorithm with features of adapting to a given situation, to select
the best model of the simulation world and to choose the most adequate actions in the given situations. We particularly
focused on the problems of the choice of the best prediction of demand for products for the given market conditions
and on the choice of the best price margin to win the competition on the market.
The ﬁrst aspect is addressed by the use of an adaptive algorithm which chooses the best demand prediction algorithm in a given situation.
The important element of the enterprise decision strategy is to guarantee the best level of the stocks, which depends, to a large degree, on the predicted values of orders for the next n simulation steps. The nearer the predicted
value is to the real value, the more precisely the warehouse is able to plan deliveries, and is able, in eﬀect, to guarantee that at the end of each step of the simulation only the minimum amount of goods (safety buﬀer) remains in the
warehouse. Incorrect predictions of demand (inﬂatedness of demand) increases storage costs and an underestimation
may cause a lack of components in the warehouse and to subsequent production standstills.
The second aspect is addressed either by the predeﬁned (according to experiences) set of rules or by the clustering
technique which identiﬁes the similar situations on the market as one possible state and assigns with it the most
proﬁtable action.
2. Related research and useful information
The multi–agent approach is often used for modelling and the optimisation of supply chains. In [2] a concept
of a multi–agent environment is presented which consists of diﬀerent components necessary for the composition of
supply–chains, and may be used for analysis of the results of the choice of strategies of company activities. In [3] an
overview is given for diﬀerent problems associated with supply chains which were solved with the use of agents as
well as a classiﬁcation of methods used by agents.
An important aspect of the decision making of agents in supply chains is their way of leading negotiations and
the choice of negotiation strategies. In [4] an overview of methods of negotiation modelling (based on game theory,
heuristics, argumentation) is given while a classiﬁcation of negotiation schemas concerning the electronic markets
may be found in [5].
Another important question associated with the modern supply chains is their feature associated with the adaptation to the given situation. The analysis of robust or ﬂexible solutions for selected strategies of behaviour is done in
[6].
One of the most important elements of adequate decision making is the use of suitable prediction techniques.
In [7] the use of prediction by agents, which participate in the tournament of agents building the most economic
supply chains – Trading Agent Competition (TAC) [8], is described. For the analysis of the current situation and
prediction of future states, techniques of data mining and machine learning are used. For example in [9] association
rules, clustering and decision trees are used, and in [10] – Markov correction prediction process and Gausian mixture
models are applied.
In our opinion, the main diﬀerence between models of the companies and market used by TAC and our model is
that, we take into consideration diﬀerent kinds of contracts (short–term and long–term) in the model.
3. System model
The goal of the work was to design and implement an environment which makes it possible to model diﬀerent
states of the market and to analyse results of the diﬀerent strategies used by companies on the market.
3.1. Market environment
The market environment consists of the following types of agents: companies, clients and negotiators. Based on
input components obtained from other companies–suppliers, the company manufactures ﬁnal products and delivers
them to customers or other companies. The customers declare demands for ﬁnal products, which leads to assigning
contracts with appropriate companies. Contracts are described by the following parameters: the kind of product,

Pawe? Kolarz et al. / Procedia Computer Science 9 (2012) 1533 – 1542

1535

number of entities, the price and the time of delivery (usually the shorter time of delivery causes the higher expected
and accepted price).
The task of the negotiators is to gather oﬀers of accepted contracts submitted by companies and customers, coupling contracts that ﬁt together and to determine the conditions acceptable for the parties concerned. The separate
realisation of the module which represents negotiators that resolve the negotiations between agents makes it possible
to change the negotiation model relatively easily, without the necessity of changing remaining decision elements.
In the framework of the works done so far, two diﬀerent negotiation models of the market subjects were implemented. In the current work, a model for determining price and assigning the partners, based on laws of supply and
demand, is used. In [11], another model which takes into consideration the market strength of the given parties is
used.
3.2. Model of agent–company
The main subject of the research having the most complex decision elements is the agent representing a company.
Its knowledge consists of: (i) quantities of sold elements of the given product in the previous and current simulation
steps and a global demand for a given product in the previous and current steps as well as (ii) the level of the current
stocks and estimated time of delivery of the product to the client.
The activities of the company are handled by the following behaviours, which group together logically linked
actions: (i) participation in the negotiation for selling products; (ii) production and sending sold products to costumers;
(iii) optimisation of the production strategy and update of the delivered oﬀer; (iv) sending information about the
readiness to pass subsequent steps of the simulation; (v) receiving information about the start of a new step in the
simulation.
The agent company consists of the following functional modules (Fig. 1):
• a buyer – responsible for buying components for production,
• a seller – responsible for selling ﬁnal products and determination conditions of selling,
• a warehouse manager – responsible for determination needs of buying to fulﬁl the stocks levels and to bear
stock maintenance costs,
• a production module – produces ﬁnal products from input components,
• a strategy manager – responsible for choice of decision strategies and conﬁguration of activities of other modules.
3.3. Strategic manager module – version I
The goal of the work is to identify the best possible strategies of activities of the company for the given conditions.
To achieve this goal, we have so far applied techniques of reinforcement learning (such as q–learning algorithm [12])
or diﬀerent demand level prediction algorithms, rule based and clustering algorithm (last three presented in this paper).
The StrategyManager (S tratMan) module may be described as follows:
S tratMan = (conds, preds, strats)

(1)

where conditions conds represent the current state of the company and its environment, preds represent the predicted
evaluation of elements describing conditions and strats represent possible decision activities.
Condition conds consists of the following elements:
• a state of the company – ﬁnancial means, established contracts and conditions;
• customer behaviour – described by a character of the demand for ﬁnal products and requirements concerning
the prices and the delivery time;
• competitor behaviour – the percent of shares of the market owned by the company;

1536

Pawe? Kolarz et al. / Procedia Computer Science 9 (2012) 1533 – 1542

1HJRWLDWRU

%X\2IIHUQXPEHUSULFHGHOLYHU\
WLPHQHJIXQFWLRQ

6HOO2IIHUQXPEHUSULFHGHOLYHU\
WLPHQHJIXQFWLRQ

&RPSDQ\$JHQW

3URGXFWLRQ
3URGXFH

1HJRWLDWLRQ
UHVXOWV
2UGHU
EX\LQJ

,QYHQWRU\
0DQDJHU

%X\HU
'HOLYHU
,QFUHDVH
'HFUHDVHSULFH

1HJRWLDWLRQ
UHVXOWV

*HWGHOLYHU
FRPSRQHQWV
2UGHU
VHOOLQJ

6HOOHU

*HWIURP

6HOHFWSUHGLFWLRQ
PHWKRG

,QFUHDVH'HFUHDVH
PDUJLQ
,QIRDERXW
VWRFNVOHYHO

,QIRDERXW
RIIHUSULFH

6WUDWHJLF0DQDJHU

,QIRDERXW
GHPDQGSULFH

Figure 1: Organisation of the agent company

• supplier behaviour – concerns the supply of components, it is possible to distinguish not suﬃcient, suﬃcient
and above suﬃcient level of component supply;
• choice of the current margins for the given products.
The strategical decisions may concern the choice of the storage management strategy (for example ATO, MTO or
the increase/decrease of the stock level), level of the margin of proﬁt and used prediction techniques.
In this paper we are focusing on the analysis of the inﬂuence of the level of the margin for the ﬁnal product and
the choice of the prediction method of the customer demand. The strategy manager module should select the proper
actions to be executed and their conﬁgurations.
3.4. Strategic manager module – version II
Decisions concerning actions and their conﬁgurations selected by the decision module of the company. The
decision module is represented as follows:
Dec = (S EM, S MS , MS , S S , ES S , Eval, s, φ, θ)

(2)

where:
• S EM – vector of values of the measures evaluating the state of the company,
• S MS – set of market situations and criterions identifying given situations taking values of measures of state of
the company into consideration,
• MS – current market situation of the company,
• S S – set of behaviour strategies with values of decision attributes which conﬁgure actions, assigned to given
strategies,
• ES S – evaluation of strategy usefulness in the given market situation matrix,
• Eval – function to evaluate usefulness of the strategy in the given market situations Eval: MS × S S → ES S ,
• s – behaviour strategy currently selected from the S S set,

Pawe? Kolarz et al. / Procedia Computer Science 9 (2012) 1533 – 1542

Strategy (1)
Vector of decision
parameters values
(1)

Strategy (j)

...

Vector of decision
parameters values
(j)

...

Strategy (k)
currently
selected (s)Vector of
decision
parameters
values (AD)

1537

Strategy (m)

...

Vector of decision
parameters values
(m)

choice of strategy:
function,
based on calculated values of
evaluation functions Eval

Market situation
(1)

...

Market situation (i),
- succent situation
of company
(MS)

...

Market situation
(n)

Identification
of
market situation -

Set of current values
of evaluation
measures of the
company
(SEM)

Figure 2: Concept of decision module functioning

• φ – function to identify the market situation φ : S EM × S M → MS ,
• θ – function to evaluate the behaviour strategy: θ : MS × ES S → s
A concept of module functioning is shown in Fig. 2. Identiﬁcation of the market situation (MS) is done based
on the state of the enterprise and its knowledge of the market (resulting from history and prediction). Values of the
description of the situation measures which are described below (SMS) are computed. They make the foundation of the
current market situation MS. For given market situations, evaluation of results of appropriate strategies performance
from the set SS is done; these evaluations are described by the value increase of the appropriate versions of the goal
function after the considered number of steps. On the basis of these values the choice of the most appropriate strategy
for a given enterprise is made.
Situation identiﬁcation. To evaluate the situation of an enterprise, the following measures (SMS) describing the
current situation are taken into account:
• Measures characterising the components purchase state (describing the course of action for certain simulation
steps):
– the contracted time of delivery of the i-th copy of the j-th component ordered in step t;
– the price of the i-th copy of the j-th component ordered in step t, settled by the contract;
– the number of the delay rounds of the j-th component ordered in step t;
– the percentage of type j components ordered by an enterprise in the whole demand for the component in
step t for the considered market;
– the percentage of type j components received in the whole demand for the component in step t for the
considered market;
• Measures characterising the state of currently possessed resources:
– the number of possessed copies of components of j type in step t;
– for how many steps the number of possessed j-type components is suﬃcient, if they are being sold according to the sale level of the former rounds, taking into consideration enterprise production abilities;
evaluations using diﬀerent methods of demand prediction are possible;

1538

Pawe? Kolarz et al. / Procedia Computer Science 9 (2012) 1533 – 1542

– for how many steps the number of possessed j-type components is suﬃcient, if they are being sold in
numbers covering the whole demand;
• Measures characterising the ﬁnal state of product sales:
– the percentage of the total sale of elements of the ﬁnal product j, which makes the enterprise sale in the
subsequent steps t;
– the time of delivery of the i-th copy of the j-type ﬁnal product contracted in step t;
– the margin at sale of the i-th copy of the j-type ﬁnal product ordered in step t;
– the number of delay rounds at delivery of the copy of the j-type ﬁnal product ordered in the step t.
The characteristics of the strategy: As a result of the strategy choice, the change of values occurs of the decision
attributes responsible for:
• Actions related to the purchase of the component; they comprise of modiﬁcation of the number of preferred
purchased components of certain types, transaction conditions depending on the number of components being
bought, proposed and accepted prices and times of delivery
• Actions related to the sale of elements; they comprise of modiﬁcation of the number of preferred ﬁnal products
sold, transaction conditions depending on the number of components being bought, proposed and accepted
prices and times of delivery.
• Actions related to the conclusion of the long-term contract with the enterprise selling components and to conditions of such a contract comprising modiﬁcation of the accepted price, the accepted number range of elements
concerning the transaction and consequences of the contract break.
• Actions related to the conclusion of the long-term contract with the enterprise buying ﬁnal products manufactured by the enterprise, comprising of modiﬁcations of the accepted price, the accepted number range of
elements concerning the transaction and consequences of the contract break.
Evaluation of the results of strategy using in the given states. The evaluation of using a strategy (Eval) may be
done in diﬀerent ways. Currently we plan to apply machine learning technique, thus carrying out many simulations
and evaluations of choice results of certain strategies by examining the goal function (G) values, after diﬀerent, given
numbers of simulation steps. The evaluation may be performed with the use of diﬀerent criteria:
• The average gained assets in round t after the choice of the given strategy described either using cash only or
considering values of purchased components;
• The maximal gained assets;
• The minimal gained assets;
• The probability of transfer to other simulation patterns and quality evaluation of these subsequent patterns by
using the evaluation
4. Realisation
The system was realised with the use of the agent platform JADE. The scheme of the architecture of the system is
presented in Fig. 3.
In the ﬁgure, the main types of interactions between agents are presented: the sending of initialisation information,
exchange of data about oﬀers and request realisation and synchronisation of steps.
The additional kinds of agents, necessary for the realisation of the simulation – Data Agent and Simulation Agent
are presented. The Data Agent is responsible for storing data about the simulation conﬁguration and providing them
to the agents as well as for the gathering of data necessary for the visualisation, generation of statistics and rapports.

Pawe? Kolarz et al. / Procedia Computer Science 9 (2012) 1533 – 1542

1539

Simulation agents decide on transitions to subsequent simulation steps and phases and informs agents about it.
Every simulation step consists of two phases: (i) negotiation and production phase and (ii) delivery and data actualisation phase. During the phase (i) negotiations, productions, ordering of buying components and realisation of requests
are performed. During the phase (ii) an actualisation of data takes place, concerning prices of products by agents and
the delivery of ordered components and products.

Figure 3: Scheme of the system architecture.

The deﬁned model of behaviours of agents, makes it possible to implement activities which are executed by the
agent parallelly. The given behaviours are triggered by the arrival of a message or a cyclic time event.
For identiﬁcation of the situations using clustering techniques, the environment Weka [13, 14] was used.
5. Selected experiments
During the valuation of environment and its components, diﬀerent experimental scenarios were performed for
diﬀerent market conditions, and especially, chosen sets of companies and their conﬁgurations and diﬀerent characteristics of time distribution of demand for ﬁnal products. Experiments concerning the accuracy of prediction oﬀered by
diﬀerent kinds of standard predictors and by an adaptive predictor are described in the next subsection. In the following subsection, the results obtained using rule-based and clustering algorithms for decision making are presented.
5.1. Adaptive Predictor
Analysis of the adaptive predictor conﬁguration. The aim of research was to ﬁx the possibility to connect many
diﬀerent algorithms of demand prediction into one adaptive algorithm. It is known that each of them has its own
speciﬁcity and behaves diﬀerently for diﬀerent data. Merging them into one and applying the best one in the very
moment should be advantageous. Adaptive predictor has originated by encapsulating algorithms: Moving average,
Arithmetic average, Holt. Each of these algorithms is fed by the same data and in every simulation step we obtain
the values predicted in such a way. The values are used subsequently to establish prediction quality and to choose the
best algorithm at any moment. To ﬁx the prediction quality we apply a simple measure which consists of summing up
a prediction error of the last n steps. An absolute diﬀerence between the real and predicted demands is assumed as a
prediction error.
Adaptive prediction is controlled by two parameters. The ﬁrst one is a number of steps, after which, cyclically,
the enumeration of quality of predictors and the choice of the best one (period of the choice of prediction - OP) is

1540

Pawe? Kolarz et al. / Procedia Computer Science 9 (2012) 1533 – 1542

performed. The second parameter is a number of historical data (the formerly predicted values), which are used to ﬁx
the prediction quality (the value is denoted as H).
The research was done for the following runs of demand for ﬁnal products: (A) – single parabola, (B) – double
parabola (sinus), (C) – double parabola disturbed by a random variable [-2:2], (D) – constant increase disturbed by
a random variable [-2:2], (E) – constant value disturbed by a random variable [-5:5]. The whole research of demand
comprises 100 steps.
As the research has proved, an adaptive predictor gives the best estimation of the demand for each examined
example. In the table below, the total results are presented. The single prediction algorithms are compared with the
adaptive algorithms. The values mean percentage of the prediction error against the real demand.
Table 1: Prediction error [%]

Series
A
B
C
D
E

Moving average
6.58
4.12
2.83
8.37
12.32

Arithmetic
7.49
5.72
3.90
7.70
12.57

Holt
8.93
5.55
3.72
10.30
13.48

Adaptive
3.65
1.72
1.13
4.69
8.52

It is also necessary to check for which parameters OP and H, the adaptive algorithm gives the best results. The
research has proved that the best results are for values OP = 1. It is in agreement with expectations, because a more
frequent evaluation of a prediction error allows a quicker switching to the better algorithm. The choice of optimal
value H is more troublesome and it turns out that it depends on the assumed value OP and a type of the real demand.
For OP = 1 the best results are obtained always for H = 1. If we increase the OP value, the optimal value H is also
moved and in most cases the best solutions are gained when it is equal to the value of parameter OP.
For greater values of OP and H (above 10) the dependency does not always occur, in such a case, the type of
examined data has an inﬂuence on results. The dependency OP and H seems obvious if the quality of predictors is
evaluated in each 10-th step; the best is to use it for n last results of predictions.
6,50

1,70

6,00

1,60
error[%]

error[%]

5,50

1,50
1,40
OP=1

4,50

1,30

OP 3
OP=3

4 00
4,00

1,20

OP=5

3,50

OP=10

3,00

OP=1
OP=3

1,10

OP=5

0

0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 H8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15

a)

5,00

1

2

3

4 H5

6

7

8

9

10 11

b)
Figure 4: Value of the error demand for the ﬁnal product as functions of OP and H for shapes of demand A) (Fig. a) and C (Fig. b)

Example of experiments with obtained conﬁguration. After selecting the best conﬁguration of the algorithm
for a signiﬁcant number of cases, the next goal to evaluate was, if the use of the more accurate prediction technique
allows us to obtain a ﬁnal better result expressed by the total incomes of companies and total level of stocks was
applied.
Because of the diﬀerent factors inﬂuencing the ﬁnal results, the more accurate prediction did not lead to the better
results in every cases. Especially, when unexpected increasement of the demand took place and the storage costs were

Pawe? Kolarz et al. / Procedia Computer Science 9 (2012) 1533 – 1542

1541

relatively low, keeping higher level of stocks was more advantageous then having good overall demand prediction
level.
Its strength was displayed especially for cases where demand had changing and complex characteristics and features of diﬀerent prediction algorithms were necessary, the importance of predication accuracy also increased when
high storage costs were used. We considered the ﬁnal demand in the form of a step function with constant lengths of
intervals, and two alternatively changing values. The total incomes obtained by companies using diﬀerent prediction
algorithms were as follows: adaptive: 265888151, Holtz: 224417881 (16 % worse than using the adaptive), moving
average: 256302250 (4 % worse than using the adaptive), arithmetic: 257172944 (4 % worse than using the adaptive).
The adaptive algorithm quickly emerges after the real demand, which allows the warehouse to better adjust to the
given situation.
5.2. Situation identiﬁcation using rule-based algorithm and clustering techniques
Two solutions presented in sections 3.3 and 3.4 were compared: using empiric decision rules or by using clustering
techniques for the identiﬁcation of the situation.
The rules concerned decision about the setting of price margin for selling products, conditions oﬀered for buying
components and the level of the stocks.
For the identiﬁcation of the situation in the performed tests we used simpliﬁed, in regard to the one described in
section 3.4, set of measures describing the situation. For the analysis of the results and the construction of the clusters
in the performed tests following data about company was taken into consideration: total capital increase, gross and
net income increase, outcome increase, warehouse costs increase.
For the given product and producer the following data was considered: global demand increase, global market
share of the producer for the given product, global gross income increase, margin increase, mean delivery time, part
in global sale, price increase, used production capacity increase,
In subsequent steps decisions were evaluated according to income of gain obtained in the subsequent steps.
rules

adaptive

350
300

Income

250
200
150
100
50
0

1 3 5 7 9 11 13 15 17 19 21 23 25 27 29 31 33 35 37 39 41 43 45 47 49
Steps

Figure 5: Gain of selected company for subsequent steps with the use of strategy selection by rules of by clustering

In Fig. 5 we can notice, that although the obtained results (total income) are slightly better for the rule–based
cases, in the system using identiﬁcation of the situation and adaptive strategy, the changes have a more subtle tendency,
without large ﬂuctuations.
6. Conclusion
Within the scope of this work, an environment for modelling and optimising strategies of market subjects was
prepared. We especially presented a module playing strategical manager of the agent company, which has to make
some general decisions about the choice of system strategies and which particularly decides on the best prediction

1542

Pawe? Kolarz et al. / Procedia Computer Science 9 (2012) 1533 – 1542

technique for a given market situation and margin level. Two pilot versions of the strategical manager were used: one
based on the set of rules, the second using the clustering technique for identifying the situation.
Subsequent work will concern the better choice and adjustment of measures used for identifying the situation in
the clustering process. We are also going to extend the set of used strategies (and ways of conﬁguration of actions)
and test diﬀerent methods of strategy evaluations for given situations.
Acknowledgements: This work was partially supported by the Polish Ministry of Science and Higher Education
grant no. N N516 366236. The authors thank to students of Computer Science of AGH-UST who participated in
the development of the modules of the environment, and especially P. Janisz, D. Gałysa, K. Dziedzic, J. Herzyk, W.
Adamek, M. Grudzie´n, M. Tkacz, G. Gunia and A. Magura–Witkowska.
References
[1] J. T. Mentzer, W. DeWitt, J. S. Keebler, S. Min, N. W. Nix, C. D. Smith, Supply Chain Management, Thousand Oaks, 2001, Ch. What Is
Supply Chain Management.
[2] J. Swaminathan, S. Smith, N. Sadeh, Modeling supply chain dynamics: A multiagent approach, Decision Sciences 29 (3).
[3] T. Moyaux, B. Chaib-draa, S. D’Amours, Supply chain management and multiagent systems: An overview, in: B. Chaib-draa, J. Muller
(Eds.), Multiagent Based Supply Chain Management, Studies in Computional Intelligence, 28, Springer-Verlag, 2006.
[4] N. Jennings, P. Faratin, A. Lomuscio, S. Parsons, M. Wooldridge, C. Sierra, Automated negotiation: Prospects, methods and challenges,
Group Decision and Negotiation 10 (2001) 199–215.
[5] A. R. Lomuscio, M. Wooldridge, N. R. Jennings, A classiﬁcation scheme for negotiation in electronic commerce, Group Decision and
Negotiation 12 (2003) 31–56.
[6] H. K. Chan, F. T. S. Chan, Comparative study of adaptability and ﬂexibility in distributed manufacturing supply chains, Decis. Support Syst.
48 (2010) 331–341.
[7] D. Pardoe, P. Stone, Predictive planning for supply chain management, in: Proceedings of the International Conference on Automated
Planning and Scheduling, 2006.
[8] TAC SCM Game Description, http://www.sics.se/tac/ (2011).
[9] M. Viamonte, C. Ramos, F. Rodrigues, J. Cardoso, Isem: a multiagent simulator for testing agent market strategies, Systems, Man, and
Cybernetics, Part C: Applications and Reviews, IEEE Transactions on 36 (1) (2006) 107 –113.
[10] W. Ketter, J. Collins, M. Gini, A. Gupta, P. Schrater, Detecting and forecasting economic regimes in multi-agent automated exchanges, Decis.
Support Syst. 47 (2009) 307–318.
˙ nska, Contracts negotiation in market environments taking into consideration the strength of each economic
[11] L. Jankowski, J. Ko´zlak, M. Zabi´
player, in: Y. Demazeau, M. Pechoucek, J. Corchado, J. Perez (Eds.), Advances on Practical Applications of Agents and Multiagent Systems,
Vol. 88 of Advances in Intelligent and Soft Computing, Springer Berlin / Heidelberg, 2011, pp. 299–308.
[12] D. Chodura, P. Dominik, J. Ko´zlak, Market strategy choices made by company using reinforcement learning, in: Trends in practical applications of agents and multiagent systems : 9th international conference on Practical applications of agents and multiagent systems, Vol. 90 of
Advances in Intelligent and Soft Computing, Springer Berlin / Heidelberg, 2011, pp. 83–90.
[13] M. Hall, E. Frank, G. Holmes, B. Pfahringer, P. Reutemann, I. H. Witten, The weka data mining software: an update, SIGKDD Explor.
Newsl. 11 (2009) 10–18. doi:http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/1656274.1656278.
URL http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/1656274.1656278
[14] Weka 3 - Data Mining with Open Source Machine Learning Software in Java, http://www.cs.waikato.ac.nz/ml/weka/ (2012).

