Available online at www.sciencedirect.com

Procedia Computer Science 9 (2012) 550 – 556

International Conference on Computational Science, ICCS 2012

Motifs and motif generalization in Chinese Word Networks
Jianyu Lia,1 , Feng Xiaob , Jie Zhoub , Zhanxin Yanga
a Engineering

center of Digital Audio and Video, Communication University of China, Beijing, China 100024
b Dept. of Automation, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China 100084

Abstract
The most signiﬁcant semantic unit of Chinese language is words composed of individual characters. This compositional structure produces great variability and representability compared to individual characters, which is quite
distinct from other languages. In this paper we utilized complex networks to model the composition of words from
characters. We focus on network motifs, the local pattern which appears more often in a statistically signiﬁcant sense.
Network motifs describe the most signiﬁcant connection pattern between these nodes. We investigated their functions
and semantical relationship. We also investigated diﬀerent generalizations of network motifs and analyzed the larger
pattern in the complex networks. As the word network is quite huge and the motif detection is very slow when motifs
are much larger, for larger pattern in the network we used topology generalization of simple motifs rather than carry
out a thorough motif detection task. The results on motifs and motif generalization in this paper not only oﬀer us a
big picture how Chinese words are formed, but also support the conclusion that motifs play a very important role in
research of complex systems.
Keywords: complex networks; motif; motif generalization

1. Introduction
Complex systems are ubiquitous in nature surrounding us. Examples of complex systems include ecosystems,
ﬁnancial markets, neural system, road traﬃc and the Internet, and even entire human societies. Such systems contain
a number of elements which interact with each other and function as a whole, thus exhibiting some kinds of similar
structural features, and imply some kinds of function-related similarities among them. Therefore detecting the regular
patterns and their interaction, and analyzing their function is very important to explore and understand complex
systems.
Complex networks are an abstraction of complex systems based on small world property and scale free property.
Recently, to describe the complex interactions, many local patterns are also studied, like community, hierarchy and
especially motif structures [1, 2, 3]. The concept of “network motifs” was ﬁrst proposed by Uri Alon’s group [1]. Network Motifs are deﬁned as patterns of interconnections that occur in many diﬀerent parts of a network at frequencies
much higher than those found in randomized networks. Recent work on network motifs includes the development
Email addresses: lijianyu@tsinghua.edu.cn (Jianyu Li), xiaof99@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn (Feng Xiao),
jzhou@tsinghua.edu.cn (Jie Zhou), yangzx@cuc.edu.cn (Zhanxin Yang)
1 Corresponding author

1877-0509 © 2012 Published by Elsevier Ltd. Open access under CC BY-NC-ND license.
doi:10.1016/j.procs.2012.04.059

Jianyu Li et al. / Procedia Computer Science 9 (2012) 550 – 556

551

of eﬃcient methods of motif identiﬁcation and understanding the distribution of motifs imposed by underlying network geometry [4, 5, 6]. Certain motifs exhibiting dynamical behavior have been identiﬁed as essential ingredients of
speciﬁc biological processes.
The research in natural system like biology, ecology, languages and brain greatly enhanced the understanding of
these complex systems [7]. Some human based systems such as software and electric networks are also found to
comply with the complex network property [8, 9]. Some researchers propose that English and Chinese languages are
weighted complex networks [10].
Compared to English, Chinese has two levels of compositions, from character to words and from words to phrases.
However, the gap between words and phrases are quite vague. In this paper we will use words to denote commonly
used words and phrases and select a generally used Chinese words database as the source of analysis. The quantity
of Chinese characters is small compared to English words, daily usage requires only 4,000 characters, and these
characters can form at least 100,000 words and phrases. So the compositional structure from characters to words is
very important in Chinese language analysis. In this paper we used motifs and motif generalization as a medium to
understand the formation and function of words and phrases. This research will promote the understanding of complex
system as well as linguistics.
The paper is organized as follows: in section 2 we will introduce the data source and the construction of the
word networks; in section 3 we will check the network comply to the property of complex network and introduce the
procedure of motif detection; in section 4 we will analyze motif types, frequency and distribution; in section 5 we will
analyze the topological generalization of detected motifs; In section 6 we will make a conclusion and discuss some
idea on future work.
2. Data and Construction of the network
The purpose of the research is to study the formation and organization of Chinese words. The data were mainly
collected from several popular middle-sized Chinese dictionaries such as Modern Chinese Dictionary [11], Contemporary Chinese Dictionary [12] and Xinhua Dictionary [13], which all contain over 50,000 entries including characters,
words, phrases, colloquialisms and idioms. More speciﬁc or comprehensive dictionaries are not considered, as they
contain a great deal of special nouns and classical characters which are unrelated to the analysis of modern Chinese.
Our data set contains 72,923 two-character words, 11,581 three-character words and 28,533 four-character words.
In this paper we will only carry out analysis on two character words. There are several reasons for this. First,
longer words will introduce diﬃculty into the deﬁnition of adjacency. In fact, we postulate that there are hierarchical
structures in longer words. So the model of the networks will be much more complicated and we remain it to be future
work. Secondly, longer words are more probable to be phrases rather than words. As we explained earlier, it is not
able to distinct phrases from words due to the ambiguity in semantics and context. However, it would be better to
exclude those are very likely to aﬀect our analysis. We also excluded those words composed of the same characters,
and after these preprocessing, our data set contains 72,217 two-character words. And we construct a directed word
network based on this data set.
The directed word network is constructed in the following ways: (1) Each node of the network denotes a single
character; (2) connections are established between two characters if they form a word (see Fig. 1). For example, if
AB is a phrase which consists of character A and character B in the order of A and B, there is a directed edge from A
to B.
3. Network Motif Detection
Before we carry out the motif detection work, we will ﬁrst check that this network comply with the properties
of common complex network. And a preliminary experiment shows the networks display high clustering and short
averaged path, and their degree follows power law distribution. In summary, the networks are small world and scale
free (The power law exponent, clustering coeﬃcient and the averaged path length are 3.32, 0.4548 and 3.04). So it is
reasonable to model this network as a complex network.
Motifs of length n will be detected in the following procedure: For each subgraph pattern count all n-node subgraphs that conform to this pattern in the real network, then compare those counts against randomly generated networks with the same n−1th subgraph connection with the real network. The detailed procedure for generating random

552

Jianyu Li et al. / Procedia Computer Science 9 (2012) 550 – 556

Figure 1: Part of the complex networks
Moti f ID
Z score
characters
phrases
occurrences

38
45.46
3,307
59,678
171,433

46
34.29
1,877
21,704
14,080

102
18.57
1940
22,806
16,166

108
32.45
2,073
23,162
15,664

110
27.83
1,047
8,110
4,851

238
14.74
263
1,108
274

all motifs
3,361
65,933
222,468

Table 1: Zscore of each motif and the number of characters and words covered by each motif.

networks are discussed in the accompanied material of [1] and in [5]. Then, if certain n-node subgraph patterns are
signiﬁcantly more prevalent than in the random case, these are considered motifs of the network.
The quantity we used to measure a subgraph pattern to be a motif is Z score . Z score is a general variable to measure
the statistical signiﬁcance of certain quantity, in our case the number of occurrence of certain subgraph. It indicates
how many standard deviations a quantity is above the mean value. So to calculate the Z score a comparison with
the corresponding randomized networks is necessary. Generally speaking, the higher Z score a motif has, the more
signiﬁcant for it to present typical characteristics in a network. For a given network N, The Z score is deﬁned as in
equation 1. Generally speaking, if Z score higher than 2, we may treat this pattern is statistically signiﬁcant and deﬁne
it as a motif. In [14] the author proposes to use normalized Z score to measure the importance of motifs.
Z score =

Nreal − Nrand
,
std(Nrand )

(1)

Several software packages for detecting motifs exist. We used both M f inder and Manmod to detect the three
nodes network motifs as they both provide useful information. The diﬀerence is that Manmod is much more eﬃcient
and robust than M f inder for the sampling scheme it introduced [15].
4. Motif Types, Frequency, Distribution
Table 1 described the distribution of three node network motifs, and the number of characters and words which
they covered. Fig. 4 illustrates these motifs. From the table we can see that motif with ID 38 appears most frequently
among the motifs and has the highest Z score . From the illustration we can see that motif 38 has feed-forward loop
structure (FFL for short). Also we can generalize that most motifs are simple generalization of FFL structure. For
instance, motif 108, 46 and 102 are FFL structure with an extension of an edge. Motif 110 is the extension of two

Jianyu Li et al. / Procedia Computer Science 9 (2012) 550 – 556

553

edges, while motif 238 is three edges. Triad 98 is not a motif as its Z score is 1.87, which means it is not statistically
signiﬁcant compared with random graphs. From the table we also found that motifs covered most of the characters
(nodes) and words (phrases), they served as the basic building blocks of the network.
Compared with other types of networks, Chinese words display some distinct organization principle. In [2] wordadjacency networks were studied in which each node represents a word and a directed connection occurs when one
word directly follows the other in the text. Five languages including English, French, Spanish, and Japanese were
analyzed. The author argues that words belong to categories and a word from one category tends to be followed
by one from a diﬀerent category. So the fully connected or loop structure are not likely to be present in the wordadjacency networks.
Our network is diﬀerent from the word-adjacency networks. In our networks one edge represents a word or phrase,
that is, conventionally ﬁxed. But in the word-adjacency networks, edges may exist between non-phrases. Also the
word-adjacency networks are extracted from texts, so the distribution is weighted by the occurrence of the words
in texts. And the most important distinction is that they are constructing a phrase or sentence network, and we are
constructing a word network. So the level of abstraction is diﬀerent. Hence the motif structure and distribution may
display a huge diﬀerence.
We also carried out a four node motif detection task. For four node motifs, we used the Fanmod program [5] as
it is more eﬃcient. For directional networks there are 199 types of subgraphs patterns. And we checked the “bifan”
motifs which are found to be quite signiﬁcant in biological and electronic circuits networks [1]. The frequency in the
real network is 0.273% while in random network this frequency is 0.28736%, result in a Z score of -1.5603. So this
“bifan” subgraph pattern is not motif in our network. We think this is a diﬀerence with networks studied in [1]. Fig.3
illustrates the motifs with both high frequency and high Z score . We found that in our network, the original motif ﬁnding
algorithm is biased towards fully connected patterns. For instance, all these motifs can be seen as an extension of less
than two edges from the three node motif with ID 238. This may result from that Chinese language is quite densely
connected compared to biology and electronic networks [1]. And we think this is the cumulative eﬀort to express
more idea with commonly used characters. For instance, when new Chinese words are coined from western science,
not very many new characters are created while the words for whole science concept are stacked into this network.
We think it would be interesting to study the evolution of the word network of Chinese language in the future.
5. Motif Generalizations
In the network motif detection task, it is rather slow to detect motifs larger than four nodes. And the combination
of the motifs is good demonstration of the importance of the pattern in the networks. So we carried out analysis based
on the topological generalization of network motifs [9]. We focused on the generalization of FFL motif as it is both
signiﬁcant in frequency and in Z score . There are three kinds of motifs generalization, each corresponds to a role in the
motif (see Fig.5 ). We carried out the experiment in the following way. First we list all those nodes and edges covered
by FFL motif. Then we will search the neighboring instances of each appearance of FFL motif. Two appearances are
neighbors if they diﬀer in only one node. We will store all these occurrences of generalizations. The capacity of the
generalizations is measured by the appearances a generalization which comprises (see Fig.5).
In our experiment, we recorded those generalizations which comprise of the most appearances of certain motif.
We found that for the multi input generalization, the biggest generalizations are (We use X, Y, Z to denote indeﬁnite
words) “X”2 , “X”, and “X”, which roughly corresponds to “X, out, done”, “X, (get) out, into”, “X, to,
done”. There are 83 characters can act as “X” in “X”, 78 characters for “X”, and 78 character for “X
”. Note that there may be intersections between these 3 generalizations. For example, “” appears in all the 3
generalizations as instance of “X”. “” means write down or write out, “” means written, “” means
write into, “” means write to something or write to someplace. The character “” is an auxiliary character for
expressing that something is done, work ﬁnished or goal reached. And the antonym and auxiliary characters appear
very frequently in the biggest generalizations. For the multi-y generalization, the biggest generalizations are “Y”,
“Y”, which roughly corresponds to “no, Y, done”, “small, Y, child”. In this generalization we can see that the
negatives and auxiliary characters frequently emerge. For the multi-output generalization, the biggest generalizations
2 There

are Simpliﬁed Chinese Characters in this paper, better viewed with Adobe Reader Simpliﬁed Chinese Addon [16].

554

Jianyu Li et al. / Procedia Computer Science 9 (2012) 550 – 556

Figure 2: Three node motifs, and the motif ID is the same with [14] and noted in brackets. The number in the circle
denotes its role in the motif [9]. Note that not all these triads are motifs, only those with the Z score higher than 2 are
motifs.

Figure 3: Four node motifs, extracted from Fanmod output, note that we only displayed the most representational motifs

Jianyu Li et al. / Procedia Computer Science 9 (2012) 550 – 556

555

Figure 4: Diﬀerent generalizations of FFL motif. The above is the original FFL motif. The below row from left to
right multi-input generalization, multi-y generalization, multi-output generalization. The size of the generalization is
measured by the number of appearances which it comprises (“m” for these three generalizations).
are “Z”, “Z”, which roughly corresponds to “big, small, Z”, “have, haven’t, Z”. In this generalization we
can see that antonym and adjectives frequently emerge.
After we investigate the three kinds of generalizations, we can extract several compositional rules for the words.
First we can see that the most frequently emerged generalizations correspond to preﬁx, suﬃx and tense transform in
English language. “” corresponds to negative preﬁx in English as “in-”, “un-” or “a-”, “” corresponds to past
participle in English. Secondly many Chinese words were combinations of main character with an auxiliary character
for deﬁning its meaning or just to discern it from other words. For instance, “” is the most frequently used second
character. The words which they link mostly denote the same or similar meaning as the ﬁrst character. It is mostly used
to compose nouns from single character nouns in traditional Chinese. “” (quilt) is a modern Chinese substitution
for “”, “” (target) for “” and “” (leopard) for “”. Thirdly, many antonyms can combine with the same
character, resulting in the diﬀerence of level or contrary meaning. For instance, “” (major event),“” (trivial
event),“” (to do something or something happens),“” (to do nothing or nothing happens), etc. This makes
the composition of new words much more ﬂexible.
6. Conclusion and Discussion
In this paper we analyzed the motif structure in Chinese word network. We found that the FFL motif is an
important motif in the network. This property is like the biological network and social network, rather diﬀerent from
the language network generated from texts [2]. This may be due to the addition of many compositions which are not
words from the real world texts. And also we can see that the Chinese word network is quite diﬀerent from other
languages. We carried on analyzing the FFL motifs. And we found that the biggest generalizations of FFL motifs are
those with two antonym characters or an auxiliary character. We found that those auxiliary characters are often used
to denote the category of some words or state of something or someone. “” and “” which we discussed in the
above sections are two examples. These words appear more frequently in modern Chinese while traditional Chinese
uses a diﬀerent method to express these concepts.
Chinese is distinct from other languages in that its characters reached maturity two thousand years ago. During
that period, new characters were seldom created throughout two millennium period. But the changing environment

556

Jianyu Li et al. / Procedia Computer Science 9 (2012) 550 – 556

requires new constructions to represent the newly founded and developed objects and ideas. Therefore more and
more words are created with characters. The composition rule plays a very important rule in forming new Chinese
words. Diﬀerent characters are possible to construct new words which have same, similar or opposite meanings. For
instance, the words used to denote the sun is “”, and the moon is “”, and “” is used to denote the
uncertain variation between bright and dim. So this is an example to use antonyms to construct new words. Such
examples abound in Chinese language, which we analyzed earlier (FFL motif). So motif analysis of this complex
network is very useful for understanding the development and evolution of Chinese language.
In the future, other than the aforementioned work, we will use motif analysis to model the composition of longer
words. We think this would result in a hierarchical representation of the motifs, and it would give us more interesting
discovery.
References
1. R. Milo, S. Shen-Orr, S. Itzkovitz, N. Kashtan, D. Chklovskii, U. Alon, Network motifs: simple building blocks of complex networks, Science
298 (5594) (2002) 824.
2. R. Milo, S. Itzkovitz, N. Kashtan, R. Levitt, S. Shen-Orr, I. Ayzenshtat, M. Sheﬀer, U. Alon, Superfamilies of evolved and designed networks,
Science 303 (5663) (2004) 1538.
3. C. Echtermeyer, L. da Fontoura Costa, F. Rodrigues, M. Kaiser, Automatic network ﬁngerprinting through single-node motifs, PloS one 6 (1)
(2011) e15765.
4. N. Kashtan, S. Itzkovitz, R. Milo, U. Alon, Eﬃcient sampling algorithm for estimating subgraph concentrations and detecting network motifs,
Bioinformatics 20 (11) (2004) 1746–1758.
5. S. Wernicke, Eﬃcient detection of network motifs, IEEE/ACM Transactions on Computational Biology and Bioinformatics (2006) 347–359.
6. S. Wernicke, F. Rasche, Fanmod: a tool for fast network motif detection, Bioinformatics 22 (9) (2006) 1152.
7. J. Li, J. Zhou, Chinese character structure analysis based on complex networks, Physica A: Statistical Mechanics and its Applications 380
(2007) 629–638.
8. S. Valverde, R. Sol´e, Network motifs in computational graphs: A case study in software architecture, Physical Review E 72 (2) (2005) 026107.
9. N. Kashtan, S. Itzkovitz, R. Milo, U. Alon, Topological generalizations of network motifs, Physical Review E 70 (3) (2004) 031909.
10. L. Sheng, C. Li, English and chinese languages as weighted complex networks, Physica A: Statistical Mechanics and its Applications 388 (12)
(2009) 2561–2570.
11. Chinese Academy of Social Science, Modern Chinese Dictionary, The Commercial Press PRC, 2008.
12. Editorial Board for Contemporary Dictionary, Contemporary Chinese Dictionary, Zhonghua Book Company, 2011.
13. The Commercial Press, Xinhua Dictionary, The Commercial Press,PRC, 2011.
14. R. Milo, S. Itzkovitz, N. Kashtan, R. Levitt, U. Alon, Response to comment on” network motifs: Simple building blocks of complex networks”
and” superfamilies of evolved and designed networks”, Science 305 (5687) (2004) 1107.
15. Z. Kashani, H. Ahrabian, E. Elahi, A. Nowzari-Dalini, E. Ansari, S. Asadi, S. Mohammadi, F. Schreiber, A. Masoudi-Nejad, Kavosh: a new
algorithm for ﬁnding network motifs, BMC bioinformatics 10 (1) (2009) 318.
16. Adobe reader simpliﬁed chinese addon, http://www.adobe.com/support/downloads/product.jsp?platform=windows&product=10.

