Available online at www.sciencedirect.com

Procedia Computer Science 9 (2012) 1940 – 1949

International Conference on Computational Science, ICCS 2012

Debugging Scientific Applications With Statistical Assertions
Minh Ngoc Dinha,*, David Abramsona, Jin Chaoa, Donny Kurniawana
Andrew Gontarekb, Bob Moenchb, Luiz DeRoseb
a
Monash University, Clayton, 3800, Victoria, Australia
Cray Inc, 380 Jackson St # 210, St Paul, MN, 55101-2987, United States

b

Abstract
Traditional debuggers are of limited value for modern scientific codes that manipulate large complex data structures. Current
parallel machines make this even more complicated, because the data may be distributed across multiple processors, making it
difficult to view, interpret and validate the contents of a distributed structure. As a result, many applications' developers resort to
placing validation and display code directly in the source program itself. This paper discusses a novel debug-time assertion,
data structures. We present the design and implementation
of statistical assertions, and illustrate the debugging technique with a molecular dynamics simulation. We evaluate the
performance of the system on a 12,000 processor Cray XE6, and show that it is useful for real time debugging.
Keywords: Debugging; Assertion; Statistic; Parallel Architecture

1. Introduction
Many scientific codes manipulate enormous multi-dimensional data structures, often distributed across parallel
processes, and it is impractical for a user to trace problems by focussing on individual data elements. Our earlier
work has demonstrated that ad hoc debug-time assertions can assist in this task because it is not necessary to
examine every value in a large data structure [1]. The study showed that in a number of cases, a parallel computer
can be used to execute the assertion logic, making it efficient when used on large data structures and machines.
This paper introduces a new type of ad hoc debug-time assertion called a Statistical Assertion. Such assertions
allow users to reason about derived metrics rather than the raw data. The essence of this approach is to (1) diminish
the substantial amount of raw data t
decomposition across a large number of processors; and (3) leverage parallelism to make the system fast enough for
real time debugging. Statistical assertions can test the statistical state of a large distributed array, and can be
refined iteratively by the user in order to locate the source of an error. Because evaluation is likely to be expensive,
we propose a scheme that executes the assertion in parallel, making assertions over large data structures feasible.

* Corresponding author. Tel.: +61 3 9903 4145.
E-mail address: nmdin1@student.monash.edu.

1877-0509 © 2012 Published by Elsevier Ltd. Open access under CC BY-NC-ND license.
doi:10.1016/j.procs.2012.04.212

