Available online at www.sciencedirect.com

Procedia Computer Science 9 (2012) 1390 – 1399

International Conference on Computational Science, ICCS 2012

Enhancing Mentoring between Alumni and Students via Smart
Alumni System
Hongmei Chia*, Edward L. Jonesa, Lakshmi P. Grandhama
a

Florida A&M University, Tallahassee, FL 32307-5100, U.S.A.

Abstract
Alumni are one of the most important assets to any university. They are the people who represent the university in the real world.
University alumni systems exist to promote active and ongoing relationships between graduates and their alma mater. However,
it is a big challenge how to enhance mentoring between alumni and current students. This paper proposes to incorporate selected
features of social networking and data mining into alumni systems to boost mentoring between alumni and students. There are
two major contributions of this research project, a framework for smart alumni systems (SAS), and a proof-of-concept prototype
implementation of an SAS subset. The SAS framework expands stakeholder roles beyond alumni to include current students,
faculty, staff, and guests. The framework supports social networking style interactions within and across stakeholder types, for
activities such as mentoring, fund-raising, curriculum development, etc. In the SAS framework, the primary purpose of data
mining is to provide recommendations for establishing associations between stakeholders so that helps current students to get
better mentoring; a secondary purpose is analyzing results from university and departmental surveys.
The proof-of-concept smart alumni system prototype has been implemented as a web-based interface. The prototype implements
stakeholder roles for students, faculty and alumni, and supports social networking features of friends, groups and messaging.
Basic data mining algorithms are used to provide a ranked list of recommendations for stakeholder relationships for friends or
groups.

Keywords: virtual mentor, e-menroing, alumni, data mining, social networking, smart alumni system

1. Introduction
Emerging technologies such as social networking software enable new and unique opportunities for the
mentoring and retention of information technology graduates. Social networking software can bridge the
generational divide that exists between current IT professionals (alumni) and information science graduates. E-

* Corresponding author. Tel.: 01-850-412-7355; fax: +01-850-599-3220.
E-mail address: hchi@cis.famu.edu

1877-0509 © 2012 Published by Elsevier Ltd. Open access under CC BY-NC-ND license.
doi:10.1016/j.procs.2012.04.153

Hongmei Chi et al. / Procedia Computer Science 9 (2012) 1390 – 1399

1391

mentoring program is using social networking software to maintain mentorship instead of traditional communication
tool [8]. According to a recent study [3] by the Center for Marketing Research at the University of MassachusettsDartmouth, 98% of the responding colleges have a Facebook page and 84% have a Twitter account. The surveys
[10] from the Pew showed that between 85% and 99% of college students use Facebook.
Social networking is a powerful tool for people to meet and interact based on common interests. On the other
hand, data mining is another powerful tool used to understand the vast amounts of data that are produced by social
interactions, in order to enhance the services being provided. It is time to design and use social network-style alumni
system. Mentoring programs, including e-mentoring programs, which allow for networking, including online social
networking, should be a key component in the recruitment and retention of our students and in strengthening
university programs.
Alumni are one of the most important assets to any university. They are the people who represent the university
in the real world. Many alumni networks were initially started from regional groups of alumni brought together for
university fundraising activities. Later, these networks slowly gained added importance in the development of the
universities because of their enormous outreach potential that benefits the university and helps current students in
their career paths. The alumni groups have been in existence for decades and they are constantly changing with time.
There have been very big changes in the recent years with the development of the internet and social networking
that forces the alumni system to undergo huge changes. Therefore, it is really important for universities to focus on
the alumni networks and find ways to enhance their growth and development.
this paper offers an inter-mix of
traditional alumni systems and social networking sites. A brief study on both systems is undertaken and the
important features of these systems are incorporated into the new proposed system. Data mining is then used to preprocess large and complex datasets to extract non-obvious patterns of correlations by removing unrelated data
(noise) to discover hidden non-obvious patterns that represent valuable knowledge discoveries. For example, data
mining can help map current students to alumni mentors. Data mining is a process of observing patterns in the data
and summarizing the findings in terms of usable information. When carrying out the data mining operations on the
system, some essential associations are revealed which should be studied in the development of more useful
university alumni systems. This system informs the main areas of any university to seek donations, mentor students,
and improve interactions and determine from which parts of the world people are more interested to join the
university. This paper describes SAS and explains the important features of strengthening e-mentor program via
SAS and mapping students and mentors by using data mining techniques.
It is envisioned that such alumni systems are beneficial not only to the universities but also to alumni and current
students. It could serve as a platform for current students to interact with their senior alumni and receive mentoring
from them with regards to career paths, real world expectations and so on. From the alumni point of view, benefits
of participating in alumni groups allow them to stay in contact and meet their fellow classmates, professors and
university personnel, even after several years beyond graduation. It also allows alumni to share professional or
personal advice, explore mutual interests and exciting new opportunities in a collaborative way.
This paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, communication tools for current mentoring are described and
challenges and motivation are discussed for SAS and e-mentoring system. The principles and concepts for smart
alumni system are presented in Section 3. In Section 4, the mentoring via SAS is proposed and implementation is
provided in Section 5. Conclusion and future work are presented in Section 6.

2. Communication tools for Mentoring
Mentorship is a commonly used strategy for role and career development that has potential benefits for students in
undergraduate programs. In this paper, we take IT undergraduate program as a case study. Mentorship is helpful in
nurturing and sharing to promote personal and professional growth [5]. Traditionally, mentorship is built via faceto-face, phone, email between mentees and mentors. However, such communication tools are limited when
compared to the daily or weekly alerts in social networking. In addition, mentorship is excluded from the traditional

1392

Hongmei Chi et al. / Procedia Computer Science 9 (2012) 1390 – 1399

alumni system (see Fig. 1). In this paper, we propose to integrate mentorship in smart alumni system via building
social-networking-style mentoring system.
What is social networking? This activity can be described as the act of sharing the associations of business or
social relationships for the purpose of exploring common needs, interests or goals. Networking is and has been
taking place all over the world since the existence of humans. Every person has a network; some recognize it and
some do not. Nowadays networking has become easy because of the development of technology. People can interact
with one another, share the ideas, and discuss their personal and professional lives without even moving from their
desks. Existing alumni systems (see Fig.1)are usually developed to facilitate networking between the alumni and
their respective universities, but most of these current systems are not being used by the majority of the alumni for
many reasons.

Information about the University

Gettting membership in the site

Invitation to events

Pledging money for the university

Receiving news letters

Some special benefits

Figure 1: Functions of the current alumni systems

A simple glance at most of the current alumni systems can give us a few answers. Typical alumni systems
are static, not engaging and are usually confined to just having information of the universities, upcoming activities
and they have very little to no space for interaction among its members. Traditionally such systems are accessible
only to the alumni, and do not involve current students and faculty, thereby hampering the realization of numerous
potential benefits. As such, there is a need for systems, which bring on board alumni, current students, staff and
faculty, to facilitate constructive interactions which could contribute to building a stronger university legacy.
As can be seen in Figure 1, the most current alumni systems do not provide channels for interaction,
especially with the current student community. A few preset channels for interaction are available and they are
unidirectional from alumni to university or vice versa. The alumni systems should be developed in ways they
increase the interactions among various categories of people associated with the university, like between current
students and alumni, between alumni and faculty, between current students and prospective students or their parents.
Such a framework would place current students within reach of the expert advice of alumni and of their stories on
how to overcome real challenges in the real world. Prospective students, on the other hand, could use it to learn
more about courses, college routine from current students. Such systems could also cater to the needs of the parents,
who wanted to know the about the universities from the current students, alumni and also the faculty. As the current
alumni systems do not have any of these features, there is a serious need for re-engineering the alumni systems.

3. The Features of Smart Alumni System
The Smart Alumni System is a combination of the traditional alumni system and social networking sites.
Unlike traditional systems, SAS will be interactive in nature and have room for multiple levels of interaction among

Hongmei Chi et al. / Procedia Computer Science 9 (2012) 1390 – 1399

1393

different categories of university related personnel, and will focus more on the common goals of the involved
personnel or the university itself.
The challenges faced by current alumni systems are:
to attract alumni to access system like other social networks;
to collect useful data related to alumni from social networks and other open resources;
to keep privacy and security a top priority for this system; and
to get current students involved.
All of the above challenges can be addressed through a Smart Alumni System (See Fig.2 and Fig. 3), which is
not just confined to the alumni of the universities. There are different stake-holders in the system, ranging from the
alumni who have studied in the university to visitors or prospective students who want to know more about the
university. All members in the system will be divided into four main categories: university, alumni, current students,
faculty and visitors along with the administrators. Each of the members will have some features, which are specific
to their individual group (of users) and some general features which tend to be common to all users.

Figure 2: Components of the Smart Alumni System

Typical examples of common features required for all of the members in the groups include maintenance of
individual information profiles and privacy aspects, which allow selective sharing of information intended to be
shared. Each member can share his or her thoughts and other information using SAS as the medium. Also, each
member can communicate with other members in the system, subject to some restrictions inherent to the type of the
user. The other important features, operation of SAS and the advantages of having this system will be discussed in
more detail in the upcoming chapters.
One of the most distinguishing aspects of the SAS is the usage of data mining principles to discover additional
relationships among the users. Data collected from alumni systems is analyzed for any possible trends (or patterns)
characteristic of the observable, and harnessing the information to help tune the development of the system. The
trends can be of various kinds like assessing student interest in joining the university based on their geographic
location of origin, or assessing how well a mathematic major fare against a computer science major or a science
major, or assessing which group of alumni tends to pledge money for the university. All such assessments can be
performed using the data collected on the SAS site; they in turn would help the university to determine the areas of
focus relevant for different aspects for future development.

1394

Hongmei Chi et al. / Procedia Computer Science 9 (2012) 1390 – 1399

Smart Alumni System

Figure 3: Stakeholders of Smart Alumni System

4. Mentoring via Social Networking
students and alumni. Mentoring is a process where the alumni can guide the current students to make appropriate
career choices. The alumnus who are typically working in a specific industry they have first hand information
related to the requirements of securing a job in the selected field, technical and professional expectations at work,
and likely career path options. The alumni can act as mentors for current students, helping them in many ways,
mostly by explaining out career options and expectations. Alumni with interests and time to mentor a current
student may indicate it in their SAS profile.
Alumni data can be searched for three types of patterns: alumni not interested in mentoring activities, alumni
undecided about their mentoring interested and alumni interested in mentoring. The first category of alumni need
not be contacted. For the second category a communication can be sent to further encourage them for participating
in the mentoring activities. For the alumni who have expressed interest and availability to mentor, their profiles are
matched with the profiles of the students based on various attributes/fields like interests, occupation, current city etc.
Data mining routines allows a better matching of the alumni with the current student profiles and tends to make the
mentoring feature more fruitful.
An alumnus who assumes the role of a mentor can help current students on technical or non-technical matters, and
can guide them in their career paths. For finding mentoring related data mining, the association algorithm is used.
The current students who need mentors have to make a request for a mentor in the SAS. The alumni interested in
mentoring the students need to express their willingness, at registration or at a later point. Upon availability of data
from both current students and alumni, the association algorithm tries to pair an alumnus with a current student
based on their interests and background.
The procedures for mentorship can be seen in Fig. 4. With regards to mentoring, all the fields in the profile are
ranked according to match between mentors and the students. The fields considered include: their department,
interests, hometown, career interests, and employer the alumnus is associated with, in that particular order of
priority.

Hongmei Chi et al. / Procedia Computer Science 9 (2012) 1390 – 1399

Alumni

Students

SAS

Data mining algorithm

Data mining algorithm

Mentoring: No

1395

Mentoring: Yes
Mentoring: Not Sure

Contact Alumni

Data mining algorithm

Connect
Alumni/Students

Mentoring Activities
Figure 4: Schematic for mentoring process

5. Related Work
The need for maintaining alumni systems has been highlighted by Arceo [1] in his study on the role of student and
alumni associations in democratization of Spain during the post-Franco political transition. Arceo explained how
student and alumni associations of Spain served as a bridge or boundary spanners between the educational
institutions, their people (students, alumni, professors and political sector) and the job market. Eventually, these
associations grew in their presence to decision-making bodies which helped retraining of the unemployed youth and
thereby contributed t
] at
One of the early efforts to establish an interactive alumni associatio
Faculty of Mechanical Engineering, University of Belgrade. Based on experience with previous alumni association
assurance in higher education. Feedback information was collected through various activities as well as
questionnaires about industrial expectations; knowledge obtained at university, and need for improvement in
teaching and research activities. The alumni ALFaMEB activities helped continuously improve the teaching and
research undertaken at the university and thereby broaden the limits of university education.
A noteworthy work in the present context is by Barnard [2] who proposed an online community portal
which is beneficial to both alumni and higher education institutions in South Africa. The portal was a web-based
secured database which allows free sharing of information between alumni management teams and its members.

1396

Hongmei Chi et al. / Procedia Computer Science 9 (2012) 1390 – 1399

Using empirical survey methods, the amount of information disseminated to target alumni audiences at the
University of Johannesburg and their opinions on community portals is collected.
Based on the collected
information the needs for building a network which is beneficial to both the alumni and the university are identified
-size-fits.
However, this study was limited to alumni members and university as its stakeholders and had provision for limited
interactions between the alumni.
Delavari et al. [6] investigated the capabilities of data mining when applied in the context of higher education
system. The authors propose a roadmap analysis model DM_EDU which is aimed at improving the decision making
procedures related to various processes which are essential to maintain the quality of educational system.
Knowledge discovered by application of data mining techniques to raw educational data assists decision makers to
improve the decision-making procedures and to set more enhanced policies for educational processes. Also, by
understanding of student enrollment tendencies and patterns in a course, they were able to predict if a student is
likely to perform well in a given course or otherwise. Such predictions also help in identifying necessary actions
required to provide additional skill classes and attention to the students who are likely to fare below par. As such, it
was shown that decision making processes such as planning, counseling and evaluation can benefit from application
of data mining techniques to educational data.
As for e-mentoring system, despite the recognized value of those involved in mentorship in higher education,
however, little progress has been made regarding the development of an infrastructure that effectively supports their
ongoing education for e- mentorship. Myrick et al [7] piloted e-mentoring system for nursing program, and a small
sample (15-25 mentors) successfully completing the five month program and responses are positive.
Although the work discussed above makes novel attempts to improve student or alumni based networks
systems, they are severely limited in their communication capabilities and fall short of harnessing the full potential
of extensive interactions between student, alumni and university. This thesis aims to address all those shortcomings
networks and is supported by decision making processes based on data mining principles.

6. Implementation
Login Page: The SAS login page serves two purposes. First of all, it enables a user to login to the system. Secondly,
it provides a preview of the university website. If desired, the user can navigate though the university website to
know more information about the programs, departments and university related news. Such feature is more useful to
guests who would like to know more about the university.

.
Figure5: Left: Screenshot of login page in SAS; right: Screenshot of profile Page in SAS

Hongmei Chi et al. / Procedia Computer Science 9 (2012) 1390 – 1399

1397

collects mandatory information like first name, last name, email, affiliation status (student, alumni, and faculty) and
date of birth; which is then checked with university records to establish user authenticity. A screenshot of the login
screen of FAMU-SAS is shown in Figure 5 (left).
Once the registration process is successful, the user can use his email and password to log into the system using
Profile page (see Fig.5 right) is the portal which contains user information which the user would like to be
displayed on his profile and provides control options to specify which content can be shared with other members of
SAS. User information is organized into three different categories and displayed under separate tabs: Profile Details,
Personal Details and Work Details.
Profile Details
this tab inherit basic details like first name, last name and affiliation status entered during the registration process,
and provides fields for entering a brief description about the user
Personal Details
ser like
Hometown, Passions, Sporting interests and favorite TV shows. Most of the fields in this tab are not mandatory and
the user can edit them at his or her convenience. Users can also use this tab to customize personal information they
want to share with other members in the system. Data collected in this tab forms an important part of user data since
it is later used to make connections between the members of the system.
Work Details
employer and other career related details. Since, the main motto of SAS is to build a career based networking for its
members; this tab is where most of the important user information is collected. This tab is sub-divided into two
background of the member: schools attended, the highest degree earned, the year graduated, majors and minors

s/Mentees
all the members of SAS who are possible mentors or mentees with
the user, and provides links to their individual profiles. It also shows links available to initiate a communication with
a mentor, shown in Figure 6.

Mentors
Maggie
Send
Message

Tom
Send
Message

Figure 6: Snapshot of Mentors list tab in SAS

Phillip
Send
Message

1398

Hongmei Chi et al. / Procedia Computer Science 9 (2012) 1390 – 1399

for his mentors and acquaintances and to add them to his mentors list within a few clicks. This tab is linked with
data mining routines to recommend likely mentors of the user based on the information provided in user profiles.
Mentors
friends,
friends, mentoring; for faculty are funding, curriculum development.
majors, company; for alumni are
We started to use this system in one department and the responses from students and alumni are positive, Feedbacks
are helpful for us to make this system more attractive to our users.
7. Conclusions and Future work
A Smart Alumni System is an online networking system where the membership is not confined just to the alumni
but is extended to the current students, faculty and other members associated with the university. In this paper, a
Smart Alumni System (or SAS) that is far more outreaching then traditional alumni systems has been designed and
implemented. This project has demonstrated that traditional systems can be re-engineered with aspects of social
networking keeping in view the potential benefits and success of social networking websites in capturing user
attention and involvement. Inspired by user functionalities in social networking media, a framework for SAS is
outlined. Further, it has been shown that data mining principles can be applied to user data obtained from alumni
data to enhance the functionality of the SAS.
The proposed Smart Alumni System has been implemented using ASP.net with C#. The implemented system
provides a platform for communication and active interaction between alumni as well as current students, faculty,
and other personnel affiliated with the university. Each stakeholder is classified into user sub-groups of a specific
kind whose permissions and functionalities are pre-defined. Users of different kind are allowed to interact among
themselves and also with users from different sub-groups in order to achieve common objectives or mutually
beneficial tasks. It has been shown that proposed Smart Alumni System can benefit from data mining principles in
order to provide an enriched experience and interactive functionalities to users of the system.
Finally, SAS can be made more readily accessible on mobile technologies like cell phones and handheld
devices by developing exclusive applets for this purpose. The SAS is a university based system and it is easy to
implement it in other platform such as any cloud environment as an e-mentoring system.
Acknowledgements
This work has been supported in part by U.S. Department of Education grant P120A090122. Any opinion,
finding, conclusion or recommendation does not represent the views of the Department of Education..
References
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.

A. Arceo
28(4), 2003, 523-528
Z. Barnard
http://hdl.handle.net/10210/851.
N. Barnes , A. Lescault, 2011, Social media adopion soars as higher-Ed experiments abd reevaluates its useod new communication tools
http://www.umassd.edu/cmr/studiesandresearch/socialmediaadoptionsoars/
G. Crisp, I. Cruz, Mentoring College Students: A Critical Review of the Literature Between 1990 and 2007, Research in Higher
Education, 525-545,
N. Delavari
International Conference on Information Technology Based Higher Education and Training, F4B/1 - F4B/6, 2005
F. Myrick et al., Preceptor/mentor education: A world of possibilities through e-learning technology, Nurse education today 1 April
2011 (volume 31 issue 3 Pages 263-267

Hongmei Chi et al. / Procedia Computer Science 9 (2012) 1390 – 1399

8.
9.

1399

Roblyer, M.D., McDaniel, M., Webb, M., Herman, J. & Witty, J. V. (2010). Findings on Facebook in higher education: A comparison
of college faculty and student uses and perceptions of social networking sites. Internet and Higher Education, 13 (2010) 134 140
FME
Transactions, Vol. 33, 2005, 103-109.

10. Generation online in 2009. http://www.pewinternet.org/~/media/Files/Reports/2009/PIP_Generations_2009.pdf

