Available online at www.sciencedirect.com

Procedia Computer Science 9 (2012) 877 – 886

International Conference on Computational Science, ICCS 2012

Practical Application of Parallel Coordinates for Climate Model
Analysis
Chad A. Steeda,∗, Galen Shipmana , Peter Thorntona , Daniel Ricciutoa , David Ericksona , Marcia Branstettera
a Oak

Ridge National Laboratory, One Bethel Valley Rd., Oak Ridge, TN 37830

Abstract
The determination of relationships between climate variables and the identiﬁcation of the most signiﬁcant associations between them in various geographic regions is an important aspect of climate model evaluation. The EDEN
visual analytics toolkit has been developed to aid such analysis by facilitating the assessment of multiple variables
with respect to the amount of variability that can be attributed to speciﬁc other variables. EDEN harnesses the parallel
coordinates visualization technique and is augmented with graphical indicators of key descriptive statistics. A case
study is presented in which the focus is on the Harvard Forest site (42.5378N Lat, 72.1715W Lon) and the Community
Land Model Version 4 (CLM4) is evaluated. It is shown that model variables such as land water runoﬀ are more sensitive to a particular set of environmental variables than a suite of other inputs in the 88 variable analysis conducted. The
approach presented here allows climate scientists to focus on the most important variables in the model evaluations.
Keywords: information visualization, climate model, sensitivity analysis, visual analytics
2000 MSC: 62P12, 68U05

1. Introduction
One of the most challenging tasks in exploring multivariate data is the identiﬁcation and quantiﬁcation of associations between a set of interrelated variables. For climate model data, this task is even more daunting due to the
complexity and number of variables that are considered. Often times, the scientist has some understanding of expected
relationships but unexpected discoveries are nearly impossible with conventional toolkits. In spite of the diﬃculty,
these tasks are paramount to uncertainty quantiﬁcation and more general exploratory analysis of climate model data.
In general, the goal of these activities is to improve the accuracy and understanding of climate models which translate
into better comprehension of climate change and prediction.
Although the volume and sophistication of climate modeling and related high performance computing have progressed rapidly in recent years [1, 2, 3], the methods to display and explore the information in useful and meaningful
ways have not kept pace. For example, researchers typically rely on scatter plots and histograms to analyze multiple
∗ Corresponding

author
Email addresses: csteed@acm.org (Chad A. Steed), gshipman@ornl.gov (Galen Shipman), thorntonpe@ornl.gov (Peter Thornton),
ricciutodm@ornl.gov (Daniel Ricciuto), ericksondj@ornl.gov (David Erickson), branstetterm@ornl.gov (Marcia Branstetter)
URL: http://cda.ornl.gov/steed/ (Chad A. Steed)

1877-0509 © 2012 Published by Elsevier Ltd. Open access under CC BY-NC-ND license.
doi:10.1016/j.procs.2012.04.094

878

Chad A. Steed et al. / Procedia Computer Science 9 (2012) 877 – 886

Figure 1: The parallel coordinates panel in EDEN provides an interactive canvas that guides the scientist to signiﬁcant associations in multivariate
data. In this case, the Harvard Forest ensemble data set of CLM4 parameters (3 leftmost axes) and outputs (8 rightmost axes) is shown after loading
the data and using the query sliders on the SH axis to highlight 14 outliers. Each polyline in the plot represents an individual CLM4 model run.
The plot shows that outliers are restricted to the upper range of the runoﬀ variable, the lower range of vegetation productivity variables (BTRAN,
GPP, TLAI, and TOTVEGC), and the lower range of the Sy parameter.

variable relationships. However, these graphics require the use of multiple separate plots since scatter plots are limited
to at most three variables. This approach is also problematic due to human perceptual issues, especially when searching for combinations of conditions. At the same time, a number of eﬀective multivariate visual analysis techniques
have been introduced in the information visualization literature. The fact that relatively few of these approaches have
been brought to bear on scientiﬁc problems where they are needed reﬂects a growing gap between viable information
visualization techniques and real-world scientiﬁc analysis. To bridge this gap, experts from both ﬁelds must work
closely together to create practical tools for today’s most pressing problems.
It is in this spirit that a team consisting of climate model scientists and an information visualization researcher
at Oak Ridge National Laboratory (ORNL) have collaborated to improve the visual evaluation of the Community
Land Model version 4 (CLM4) [2]. A new system, called the Ensemble Data analysis ENvironment (EDEN), has
been developed through this eﬀort to provide an eﬃcient framework to discover knowledge in complex CLM4 data
sets. As shown in Fig. 1, EDEN is designed to harness the high bandwidth human visual channel with interactive
parallel coordinates that guide the scientist to potentially signiﬁcant associations in the data. Through a case study
(see Section 5) with climate model scientists who are also co-authors of this work, the notion that interactive parallel
coordinates can provide a more eﬀective environment for climate model analysis is corroborated. Furthermore, the
research reported here addresses an important point brought out in the NIH/NSF Visualization Challenges Report [4],
which encourages visualization researchers to “collaborate closely with domain experts who have driving tasks in
data-rich ﬁelds to produce tools and techniques that solve clear real-world needs.” The tool in the current work is
EDEN, the techniques are interactive parallel coordinates and statistical analytics, and the real-world need is the
understanding of climate model parameters and outputs.
2. Related Work
Although there have been many approaches for the visual analysis of multivariate data shared in the literature [5],
the techniques utilized for climate data analysis are generally still constrained to non-interactive, basic graphics using
methods developed over a decade ago; and it is questionable whether these methods can cope with the complexity of
today’s data. For example, scientists often rely on simple scatter plots and histograms which require several separate
plots or layered plots to study multiple attributes in a data set. However, the use of separate plots is not an ideal
approach in this type of analysis due to perceptual issues such as the extremely limited memory for information that
can be gained from one glance to the next [6]. These issues are illustrated through the perceptual phenomenon of
change blindness [7] and they are exacerbated when searching for combinations of conditions.

Chad A. Steed et al. / Procedia Computer Science 9 (2012) 877 – 886

879

Figure 2: The polyline in parallel coordinates maps the N-dimensional data tuple C with coordinates (c1 , c2 , . . . , cN ) with points on N parallel axes
which are joined with a polyline whose N vertices are on the Xi -axis for i = 1, . . . , N.

Scientists often rely on the scatter plot matrix (SPLOM), which presents multiple adjacent scatter plots for all
variable comparisons in a single display [8]; but the SPLOM requires a large amount of screen space and forming
multivariate associations is still challenging. Wilkinson et al. [9] used statistical measures for organizing SPLOMs to
guide the viewer through an exploratory analysis of high-dimensional data sets. Although the organization methods
improve the analysis, the previously mentioned perceptual issues with SPLOMs remain to some degree. Another
approach is to use layered plots, which condense the information into a single display; but there are signiﬁcant issues
with these techniques due to layer occlusion and interference as demonstrated by Healey et al. [6].
Parallel coordinates is a popular multivariate visualization technique that can alleviate said issues and it is the basis
for the interactive display panel in the EDEN framework. The parallel coordinates technique was initially popularized
by Inselberg [10] as a novel approach for representing hyper-dimensional geometries, and later demonstrated in the
direct analysis of multivariate relationships in data by Wegman [11]. In general, the technique yields a compact twodimensional representation of even large multidimensional data sets by representing the N-dimensional data tuple
C with coordinates (c1 , c2 , . . . , cN ) by points on N parallel axes which are joined with a polyline (see Fig. 2) [12].
In theory, the number of attributes that can be represented in parallel coordinates is only limited by the horizontal
resolution of the display device. But in a practical sense, the axes that are immediately adjacent to one another
yield the most obvious information about relationships between attributes. In order to analyze attributes that are
separated by one or more axes, interactions and graphical indicators are required. To this end, several innovative
parallel coordinates extensions that seek to improve interaction and cognition have been described in the visualization
research literature. For example, Hauser et al. [13] described a histogram display, dynamic axis re-ordering, axis
inversion, and some details-on-demand capabilities for parallel coordinates. In addition, Siirtola [14] presented a rich
set of dynamic interaction techniques and Johansson et al. [15] described informative line shading schemes for parallel
coordinates. Furthermore, several focus+context implementations for parallel coordinates have been introduced by
Fua et al. [16], Artero et al. [17], and Novot´ny and Hauser [18]. More recently, Qu et al. [19] described a method for
integrating correlation computations into a parallel coordinates display. The EDEN visualization approach described
in the remainder of the current work uses variants of these extensions to the classical parallel coordinates plot.
3. Data
The data analyzed in the current work has been generated using the CLM4 which represents the land component
of the Community Climate System Model version 4 (CCSM4) [1]. Both global model output data from a single
simulation and single point data in an ensemble of simulations have been generated for analysis of model output
sensitivity to input parameter variation. In the current work, the focus is on analysis of the ensemble data sets.
The monthly CLM4 outputs were post-processed into comma separated value (CSV) ﬁles with a selected number of
model parameters (inputs variables that are used for initialization) and a number of outputs. Each column in the ﬁle
represents a parameter or model output and each row represents a particular model run. Therefore, a model run is a

880

Chad A. Steed et al. / Procedia Computer Science 9 (2012) 877 – 886

Table 1: Variable descriptions for the Harvard Forest site ensemble of CLM4 simulations averaged for the month of May over 10 years (1995–2004).
An analysis of this data set using EDEN is presented in Section 5.

CLM4 Parameter Variables
Units
Description
none
maximum fractional saturated area
decay factor for subsurface runoﬀ with depth
m s−1
none
average speciﬁc yield

Parameter
Fmax
Fdrai
Sy

Output
runoﬀ
LH
SH
BTRAN
GPP
TLAI
TOTVEGC
TOTSOMC

CLM4 Output Variables
Units
Description
mm s−1
total runoﬀ
latent heat ﬂux
W m−2
sensible heat ﬂux
W m−2
none
transpiration scaling factor
gC m−2 s−1 gross primary productivity
total leaf area index
m2 m−2
total vegetation carbon
kg C m−2
total soil organic matter carbon
kg C m−2

data tuple that contains both the parameters and outputs which can be used to evaluate the sensitivity of the model
outputs to changes in parameters when simultaneously analyzed with other model runs. In the parallel coordinates
plot, the data tuple is graphically displayed as a polyline. In Section 5, a case study is presented that uses a particular
ensemble of CLM4 simulations for a single site (42.5378N Lat, 72.1715W Lon) averaged for the month of May over
10 years (1995–2004). This data set contains 134 model runs performed at the model location of the Harvard Forest
eddy covariance ﬂux tower, a temperate deciduous forest in Massachusetts, USA. In each model simulation, 3 model
parameters were varied: Fmax, Fdrai, and Sy. In addition to the input parameters, 8 output variables are analyzed:
LH, SH, BTRAN, GPP, TLAI, TOTVEGC, and TOTSOMC. A total of 11 variables are visualized in the case study (see
Table 1).
4. Interactive Parallel Coordinates
The primary display in EDEN provides an interactive parallel coordinates visualization. Parallel coordinates is an
eﬀective method for the CLM4 data because it facilitates the display of large multivariate data sets. In fact, the number
of variables that can be displayed is only limited by the horizontal resolution of the display device. A common set of
parallel coordinates capabilities such as movable axes, details on demand, and axis inversion are available in EDEN.
The parallel coordinates plot has been extended with a number of capabilities that facilitate exploratory data analysis
and guide the scientist to the most signiﬁcant relationships in the data. In the following sections, these features are
summarized to provide context for the case study in section 5, but the reader is encouraged to explore the author’s
prior publications for a more detailed explanation of these extensions [20, 21, 22].
4.1. Descriptive Statistical Indicators
In EDEN, the parallel coordinates axes are enhanced with visual cues that guide the scientist’s exploration of the
information space. This approach is akin to the concept of the scented widget described by Willett et al. [23]. Scented
widgets are graphical user interface components that are augmented with an embedded visualization to enable eﬃcient
navigation in the information space of the data items. In EDEN, each axis in the parallel coordinate display is scented
with graphical encodings of several key descriptive statistics to summarize the variable distributions (see Fig. 3). The
median, interquantile range (IQR), and frequency information are calculated for the data within the focus area of each
axis. The user can switch between mean and standard deviation range as an alternative to the median and IQR display.

Chad A. Steed et al. / Procedia Computer Science 9 (2012) 877 – 886

881

Figure 3: The axes in the parallel coordinates display are augmented with graphical indicators of key descriptive statistical quantities, correlation
measures, and query range sliders. In this annotated ﬁgure, the numbered call-outs highlight speciﬁc features of the axis widgets which are
described in detail in the remainder of this paper.

This variability information is graphically encoded in the boxes on each axis interior. The wide boxes (see 4 in
Fig. 3) represent the statistics for all the axis samples, while the more narrow boxes (see 3 in Fig. 3) capture the
samples that are currently queried with the query sliders (see 2 in Fig. 3). The thick horizontal lines (see 3a and 4a in
Fig. 3) that divide the variability boxes vertically represent either the median or the mean value.
4.2. Dynamic Visual Queries
The concept of dynamic visual queries focuses on interactive displays that facilitate rapid, incremental, and
reversible actions, selection by mouse gestures (rather than typing), and immediate and continuous display of results [24]. In EDEN, dynamic visual queries are realized through interactive axis scaling and query sliders
4.2.1. Dynamic Axis Scaling
Each parallel coordinate axis can be interactively scaled to facilitate zooming into speciﬁc regions of interest. As
shown in Fig. 4, the axis is partitioned into three sections delineated by horizontal tick marks: the central focus area
and the top and bottom context areas. When the mouse hovers over the focus area, an upward scroll gesture expands
the display of the focus area outward and pushes lines outside the new upper and lower limits into the context areas.
A downward scroll gesture causes the opposite eﬀect: focus area compression. Alternatively, the user may elect to
use the scrolling gesture over either of the two context areas independently to alter either the maximum or minimum
limits. This technique is helpful to the scientists when the parallel coordinate plot contains a densely packed group of
lines and to remove outliers from the display.
4.2.2. Query Sliders
On each parallel coordinate axis, a pair of sliders (see 2 in Fig. 3) are displayed that can be dragged with the
mouse to rapidly ﬁlter the data. By dragging either the top or bottom slider, the scientist can adjust the maximum and
minimum limits of the current query, respectfully. For example, in Fig. 1, the query sliders are set to highlight the
lines crossing the upper range of the SH axis. When sliders on multiple axes are set, the scientist is given the ability to
construct Boolean AND queries. That is, lines that lie between the sliders of each axis are shaded more prominently.
Lines that are not queried are still displayed in the plot for context; but these lines are shaded with less contrast to the
background color of the panel. Through these sliders, mouse gestures are the primary means to select lines of interest
as opposed to exiting to external packages or command line scripts.

882

Chad A. Steed et al. / Procedia Computer Science 9 (2012) 877 – 886

(a) Before scaling

(b) After scaling

Figure 4: Image sequence illustrating dynamic axis scaling capability before (a) and after (b) axis scaling has been performed. In this example,
scaling is performed by an upward mouse scroll gesture in the focus area of the axis which moves the values of the upper and lower limits closer in
value, zooming into the central axis region.

4.3. Correlation Indicators
EDEN also enables a visual form of correlation mining to judge the strength of relationships between pairs of
variables. As the user interacts with the system, the correlation information is updated in real-time and used to
augment the parallel coordinates display. For each possible pairing of axes, the system automatically calculates the
Pearson product-moment correlation coeﬃcient, r. This computation yields a correlation matrix where each i, j
element is equal to the r value between the i and j variables. The rows from this matrix are displayed graphically
beneath each axis as a series of color-coded blocks (see 5 in Fig. 3, ). In each block, the color encodes r between the
axis directly above it and the axis that corresponds to its position in the set of blocks. When the mouse hovers over an
axis, the axis is highlighted (see 1a in Fig. 3) and the correlation coeﬃcient blocks corresponding to it below the other
axes are enlarged (see 5a in Fig. 3). The correlation indicator blocks are shaded blue for negative correlations and
red for positive. The stronger the correlation, the more saturated the color so that the stronger correlations are more
prominent. The r value of an axis with itself is always equal to one and the corresponding indicator block is shaded
white.
In addition to the correlation indicator blocks, EDEN displays small scatter plots below the correlation indicators
for each axis when an axis is highlighted (see 6 in Fig. 3). The scatter plots are created by plotting the points with
the highlighted variable as the y axis and the variable directly above the scatter plot as the x axis. Each scatter plot
also shows the numerical r value associated with the pair of axes below the scatter plot (see 7 in Fig. 3). The scatter
plots provide a visual means to conﬁrm the type of correlation (positive or negative) and the strength. The type of
correlation is also visually detectable in the line conﬁguration of the parallel coordinates plot. Polylines that cross in an
‘X’ pattern (see the line crossings between BTRAN and SH in Fig. 5) are characteristic of a negative correlation while
lines that appear to be more parallel indicate a positive correlation (see the line crossings between GPP and TLAI
in Fig. 5). Unlike the other correlation indicators, the scatter plot is useful for discovering nonlinear relationships
between variables. For example, a nonlinear relationship can be observed in a scatter plot even if r is zero.
5. Case Study: CLM4 Sensitivity Analysis
To illustrate the eﬀectiveness of EDEN, the analysis of an ensemble of CLM4 simulations with 11 variables at
the location of the Harvard Forest eddy covariance ﬂux tower (see Section 3) is described in this section. In Fig. 5,
the parallel coordinates panel is shown after loading the data set. From this initial plot, several interesting features
in the data are revealed. First of all, the box plots on the ﬁrst 3 axes (Fmax, Fdrai, and Sy) reveal nearly normal
distributions, reﬂecting the sampling strategy used to generate the model input parameters. This sampling strategy

Chad A. Steed et al. / Procedia Computer Science 9 (2012) 877 – 886

883

Figure 5: The initial view of the May Harvard CLM4 ensemble data set is shown after its loading into EDEN. With the mouse over the BTRAN
axis, the view reveals very strong correlations with the other 6 output variables and a moderately strong correlation with the runoﬀ output variable.

has been selected to represent the existing knowledge about values of these parameters and to maximize coverage of
the samples over the parameter space. The box plots on the other axes suggest skewed distributions toward either the
minimum (e.g. runoﬀ and SH) or maximum values. In Fig. 5, the mouse is over the BTRAN axis revealing strong
correlations (notice the highly saturated correlation indicator blocks enlarged beneath each axis) with the other 6
output variables (LH, SH, GPP, TLAI, TOTVEGC, and TOTSOMC). These strong correlations reﬂect the interrelated
nature of the model outputs. For example, low values of runoﬀ and SH as described above occur in simulations in
which there are low amounts of foliage (low TLAI and TOTVEGC). Low foliage means low transpiration (a component
of LH), leaving more soil water available for runoﬀ and more net energy available for sensible heat (SH). These strong
feedbacks between vegetation and soil hydrology are one example of many in the CLM4 where potentially unexpected
relationships exist between indirectly connected model parameters and outputs.
Although Figure 5 is useful for representing broad relationships among the variables, outliers exercise too much
inﬂuence on the display making it diﬃcult to form more detail judgments on the correlation and distribution patterns.
That is, the outliers expand the range of values for several axes which results in a mass of lines at the bottom or top
of the parallel coordinate axes (see runoﬀ and BTRAN in Fig. 5). In Fig. 1, the query sliders on the SH axis have
been adjusted to highlight a group of 14 outliers. This plot also shows that these lines are outliers for the other 7
output variables. The outliers appear to be related to the upper range of values in the runoﬀ axis. Furthermore, the
outliers are contained in the lower range of the Sy axis, but unlike the runoﬀ axis, the lower range of Sy also contains
a number of polylines that are not outliers (notice the presence of a number of light gray non-query lines behind the
queried lines on the Sy axis). The outlier lines are rather widely dispersed on the Fmax and Fdrai axes suggesting
weak correlations. This analysis strongly suggests that Sy is controlling most of the variability in the output variables
and that the Fmax and Fdrai variables are only minor contributions.
To gain more insight into the data set, the dynamic axis scaling capability (see Sec. 4.2.1) is used to push these
outliers into the context area of the display. In Fig. 6(a), the focus area limits have been adjusted for the LH, SH, and
BTRAN axes. The inﬂuence of the outliers on the display is reduced so that more structure can be observed in both
the parallel coordinates plot as well as the scatterplots. It is important to note that the relationships described above
are preserved when said outliers are removed. The SH axis is highlighted in this plot, showing that the correlation
with LH is even stronger (r = −0.99) now that the outliers have been removed. In addition, the conﬁgurations of
the SH and LH axes in Fig 6(a) suggest bimodalities. In Fig. 6(b) the group of lines from the lower range of the
SH axis are selected using the query sliders. From this plot, it is clear that simulations with low SH correspond to
high values for LH and low values for BTRAN. Conversely, the lines crossing the upper range of SH have a negative
correlation pattern with LH (notice the ’X’ shaped crossing between the axes). This pattern is shown in Fig. 6(c), and
the correlation between LH and SH for the queried lines is a perfect negative correlation. This bimodality appears to

884

Chad A. Steed et al. / Procedia Computer Science 9 (2012) 877 – 886

(a) After axis scaling on the LH, SH, and BTRAN axes

(b) Highlighting the cluster of lines in the lower range of SH

(c) Highlighting the cluster of lines in the upper range of SH
Figure 6: Dynamic axis scaling is used on the LH, SH, and BTRAN axes to remove the outliers and reveal more structure in the display (a). Two
clusters of lines are observed for the lower range (b) and the upper range (c) of SH.

Chad A. Steed et al. / Procedia Computer Science 9 (2012) 877 – 886

885

Figure 7: The two clusters of lines are shown for the runoﬀ axis after scaling its focus area to remove additional outliers at the upper portion of the
display.

be driven by a threshold value of Sy near 0.2, above which runoﬀ is near the minimum value and below when there is
increased runoﬀ and also increased variability of this and other output variables.
In Fig. 7, the mouse is used to highlight the runoﬀ output variable. The correlation indicators below the axes reveal
strong correlations with all but the ﬁrst two parameters (Fmax and Fdrai) and the last output variable (TOTSOMC).
For this plot, the focus range has been dynamically scaled for the runoﬀ axis to push a number of upper outliers into
the context area. In this plot, two distinct groups of lines, one for the upper range of and one for the middle to lower
range, are apparent. These two groups correspond to the groups highlighted in Figs. 6(c) and 6(b). The lines in the
upper range of runoﬀ, correspond to the lower range of LH, the upper range of SH and BTRAN and the lower ranges
of GPP, TLAI, and TOTVEGC.
6. Conclusions
CLM4, the land-surface model used in this study, contains over 100 input parameters and over 300 output variables
that vary spatially and temporally. Fully coupled climate models contain even more inputs and outputs. Discovering
new relationships among these variables using traditional scatterplots or other graphical methods is not practical. In
this work, the EDEN visual analytics toolkit is described for determining the signiﬁcant relationships among many
climate model variables in a practical climate model evaluation. During the course of this evaluation, it was noted that
the best use by climate scientists occurs when they are involved in the initial selection of the climate variables to be
examined. The parallel coordinates approach in EDEN facilitates the assessment of multiple variables simultaneously
in a single display to ascertain the amount of variability that can be attributed to speciﬁc other variables. One limitation
noted by the climate scientists is that domain expertise is necessary during the early stages of the analysis. When this
input is not available, large amounts of model/analysis output was either not useful or diﬃcult to interpret. This
ﬁnding suggests a close collaboration of visualization designers and climate domain scientists throughout the analysis
process. This limitation could also be resolved by combining EDEN with other data-mining approaches such that
only potentially meaningful relationships are highlighted visually.
In the case study presented here, it is observed that model variables such as land model water runoﬀ and other
hydrologic variables are quite sensitive to a particular set of other environmental drivers and model parameters. In
an earlier analysis of a 1,000 member ensemble covering 88 variables the relationships were less clear. This issue
was likely a result of the insuﬃcient sampling over the high dimensional space (81 parameters) and the diﬃculty in
visualizing such a large number of variables. Focused analysis covering subsets of model parameters and outputs are
necessary. Of particular interest is the variability in the surface latent and sensible energy heat ﬂuxes that in turn inﬂuence atmospheric thermodynamics and climate. Initial inclusion in the climate model evaluation was required when

886

Chad A. Steed et al. / Procedia Computer Science 9 (2012) 877 – 886

breaking down critical variable combinations in practical applications to state-of-the-art climate model simulations.
Acknowledgments
This research is sponsored by the Climate Science for a Sustainable Energy Future (CSSEF) project that is funded
by the U.S. Department of Energy, Oﬃce of Science. The authors wish to thank Zhangshuan Hou (Paciﬁc Northwest
National Laboratory) for the generation of the Harvard Forest site CLM4 ensemble data set. This paper was prepared
by the Oak Ridge National Laboratory, P.O. Box 2008, Oak Ridge, Tennessee 37831-6285, managed by UT–Battelle,
LLC, for the U.S. Department of Energy, under contract DE-AC05-00OR22725. The United States Government
retains and the publisher, by accepting the article for publication, acknowledges that the United States Government
retains a non-exclusive, paid-up, irrevocable, world-wide license to publish or reproduce the published form of this
manuscript, or allow others to do so, for United States Government purposes.
Bibliography
[1] P. R. Gent, G. Danabasoglu, L. J. Donner, M. M. Holland, E. C. Hunke, S. R. Jayne, D. M. Lawrence, R. B. Neale, P. J. Rasch, M. Vertenstein,
P. H. Worley, Zong-Liang Yang, M. Zhang, The community climate system model version 4, Journal of Climate 24 (19) (2011) 4973–4991.
[2] D. M. Lawrence, K. W. Oleson, M. G. Flanner, P. E. Thornton, S. C. Swenson, P. J. Lawrence, Zong-Liang Yang, S. Levis, K. Sakaguchi,
G. B. Bonan, A. G. Slater, Parameterization improvements and functional and structural advances in version 4 of the community land model,
Journal of Advances in Modeling Earth Systems 3 (M03001) (2011) 27 pp.
[3] J. T. Overpeck, G. A. Meehl, S. Bony, D. R. Easterling, Climate data challenges in the 21st century, Science 331 (6018) (2011) 700–702.
[4] C. Johnson, R. Moorhead, T. Munzner, H. Pﬁster, P. Rheingans, T. S. Yoo (Eds.), NIH/NSF Visualization Reserach Challenges, IEEE Press,
2006, http://tab.computer.org/vgtc/vrc/index.html (current 1 Jul. 2009).
[5] S. K. Card, J. D. Mackinlay, B. Shneiderman, Readings in Information Visualization: Using Vision to Think, Morgan Kaufmann, 1999.
[6] C. G. Healey, L. Tateosian, J. T. Enns, M. Remple, Perceptually-based brush strokes for nonphotorealistic visualization, ACM Transactions
on Graphics 23 (1) (2004) 64–96.
[7] R. A. Rensink, Change detection, Annual Review of Psychology 53 (2002) 245–577.
[8] P. C. Wong, R. D. Bergeron, 30 years of multidimensional multivariate visualization, in: Scientiﬁc Visualization - Overviews, Methodologies,
and Techniques, IEEE Computer Society Press, 1997, pp. 3–33.
[9] L. Wilkinson, A. Anand, R. Grossman, High-dimensional visual analytics: Interactive exploration guided by pairwise views of point distributions, IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics 12 (6) (2006) 1366–1372.
[10] A. Inselberg, The plane with parallel coordinates, The Visual Computer 1 (4) (1985) 69–91.
[11] E. J. Wegman, Hyperdimensional data analysis using parallel coordinates, Journal of the American Statistical Association 85 (411) (1990)
664–675.
[12] A. Inselberg, Parallel coordinates: Interactive visualization for high dimensions, in: E. Zudilova-Seinstra, T. Adriaansen, R. Liere (Eds.),
Trends in Interactive Visualization, Springer-Verlag, London, UK, 2009, pp. 49–78.
[13] H. Hauser, F. Ledermann, H. Doleisch, Angular brushing of extended parallel coordinates, in: Proceedings of IEEE Symposium on Information Visualization, 2002, pp. 127–130.
[14] H. Siirtola, Direct manipulation of parallel coordinates, in: Proceedings of the International Conference on Information Visualisation, IEEE
Computer Society, London, England, 2000, pp. 373–378.
[15] J. Johansson, P. Ljung, M. Jern, M. Cooper, Revealing structure within clustered parallel coordinates displays, in: IEEE Symposium on
Information Visualization, 2005, pp. 125–132.
[16] Y.-H. Fua, M. O. Ward, E. A. Rundensteiner, Hierarchical parallel coordinates for exploration of large datasets, in: Proceedings of IEEE
Visualization, 1999, pp. 43–50.
[17] A. O. Artero, M. C. F. de Oliveira, H. Levkowitz, Uncovering clusters in crowded parallel coordinates visualization, in: IEEE Symposium on
Information Visualization, 2004, pp. 81–88.
[18] M. Novot´ny, H. Hauser, Outlier-preserving focus+context visualization in parallel coordinates, IEEE Transactions on Visualization and
Computer Graphics 12 (5) (2006) 893–900.
[19] H. Qu, W. Chan, A. Xu, K. Chung, K. Lau, P. Guo, Visual analysis of the air pollution problem in Hong Kong, IEEE Transactions on
Visualization and Computer Graphics 13 (6) (2007) 1408–1415.
[20] C. A. Steed, P. J. Fitzpatrick, T.J. Jankun-Kelly, A. N. Yancey, J. Edward Swan II, An interactive parallel coordinates technique applied to a
tropical cyclone climate analysis, Computers & Geosciences 35 (7) (2009) 1529–1539.
[21] C. A. Steed, P. J. Fitzpatrick, J. Edward Swan II, T.J. Jankun-Kelly, Tropical cyclone trend analysis using enhanced parallel coordinates and
statistical analytics, Cartography and Geographic Information Science 36 (3) (2009) 251–265.
[22] C. A. Steed, T.J. Jankun-Kelly, P. J. Fitzpatrick, Guided analysis of hurricane trends using statistical processes integrated with interactive
parallel coordinates, in: IEEE Symposium on Visual Analytics Science and Technology, IEEE Computer Society, Atlantic City, NJ, 2009, pp.
19–26.
[23] W. Willett, J. Heer, M. Agrawala, Scented widgets: Improving navigation cues with embedded visualizations, IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics 13 (6) (2007) 1129–1136.
[24] C. Ahlberg, B. Shneiderman, Visual information seeking: Tight coupling of dynamic query ﬁlters with starﬁeld displays, in: Proceedings of
Human Factors in Computing Systems, Association for Computing Machinery, Boston, MA, 1994, pp. 313–317, 479–480.

