Quantiﬁcation of Uncertainty for Numerical
Simulations with Conﬁdence Intervals
James Glimm
Distinguished/Leading Professor
Dept of Applied Mathematics and Statistics
P-138A Math Tower
University at Stony Brook
Stony Brook, NY 11794-3600
Phone: +1-(516)-632-8355
FAX: +1-(516)-632-8490
glimm@ams.sunysb.edu

Abstract
We present a prediction and uncertainty assessment methodology for numerical simulation. The methodology allows prediction of conﬁdence intervals. It has
been developed jointly with a number of colleagues. It is a work in progress in the
sense that not all components of the methodology are complete. The methodology, at its present level of deveopment, will be illustrated in two speciﬁc cases:
the ﬂow of oil in petroleum reservoirs (with prediction of production rates) and
an analysis of solution errors for the simulation of shock wave interactions.
The formalism assesses uncertainty and yields conﬁdence intervals associated
with its prediction. In the terminology of veriﬁcation and validation, these predictions can be veriﬁed as exact within a framework for statistical inference, but
they are not validated as being descriptive of a physical situation. In fact the
present illustrative examples are simpliﬁed not intended to represent an experimental or engineering system.
The methodology combines new developments in the traditional areas of
oil reservoir upscaling and history matching with a new theory for numerical
solution errors and with Bayesian inference. For the shock wave simulations, the
new result is an error analysis for simple shock wave interactions.
The signiﬁcance of our methods, in the petroleum reservoir context, is their
ability to predict the risk, or uncertainty associated with production rate forecasts, and not just the production rates themselves. The latter feature of this
method, which is not standard, is useful for evaluation of decision alternatives.
For shock wave interactions, the signiﬁcance of the methodology will be to contribute to veriﬁcation and validation of simulation codes.

V.N. Alexandrov et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2001, LNCS 2073, p. 5, 2001.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2001


