Correlated, Real Time Multi-spectral Sensor Test and
Evaluation (T&E) in an Installed Systems Test Facility
(ISTF) Using High Performance Computing
1

1

1

1

John Kriz , Tom Joyner , Ted Wilson , and Greg McGraner
1

Naval Air Warfare Center – Aircraft Division (NAWC-AD), Air Combat Environment
Test & Evaluation Facility (ACETEF), Building 2109, Suite N223, Shaw Road, Patuxent River,
MD 20670 {KrizJE, JoynerTW, WilsonJE2, McgranerGL}@navair.navy.mil

Abstract. Military aircraft are increasingly dependent on the use of installed RF and
Electro-optical sensor systems and their data correlation/fusion to contend with the
increasing demands and complexities of multi-mission air warfare. Therefore,
simultaneous, and correlated, ground-based T&E of multiple installed RF and
Electro-optical (EO) sensors and avionics systems/subsystems is used to optimize
the use of scarce flight testing resources while also satisfying increasingly
sophisticated test requirements. Accordingly, it is now an accepted, and highly costeffective practice, to first conduct rigorous ground testing and evaluation (T&E) of
the installed/integrated sensors’ performance and their interaction using high fidelity
modeling and simulation with real time scene rendering. Accordingly, valid groundbased T&E of installed multi-spectral (RF, IR, Visible) sensors requires that the
simulations’ spatial, spectral and temporal components be of sufficient fidelity and
correlation to produce sensor responses that are indistinguishable from responses to
"real-world" conditions. This paper discusses accomplishment of the foregoing
goals, and fidelity challenges through innovative utilization of High Performance
Computing (HPC) parallelization, visualization, shared memory optimization and
scalability for multi-spectral modeling, simulation and real time rendering.

1. Introduction
Today’s military aircraft are increasingly dependent on a diversity of electromagnetic
sensors to provide aircrews and tactical commanders with unparalleled battle space
awareness and engagement opportunity. The missions are equally diverse in such
areas as reconnaissance, search and rescue, time vision navigation/evasion, target
acquisition, target search and track, missile warning, and terminal missile homing.
Achieving these missions requires employment of the most advanced sensors
available to provide the war fighter with the greatest possible tactical advantage.
Accordingly, multi-spectral sensors are an integral component of the flight and
mission control avionics. Consequently, overall mission performance is directly
linked to the combined performance of the onboard mission critical sensors.

V.N. Alexandrov et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2001, LNCS 2074, pp. 521–530, 2001.
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2001

522

J. Kriz et al.

1.1 Installed Sensor Testing
The foregoing critical inter-relationship necessitates extensive developmental and
operational sensor test and evaluation (T&E) of these integrated sensor/avionics
environments prior to their release for operational use. The highest fidelity of
systems performance testing occurs during flight-testing. However, it is becoming
increasingly cost prohibitive to provide all mission representative environments
during flight-testing. Therefore, the aviation community has developed ground-based
dynamic, high fidelity instrumentation capabilities to test installed aircraft sensor
subsystems. These ground-based capabilities are increasingly using correlated high
fidelity real-time simulation and stimulation to conduct T&E of the installed sensor’s
performance and interaction with other sensors integrated within the weapons system
platform. The computational challenge is to replicate the multi-spectral, temporal and
geometric fidelity of the real-world problem-domain in a virtual warfare environment.
Figure 1 illustrates the many attributes to be replicated, and correlated in real-time.

Fig. 1. The Computational Challenge: Accurately Replicate the Battle-space

1.2 Joint Installed System Test Facility (JISTF)
The combination of increasingly sophisticated test requirements and today’s declining
investments in test assets requires the coordinated and innovative development of
modeling, simulation and emerging technologies to maximize use of scarce testing
investment resources. In response to these emerging T&E needs, the Office of the
Secretary of Defense (OSD), Central Test and Evaluation Investment Program
(CTEIP), has sponsored development of three Joint Installed System Test Facility
(JISTF) enhancements based on dynamic virtual reality simulation technology.

Correlated, Real Time Multi-spectral Sensor Test and Evaluation (T&E)

523

These enhancement projects are the Communications Navigation & Identification
(CNI)/Joint Communications Simulator (JCS), Generic Radar Target Generator
(GRTG), and Infrared Sensor Stimulator (IRSS). This paper addresses the
capabilities of the JISTF GRTG and IRSS enhancements at the Air Combat
Environment Test and Evaluation Facility (ACETEF), Naval Air Warfare Center,
Aircraft Division (NAWC-AD), Patuxent River, MD, and their HPC requirements,
and utilization. GRTG and IRSS provide the capability to simultaneously test
multiple installed avionics and sensor subsystems in a ground test environment.
Moreover, they are used to evaluate multi-sensor data fusion/correlation and
subsystems’ interoperability for Communications and Data Link subsystems, GPS,
RADAR, and Infrared Sensors. Figure 2 illustrates the functional relationship of the
three upgrades within the ACETEF architecture.

Fig. 2. Functional Block Diagram of Upgrades in ACETEF Architecture

1.3 Overview of the ACETEF Enhancements
The objective of the ACETEF enhancements is to develop, install, and operationally
certify common core capability enhancements that will enable the effective testing of
advanced CNI, RADAR, Infrared (IR) and Electronic Countermeasures (ECM)
avionics subsystems. This enhanced test capability reduces the overall cost and
schedule associated with the developmental and operational testing of existing and
new avionics, sensor, and communication suites.

524

J. Kriz et al.
Audio Visual Lab
(Eagles Nest)
AIC

Operations
Control
Center

Direct Links
DREN

Manned Flight
Simulator

Instrumentation
Room

DSI

Anechoic
Chambers

Bench

SWEG “The Environment”

RF/UV/Laser
RF/IR

Shielded
Hangar
RF

Communication,
Navigation,
Identification Lab

TRAP
TADIX-B
TIBS
OTCIXS
Link-16/11

Ramp
RF

Threat Air
Defense Lab

RF

E3 Team
Warfare Simulation Team
Electronic Combat Stimulation Team

EWISTL*

“The Hardware”

Command Center
Offensive Sensor
Stimulators
EW, RADAR, IR/UV

Warfare
Simulation Lab

Electromagnetic Effects Lab

*Electronic
Warfare
Integrated
Systems
Test
Laboratory

High Performance
Computing
Mission Planning
SCRAMNET
Classified Network
Aircraft Data/Discretes
Audio/Visual Network

Aircraft Simulation Team
Simulation Support Team

Fig. 3. Functional Architecture of ACETEF Infrastructure

This new capability supplements conventional flight testing by enabling the
assessment and evaluation of system and subsystem performance over a wide range of
operational modes, threat scenarios, and Electronic Warfare (EW) environments both
prior to and during flight-testing. These assessments greatly increase the information
value and content of each flight test by focusing attention on specific preparatory high
value tests that are best be performed in the air. In addition, these assessments
provide the capability to conduct in-depth evaluations of flight test anomalies in an
installed configuration. The ACETEF infrastructure illustrated in Figure 3 includes
two anechoic chambers, a shielded hangar, associated test instrumentation, HPC
resources and laboratories capable of testing installed sensor/avionics systems.

Fig. 4. Functional Block Diagram of ACETEF Upgrade Interoperability

Correlated, Real Time Multi-spectral Sensor Test and Evaluation (T&E)

525

Figure 4 illustrates the integration and interoperability of the GRTG and IRSS
within the ACETEF infrastructure. Interoperability is achieved through a common
communications backbone, which enables the real-time executive (RTEx) control to
synchronize individual simulator/stimulator operations, the System Under Test (SUT)
and the Instrumentation Subsystem to a common test scenario. Common data bases,
standard communications interfaces, standard programming languages, and standard
simulation models all contribute to the integrated operation of the ACETEF. Modular
design principles and the use of an open architecture permit the addition of other
simulators and a free space Angle Of Arrival (AOA) system in the future. The
communications infrastructure also implements a number of standard interfaces to
avionics buses through a SUT interface. The use of common test scenarios, common
data bases and standard simulations used by hardware-in-the-loop (HITL) facilities
and Open Air Ranges (OAR) provides the linkage and traceability needed to
implement the Electronic Combat (EC) Test Process.
Additionally, their capabilities contribute to the evaluation of systems, and sensors,
during development, and engineering model development (EMD) performance
assessment. They also enable sensor test in a variety of environmental and warfare
simulations that can not be replicated on the test range.
1.4 Generic Radar Target Generator (GRTG)
The GRTG is a modular and expandable radar environment stimulator for use with
existing and emerging radar systems (e.g., Existing - F-22 APG-77, F/A-18 APG-73,
and the JSF - Future capability). It is used to verify the functionality of air-to-air
(A/A) and air-to-surface (A/S) modes (- Future capability) of radar systems. The
GRTG generates radar skin returns and surface returns, and electronic
countermeasures (ECM) against airborne radar’s operating in the I/J bands (818GHz). It is capable of simulating a maximum of four targets in the main beam of
the radar antenna. The modular design enables reconfiguration to incorporate
enhancements in other spectra bands and radar modes as necessary to accommodate
future systems. Additionally, 32 targets can be simulated in the radar field of regard
(FOR).
The GRTG can be operated in a stand-alone mode or integrated with the ACETEF
infrastructure. Signals are injected directly to the SUT radar receiver via RF cables or
radiated free space from horn antennas to the radar antenna assembly. In the case of
free space, the GRTG functions in conjunction with the angle of arrival (AOA)
subsystem to provide multiple dynamic/static angles of arrival for radar/ECM targets.
In the case of direct injection (RF), the GRTG replicates/models by-passed radar subassemblies by directly injecting the signal into the radar-processing avionics. The
GRTG is capable of both autonomous (stand-alone) testing and correlated, real time,
integrated multi-spectral testing with other simulators/stimulators (e.g., EW, IR,
GPS). The latter form of testing is accomplished with the GRTG and other
simulators/stimulators responding to an external ACETEF scenario simulation
synchronized by the real-time executive controller. Figure 5 is a block diagram of the
GRTG functional areas and relationships.

526

J. Kriz et al.

SYSTEM UNDER TEST

Real Time
Executive

Instrumentation
System

Generic Radar Target Generator
(GRTG)

Operator

Common
Databases

(Terrain, Targets,
Features)

GRTG
Controller

GRTG
DSP

Database
Management
System

RADAR
ECM
Generator

AOA
Interface

AOA
Subsystem
(Free Space)

Direct
Injection
System

Fig. 5. GRTG Functional Block Diagram

1.5 Infrared Sensor Stimulator (IRSS)
The IRSS is a modular system used to generate high fidelity Infrared (IR) scenes for
stimulation of installed IR Electro-Optic (EO) sensors installed on military aircraft
undergoing integrated developmental and operational testing. It is capable of
stimulating multiple types of sensors such as Forward Looking Infrared (FLIR),
Missile Warning Systems (MWS), Infrared Search and Track (IRST) and Missile
Seekers. It features include an open architecture, high fidelity physics-based
rendering, repeatable, dynamic real-time IR and Ultraviolet (UV) simulation, freespace scene projection and direct image signal injection stimulation capability. The
dedicated system configuration utilizes two SGI Onyx2 graphics computers and a
proprietary scene rendering system (SRS) to provide three channels of real time
sensor-specific scene simulation. With the parallel use of HPC resources, IRSS is
scalable to ten channels of simulation output. The signal injection component also
provides a sensor modeling capability for replicating sensor optics/detector
modulation transfer function and evaluating performance characteristics and
effectiveness of prototype designs (e.g., EMD). The IRSS system can operate in
stand-alone mode, or in an integrated mode with the ACETEF infrastructure.
Figure 6 is a top-level functional block diagram of the IRSS and its six subsystems.
The six subsystems are (1) Simulation Control Subsystem; (2) Scenario Development
Subsystem; (3) Modeling and Database Development Subsystem; (4) Scene
Generation Subsystem; (5) Point Source Projection Subsystem and (6) Signal
Injection Subsystem/interface. The IRSS operator and/or the real-time executive
control software provide inputs to the IRSS simulation control computer.

Correlated, Real Time Multi-spectral Sensor Test and Evaluation (T&E)

527

In the integrated mode, the ACETEF real time executive software controls IRSS
SCRAMNET interfaces, timing, and execution priorities for system models and
simulations to create a real-time virtual test environment. Scenario development
inputs are provided by an operator and/or the executive software. Inputs includes (but
are not limited to): aircraft data (position, airspeed, attitude), sensor data (FOV, FOR,
modulation transfer function (MTF), and slew rates), and gaming area environment
(targets, backgrounds and atmospherics effects). The IRSS functions in concert with
the other stimulators to perform correlated, real time, integrated multi-sensor testing.

Fig. 4. IRSS Six Primary Functional Subsystems

2. The Need for High Performance Computing (HPC) Resources
The technical challenge for the ACETEF T&E enhancements is that they be valid test
tools. Consequently, the spatial, spectral and temporal components of the computergenerated synthetic scenes/RF responses should be of sufficient fidelity to produce
sensor responses that are indistinguishable from the tested sensor’s "real-world"
responses. Two fundamental capabilities are required to accomplish the foregoing
validity objectives. First, the simulation generation equipment must have the
capability to create a valid simulation of the real-world conditions. Second, the
stimulators (RF emitters, IR scene projectors and signal injection modules) must be
capable of accepting the simulated scene, retain sufficient scene fidelity, and interface
appropriately to the sensor unit under test (UUT).

528

J. Kriz et al.

This section discusses the subtleties of accomplishing the foregoing goals, and
provides an overview of how these T&E enhancements meet the fidelity challenge.
The GRTG and IRSS have been designed to take advantage of present and future
ACETEF HPC resources. When the complexity of GRTG and IRSS test requirements
increases, HPC resources are used to augment dedicated computational systems.
Areas such as increased number and/or types of sensors to be stimulated, increased
frame rates, and scene complexity are illustrative of increased test requirements.
Figure 7 is an architectural diagram of the ACETEF HPC configuration.

Fig. 7. ACETEF High Performance Computing Architectural Configuration

The GRTG configuration is capable of utilizing HPC resources for real-time standalone scenario control. Pre-planned product improvements to the GRTG includes a
large area common terrain database server upgrade to support ultra-high-fidelity
synthetic aperture radar (SAR) processing. The terrain database will be shared
between the IRSS, and the GRTG to support multi-spectral testing. Figure 8 is an
aerial view of the ACETEF Large Anechoic Chamber with a cutaway view of an
F/A 18 and EA6B inside the chamber. Figure 9 illustrates an ACETEF multi-spectral
testing configuration in one of the two anechoic chambers. The aircraft can be
positioned on the ground or suspended from one of two 40 tons cranes located on the
test chamber ceiling.

Correlated, Real Time Multi-spectral Sensor Test and Evaluation (T&E)

Fig. 8. ACETEF Large Anechoic Chamber

Fig. 9. ACETEF Multi-Spectral Testing Configuration

529

530

J. Kriz et al.

The IRSS performance and throughput requirements for dynamic real time
rendering and physics-based accuracy necessitate use of an HPC solution.
Accordingly, the IRSS architecture employs commercial-off-the-shelf (COTS) Silicon
Graphics (SGI) fast symmetric multiprocessing hardware to minimize cost and
development time. The following functional processes illustrate the high performance
computational workload that the IRSS must satisfy.
1. IRSS provides three channels of digital video configured to support
synchronized testing of multiple EO imaging sensors on a single aircraft or individual
sensors on up to three aircraft. The architecture is scalable to a maximum of ten
channels of output using a commensurate temporary allocation of HPC resources.
2. During real-time scene simulation, the multiprocessors are used to update
polygon vertex locations and compute radiometrically correct floating-point radiance
values for each waveband. Scene radiance is calculated on a frame by frame basis
with each frame being rendered with the relevant contributions from the sky, sun,
targets, terrain, and atmosphere. The individual frame calculations are accomplished
as a function of the engagement geometry using existing validated high-fidelity IR
models for phenomenology, terrain, and targets.

3. Summary and Conclusions
The JISTF IRSS and GRTG enhancements have all been carefully designed and
developed to leverage current and future HPC resources. The IRSS enhancement is
increasingly using more of HPC assets as it pushes the limits of technology for IR
scene generation and rendering. When the GRTG and the CNI systems are upgraded
to take advantage of a multi-spectral common terrain database systems, there will be
increased reliance on HPC systems to provide the backbone for integrated multispectral testing at ACETEF. They provide the valid stimulator T&E of installed
multi-spectral (RF, IR, Visible) sensors with correlated high fidelity stimulation
spatial, spectral and temporal components that produce sensor responses that are
indistinguishable from responses to "real-world" conditions. The availability and use
of HPC resources has enabled resolution of critical issues relating to scaling, and the
accommodation of additional channels of synchronized/correlated output and
throughput limitations versus the level of scenario complexity (e.g. the content of
targets and background descriptions, and system latency.)

References
1. T. Joyner, K. Thiem, R. Robinson, R. Makar, and R. Kinzly, “Joint Navy and Air Force
Infrared Sensor Stimulator (IRSS) Program Installed Systems Test Facilities (ISTF)”,
Technologies for Synthetic Environments: Hardware-in-the-Loop Testing IV, Robert Lee
Murrer, Editor, Proceedings of SPIE Vol. 3697, pp. 11-22, 1999.
2. DoD HPC Modernization Program FY96 Implementation Plan for the Common High
Performance Computing (HPC) Software Support Initiative (CHSSI), dated October 1995

