Recent Developments of a Coupled CFD/CSD
Methodology
Joseph D. Baum1 , Hong Luo1 , Eric L. Mestreau1 , Dmitri Sharov1 ,
Rainald Löhner2 , Daniele Pelessone3 , and Charles Charman4
1

Center for Applied Computational Sciences, SAIC,
McLean, VA 22102, USA
{baum, luo, mestreau, sharov}@apo.saic.com
2
CSI, George Mason University,
Fairfax, VA 22030, USA
lohner@rossini.gmu.edu
3
Engineering and Software System Solutions,
Solana Beach, CA 92075, USA
4
General Atomics,
San Diego, CA 92121,USA

Abstract. A recently developed loose-coupling algorithm that combines
state-of-the-art Computational Fluid Dynamics (CFD) and Computational Structural Dynamics (CSD) methodologies has been applied to
the simulations of weapon-structure interactions. The coupled methodology enables cost-eﬀective simulation of ﬂuid-structure interactions with
a particular emphasis on detonation and shock interaction. The coupling incorporates two codes representing the state-of-the-art in their
respective areas: FEFLO98 for the Computational Fluid Dynamics and
DYNA3D for the Computational Structural Dynamics simulation. An
application of the methodology to a case of weapon detonation and fragmentation is presented, as well as fragment and airblast interaction with
a steel wall. Finally, we present results of simulating airblast interaction
with a reinforced concrete wall, in which concrete and steel rebar failure and concrete break-up to thousands of chunks and dust particles are
demonstrated.

1

Introduction

Several classes of important engineering problems require the concurrent application of CFD and CSD techniques. Among these are: a) Shock/structure
interactions; b) Aeroelasticity of ﬂexible thin ﬂight structures; c) Hypersonic
ﬂight vehicles (thermal-induced deformations); d) Deformation of highly ﬂexible
fabrics; and e) Vehicles with variable geometry. Currently, these problems are
solved either iteratively, requiring several cycles of ”CFD run followed by CSD
run”, or by assuming that the CFD and CSD solutions can be decoupled.
The various eﬀorts to develop a ﬂuid/structure coupling can be classiﬁed
according to the complexity level of the approximations used for each of the
V.N. Alexandrov et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2001, LNCS 2073, pp. 1087–1097, 2001.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2001
�

1088

J.D. Baum et al.

domains. Approximations of the Partial Diﬀerential Equations for the structural
mechanics range from simple 6 DOF integration to ﬁnite elements with complex
models for elasto-plastic materials with rupture laws and contact. Similarly,
the ﬂuid dynamics approximations of the PDEs range from the potential ﬂow
(irotational, inviscid, isentropic ﬂows) to the full Navier-Stokes set of equations.
Our present research interests focus on non-linear applications, in particular,
structures that experience severe deformations due to blast loads, aerodynamic
or aero-thermodynamic loads. The ﬂuid approximation chosen is either Euler or
Reynolds-Averaged Navier-Stokes. On the structure side, elasto-plastic materials
with rupture criteria are used.
In this study, the coupled CFD/CSD methodology is applied to the simulation of weapon detonation and fragmentation. This application constitutes a
very severe test to the numerical methodology as it requires modeling of several complex, interacting physical phenomena: a) Detonation wave initiation
and propagation; b) CSD modeling of case expansion and fragmentation; c) The
transfer of rigid fragments from the CSD to the CFD modules; d) Blast wave
expansion through the breaking case, diﬀracting about the ﬂying fragments; e)
Flight of thousands of rigid bodies, each treated as a separate, free-ﬂying body,
where its trajectory and velocity are determined by balance of forces and moments; and f) Fragments and airblast impact on the structure and the resulting
structural deformation.
Two approaches can be used to tackle ﬂuid/structure interaction. The socalled ’tight coupling’ approach requires solving both CFD & CSD as one coupled
set of equations, and would require the complete rewrite of both solvers. The
second approach, termed ’loose coupling’, decouples the CFD and CSD sets of
equations and uses projection methods to transfer interface information between
the CFD and CSD domains. We adopted the latter method. By building on preexisting and well- established codes, a loose-coupled solver can be assembled with
minimum modiﬁcations to either of the two solvers. The modularity is kept by the
addition of a ‘controller’ code, which handles the transfer of information between
the diﬀerent solvers [7], [11], [3]. This code handles non-matching meshes at the
interface and incorporates conservative interpolation schemes and fast techniques
for neighbor search. It deduces automatically the correspondence between ﬂuid
and structure points without any user input. Time synchronization between the
CFD and CSD solvers is also managed by the controller code, which uses a
leap-frog approach.
1.1

The Current Numerical Methodology

Mesh generation was performed using FRGEN3D, an advancing front based grid
generator [9]. This mesh generator is also included in the ﬂow solver, FEFLO98,
to handle mesh regeneration on the ﬂy. The mesher requires the input of CAD
surfaces and lines. Very complex shapes can now be meshed in a matter of hours
once the model is properly deﬁned [1], [2], [3]. However, assembling the CAD
deﬁnition of the model still remains the bottleneck, consuming large amounts of
man-hours. To remedy this deﬁciency, we have developed a dedicated graphic

Recent Developments of a Coupled CFD/CSD Methodology

1089

pre-processor, to promptly handle the speciﬁcs of the mesher/solver such as:
boundary conditions, element size deﬁnition and automatic generation of the
structural model from the predeﬁned ﬂuid domain. The pre-processor also provides extensive data checking allowing a considerable gain in productivity. For
the current study, both CFD & CSD meshes were generated with FRGEN3D.
The CFD mesh is composed of tetrahedral elements in the volume and triangles
on the surfaces. The CSD mesh includes beams, quad and triangle shells (quads
corresponds to the concatenation of 2 triangles) and bricks for the volume. The
bricks result from the cut of tetrahedral elements. Although the angles of a typical hex are less than perfect, extensive testing against perfect-angle bricks for
both linear and nonlinear tests, produced almost identical results. This, nevertheless, necessitated the replacement of the Belytschko-Tsay hourglass control
model (default model in DYNA3D [15]), with the Flanagan-Belytschko hourglass control model (model no. 3 in DYNA3D [5]), incurring a 30% performance
penalty.
The ﬂow solver is FEFLO98, a 3-D adaptive, unstructured, edge-based hydrosolver based on the Finite-Element Method Flux-Corrected Transport (FEMFCT) concept [8]. It solves the Arbitrary Lagrangean-Eulerian (ALE) formulation of the Euler and Reynolds-Averaged turbulent, Navier-Stokes equations.
The high order scheme used is the consistent-mass Taylor-Galerkin algorithm.
Combined with a modiﬁed second-order Lapidus artiﬁcial viscosity scheme, the
resulting scheme is second-order accurate in space, and fourth-order accurate in
phase. The spatial adaptation is based on local H-rﬁnement, where the reﬁnement/deletion criterion is a modiﬁed H2-seminorm [10] based on a user- deﬁned
unknown. For detonations and shock wave diﬀraction simulations, the critical
parameter used for the reﬁnement/deletion criteria is density. The explosive detonation is modeled using a JWL equation of state with afterburning. To enhance
computational eﬃciency, the portion of the ﬂuid domain not reached by the blast
wave is automatically deactivated.
The structural dynamics solver is DYNA3D [15], an unstructured, explicit
ﬁnite element code. DYNA3D is well suited for modeling large deformations and
provides a good base for non-linear materials with elasto-plastic compartmental
laws with rupture. DYNA3D incorporates a large library of materials and various
equations-of-state, as well as many kinematic options, such as slidelines and
contacts. Furthermore, DYNA3D is a well proven and benchmarked solver used
extensively in the CSD community.

2
2.1

Numerical Results
Weapon Fragmentation Study

The coupled technology has been applied to the simulation of the detonation
and fragmentation of an experimental weapon. The bomb hangs tip-down at the
center in a reinforced concrete room The thick- walled steel weapon is top (i.e.,
base) ignited. The detonation front propagates from the base to the tip at the
C-J detonation velocity, as prescribed in the detonation model (essentially, the

1090

J.D. Baum et al.

program burn model of DYNA3D). Initially, the CFD domain consisted of two
separate regions: the domain inside the case is modeled using the JWL EOS,
while the ambient atmosphere outside is modeled using a perfect gas EOS. Once
fragmentation occurred, the two topologies merged and the complete domain is
modeled using the JWL EOS.
The structural response (case expansion) is modeled using GA-DYNA [12],
[13], the General Atomics version of DYNA3D. Several CSD meshes of this
weapon were tested, using either 8-node hexahedral elements or brick-like parallelepipedal elements, and varying the number of elements from 748 to 8228.
The results presented here were obtained with 748 brick elements with a single
element across the thickness of the casing. The fragment size distribution for
the present simulation is prescribed. This value was obtained by averaging
fragment sizes from several arena tests. A more accurate procedure is described
below [14].
After ignition, as the detonation wave propagates from the base to the tip,
the high-pressure detonation products force the case to expand. The structural
elements fail once the element strain (averaged over all faces) exceeds 100%. The
strain criterion for failure is computed at the center of each element. Each failing
fragments is then treated as a separate rigid body, for which the trajectory is
computed using a 6 DOF integrator linked to the contact algorithms. Once bricks
fail, ﬂuid elements are introduced into the narrow gaps separating the fragments.
The gaps are of the order of a millimeter, which would result in unacceptable
small ﬂuid elements and small integration time step. The gap size was increased
by shrinking the fragments uniformly around the center of gravity. The topology
change due to the breakup requires remeshing of at least part of the domain, a
CPU intensive process that is allowed to occur only every 5-8 µs. Thus, the CSD
code maintains a list of failed elements, and shrinks them only when allowed.
One important aspect of this class of simulations is the large size disparity
between the critical length scales. After fragment break-up, the gap between
fragments is several millimeters. In contrast, the average fragment length is
about ten centimeters, and the room length is of the order of ten meters. The
large disparity in dimensions forced us to attach to each ﬂying fragment entities
called grid sources. The sources enforce local pre-speciﬁed element size, ensuring
a uniform, high-resolution mesh about each fragment, and thereby reduce the
number of local and global remeshings. Figures 1a through 1c show the CSD
surface mesh, the CFD mesh on a planar cut through the weapon (not a plane
of symmetry due to the lack of symmetry for this weapon), and the CFD surface
mesh, respectively, at 550 µs. The results show the ﬁnely-resolved mesh within
the initial HE zone, resulting from the application of a grid source placed along
the center of the weapon. On the weapon we form a much ﬁner CFD mesh than
the CSD mesh, with rapid increase of mesh size with distance from the weapon.
The range-of-inﬂuence of the centerline-placed source was speciﬁed to produce a
ﬁne-resolution mesh not just within the HE zone, but also around the complete
volume in which fragmentation occurs after case expansion. As the fragments
exit the ﬁne-resolution zone imposed by the central source, CFD mesh resolution

Recent Developments of a Coupled CFD/CSD Methodology

1091

is reduced to the level speciﬁed by the sources attached to the fragment. This can
clearly be seen on the third row from the top, where mesh resolution is reduced
from several elements across each fragment at t=0, to three elements at t=350
µs, and ﬁnally two elements at t=550 µs (Fig 1c). Finally, examination of the
planar cut results (Fig 1b) shows that the mesh size dictated by the sources is
dependent on the fragment and face size. Sources attached to the smaller moving
faces yield a ﬁner mesh resolution than those attached to the larger ones. Thus,
at t=550 µs, the large fragments that are outside the core central source (such
as the rows 4, 15 and 17), show coarse mesh resolution on the large faces, but
ﬁne resolution within the gaps and the near-by faces.

Fig. 1. CSD mesh, CFD mesh on a plane cut and CFD mesh on the surface of the
weapon at t=0.550ms

During case expansion, the internal mesh velocity signiﬁcantly exceeds the
external velocity, resulting in case thinning. On average, while the CG of the
element experiences a 100% strain (break-up criteria), the internal face expands
about 145-160%, compared to about 70-80% for the external face. This indicates that during a signiﬁcant portion of the expansion period, the internal face
velocity is about twice the external face velocity.
Figures 2a through 2d show a sequence of snapshots. At each time, the panel
shows the pressure and CFD mesh velocity contours on a planar cut through
the weapon, and the CSD fragment velocity contours. Figure 2a at 131 µs shows
detonation wave propagation down (from base to tip) as a planar front, and the
radial expansion of the case. The ﬁrst fragment break-up occurs at 94 µs, for the
upper row attached to the heavy base. While the base itself does not fragment,
as it does not expand signiﬁcantly, the row of elements below fails due to shear,
not tension. Similarly, the layer of fragments above the nose cone fails due to
shear (Fig 2c at 370 µs). Detonation was completed at about t=263 µs and the
shock reﬂected upward (Fig 2b).

1092

J.D. Baum et al.

Fig. 2. Propagation of detonation wave and case fragmentation. Results show pressure,
mesh velocity, and fragment velocity at times 131 µs, 370 µs, and 600 µs, respectively.

The relatively small spacing between the expanding fragments ensures that
the high-pressure detonation products would be fairly contained within the expanding fragments for an extended period. The results demonstrate that even
at t=0.6 ms (Fig 2d), the pressure within the core is signiﬁcantly higher than
outside.
The fragments achieve their terminal velocity within about 120-150 µs after detonation front passage. This is signiﬁcantly slower then the acceleration
period of 60-90 µs for a serrated weapon [4]. The ﬁnal mass-averaged fragment
velocity obtained for this simulation, using a strain break-up value of 1.0, was
787.6 m/sec. The experimental measured value was 752 m/sec. To examine the
role of the break-up strain value on the ﬁnal velocity we conducted three more
simulations, at break-up strain values of 0.1 (Vf =675.53 m/sec), 0.5 (Vf =741.8
m/sec), and inﬁnity (no break-up, Vf =859.7 m/sec). The results show that the
experimental data indicates a break-up strain value of about 0.6, a value that
corresponds to an internal expansion of about 90%, and external expansion of
about 50%.
A total of ﬁve simulations were conducted under this study, investigating the
role of the break-up strain value on the ﬁnal fragmentation velocity distribution,
and single vs. multiple elements through the case thickness. The initial mesh for
each simulation included about 8.7 million elements, the ﬁnal one about 19.2 million elements. The ﬁve simulations conducted averaged about ﬁve days on a SGI
Origin 2000, using twelve to sixteen processors. Once remeshing parallelization
was completed, CPU time was cut to less than a day.
2.2

Blast Impact on a Reinforced Concrete Wall

As the next step in the CFD/CSD coupling development eﬀort, we applied the
coupled methodology to the simulation of airblast interaction with reinforced

Recent Developments of a Coupled CFD/CSD Methodology

1093

concrete wall. The model included two rooms, but only the connecting wall was
modeled with the CSD code. All other structural components (e.g., other walls,
ﬂoor and ceiling) were treated as rigid. The CFD domain consisted of 9,387
boundary points, 55,281 points and 296,751 elements. The wall included 81,101
nodes, 69,048 solid hexahedron elements in the concrete and 598 beam points
in the steel rebars. While the CFD solution was non- adapted, three levels of
mesh adaptation [12] were in the CSD model. The standard DYNA3D element
erosion model was used to eliminate failed CSD elements.
Several new schemes were employed here. These include: 1) A recently developed crack propagation model [14] that takes advantage of the CSD H-reﬁnement
scheme. As the crack propagates through the material, mesh adaptation is used
to ensure the accuracy of the stress wave propagation, and the accurate agglomeration of the elements into discrete fragments. This approach alleviates the need
for expensive arena test data. The new model was validated against data for two
test [14]; 2) The adaptation procedure ensures that each fragment contains several elements. As the elements fail and fragments are formed, each is treated
by GA-DYNA as an independent body, with the appropriate volume, mass, momentum and energy. GA-DYNA then keeps track of fragment-to-fragment and
fragment-to-wall interactions through a contact algorithm. GA-DYNA transfers
the information to FEFLO98, which treats every fragment as a sphere, allowing for accurate momentum and energy exchange (e.g., drag and heat transfer);
and 3) A new model that allows rebar data to be interpolated from enclosing
elements, in contrast to the original DYNA3D that required all nodes to be on
the rebar itself.
Figure 3 shows several snapshots taken during the simulation. Fig. 3a shows
the CSD mesh as shown on the surface. Notice that the CSD elements were
generated by splitting the CFD elements (as clearly seen on the sides). The
steel rebars are shown in Fig 3b. The concrete material used was intentionally
’softened’ to produce faster wall break-up (for testing and debugging purposes).
Hence, the signiﬁcant damage shown in Fig. 3c, after only 400 time steps. Each
element face is given a uniform color corresponding to the value of the element
damage parameter. No nodal averaging was performed. Figures 3d, 3e and Figs
3d, 3g show a pair of snapshots (front and back) taken early and late in the
run, respectively. The ﬁgures show the computed geometry as realized by the
CSD code (Figs 3d and 3f), and as realized by the CFD code (Figs 3e and 3g).
While the CSD code integrates all structural matter, including all the produced
debris, small particles and dust, not all information is transferred to the CFD
code. Only information about large chunks and large fragments is transferred to
the CFD code. These are treated by the CFD code as moving bodies. Thus, the
CFD code computes the motion of hundreds of moving bodies, evaluating the
forces acting on them and the resulting trajectories. Small particles and dust
trajectories are carried by the CSD code, and only the momentum and energy
transfer information is exchanged with the CFD code, so that the CFD code can
accurately compute energy dissipation due the drag and thermal losses imposed
by the ﬂying smaller, cooler particles. Figures 3h and 3i show a superposition of

1094

J.D. Baum et al.

Fig. 3. This ﬁgure shows the initial CSD mesh, and the structural response to blast.
The ﬁgures show the CSD surface mesh (Fig 3a); the rebar pattern (Fig 3b); the element
damage parameter after 400 steps (Fig 3c); the CSD and CFD surface realizations at
early time (Figs 3d and 3e), and late time (Figs 3f and 3g), respectively; a superimposed
pressure contours and adapted CSD mesh at an early time on the front and back faces
of the damaged wall (Figs 3h and 3i, respectively).

Recent Developments of a Coupled CFD/CSD Methodology

1095

pressure contours and CSD mesh on both sides of the wall. The results show the
typical damaged concrete pattern: a crown in the blast room and spallation web
on the opposite side. Notice the complex connectivity through the concrete that
allows the high pressure to emerge through the other side of the wall: from the
peripheral crown to the centered spall zone. Three levels of mesh adaptation are
shown in these ﬁgures. The adapted CSD mesh enables accurate prediction of
the spallation, crack propagation, element failure and fragment formation, which
expose the rebars on the spalled side.
2.3

Blast Fragment Impact on a Steel Chamber

The coupled CFD/CSD methodology was applied to the simulation of airblast
and fragment interaction with a steel walled chamber. While the CFD solution
was non-adapted, three levels of mesh adaptation [Pe97] were in the CSD model.
The standard DYNA3D element erosion model was used to eliminate failed CSD
elements.
The numerical predictions show that the impacting weapon fragments arrive
ahead of the airblast (Fig 4a), punching holes through the plate (Figs 4b, 4c
and 4e). Next, the pressure blast from the detonation tears the weakened plate
apart (Figs 4d and 4f). The eroded plate elements were converted into particles
that can interact with the rest of the structure. Contact conditions were enforced
between all entities of the model, thus avoiding simulation break due to fragments
coming in contact with each other and eliminating the CFD mesh in between.
Signiﬁcant CPU cost reduction was achieved by the allowing the CSD code to
model convection of the small broken pieces. The CFD code handles these pieces
as spheres with the correct eﬀective radius, modeling only the momentum (drag)
and energy exchange between the blast and the spheres. Hence, the information
transferred from the CSD to the CSD module is reduced to the minimal sphere
data (radius, density, velocity vector and temperature).

3

Summary and Conclusions

A recently developed loose-coupling algorithm that combines state-of-the-art
Computational Fluid Dynamics (CFD) and Computational Structural Dynamics (CSD) methodologies, has been applied to the simulation of weapon detonation and fragmentation. This application required modeling several complex
and interacting physical phenomena. In addition to the loose coupling of two
state-of-the-art codes, FEFLO98 and DYNA3D, several new routines were developed to allow better communications between the codes, especially during
case fragmentation. The results demonstrate the ability of the coupled methodology to handle these processes and yield results that are in good agreement
with experimental data. While other techniques may be used to model weapon
fragmentation, the advantage of the coupled CFD/CSD methodology is that in
addition to the fragment size and velocity distribution, it also yields an accurate description of the airblast environment. The resulting fragment and airblast
predictions can then be used to predict the target response to the attack.

1096

J.D. Baum et al.

Fig. 4. Figures 4a shows the initial fragment position; Fig. 4b shows the surface immediately after fragment impact (t=0.2 ms); Figs 4c and 4e show the steel surface at
t=0.5ms, after fragment impact but before airblast impact, while Figs 4d and 4f show
the complete repture of the steel plate after blast impact.

Recent Developments of a Coupled CFD/CSD Methodology

4

1097

Acknowledgements

This research eﬀort was supported by the Defense Threat Reduction Agency. Dr.
Michael E. Giltrud, served as the contract technical monitors. Computer time
was generously provided by the DOD High Performance Computing Modernization Oﬃce (HPCMO).

References
1. J.D. Baum, H. Luo, and R. Löhner : Numerical Simulation of a Blast Inside a
Boeing 747; AIAA-93-3091 (1993).
2. J.D. Baum, H. Luo and R. Löhner : Numerical Simulation of Blast in the World
Trade Center; AIAA-95-0085 (1995).
3. J.D. Baum, H. Luo, R. Löhner, C. Yang, D. Pelessone and C. Charman : A Coupled Fluid/Structure Modeling of Shock Interaction with a Truck; AIAA-96-0795
(1996).
4. J.D. Baum, H. Luo and R. Löhner : The Numerical Simulation of Strongly Unsteady Flows With Hundreds of Moving Bodies; AIAA-98-0788 (1998).
5. T. Belytschko, and J.I. Lin : A Three-Dimensional Impact-Penetration Algorithm
with Erosion; Computers and Structures, Vol. 25 No. 1, p 95, 1986.
6. D.J., Benson, and J.O. Hallquist : A single surface contact algorithm for the postbuckling analysis of shell structures; Computational Methods in Applied Mechanics
and Engineering, Vol. 78, No. 2 p 141, 1990.
7. J.R. Cebral and R. Löhner : Conservative Load Transfer for Fluid-StructureThermal Simulations; Proc. 4th WCCM, Buenos Aires, Argentina, July (1998).
8. R. Löhner, K. Morgan, J. Peraire and M. Vahdati : Finite Element Flux-Corrected
Transport (FEM-FCT) for the Euler and Navier-Stokes Equations; Int. J. Num.
Meth. Fluids 7, 1093-1109 (1987).
9. R. Löhner and P. Parikh : Three-Dimensional Grid Generation by the Advancing
Front Method; Int. J. Num. Meth. Fluids 8. 1135-1149(1988).
10. R. Löhner and J.D. Baum : Adaptive H-Reﬁnement on 3-D Unstructured Grids
for Transient Problems; Int. J. Num. Meth. Fluids 14, 1407-1419 (1992).
11. R. Löhner, C. Yang, J. Cebral, J.D. Baum, H. Luo, D. Pelessone and C. Charman
: Fluid- Structure Interaction Using a Loose Coupling Algorithm and Adaptive
Unstructured Grids; AIAA-95-2259 (1995).
12. D. Pelessone, and C.M. Charman : An Adaptive Finite Element Procedure for
Structural Analysis of Solids; 1997 ASME Pressure Vessels and Piping Conference,
Orlando, Florida, July (1997).
13. D. Pelessone and C.M. Charman : A General Formulation of a Contact Algorithm
with Node/Face and Edge/Edge Contacts; 1998 ASME Pressure Vessels and Piping
Conference, San Diego, Ca, July (1998).
14. D. Pelessone, C.M. Charman, R. Löhner and J.D. Baum : A new Crack Propagation
Algorithm for modeling Weapon Fragmentation; in preparation.
15. R.G. Whirley and J.O. Hallquist : DYNA3D, A Nonlinear Explicit, ThreeDimensional Finite Element Code for Solid and Structural Mechanics - User Manual; UCRL-MA-107254 (1991), also Comp. Meth. Appl. Mech. Eng. 33, 725-757
(1982).

