Analysis of the Argumentative Eﬀect of
Evaluative Semantics in Natural Language
Serge V. Gavenko
Moscow State Linguistic University
Usacheva St., 62-510, Moscow 119048 Russia
serge.gavenko@mtu-net.ru

Abstract. The article deals with the semantic aspect of the argumentative discourse. Argumentation has long been studied in the realm of
the rhetorical science, though a research into the functioning of linguistic
means on which any verbal human interaction is based can present to
us some subtle mechanisms that subconsciously govern the process of
persuasion and decision-making. The particular research reﬂected in this
paper tries to cast some light upon argumentative power of evaluative semantics. A person who has to make a decision about something, attaches
a certain value to it; by building argumentative discourse while employing and operating evaluative notions, authors are able to lead addressees
to a certain desired attitude. The highest appeal have sublimated (ethical, aesthetical, emotive) evaluations, though evaluations, based on perceptive sensations may be propelled to have sublimated charge. Such a
mechanism is the major point of investigation in the present paper.

1

Argumentation as a Multi-discipline Object

The present research is based on the analysis of evaluative semantics derived
from the notion of sense perception used in argumentative discourse. It reﬂects
the development of the study in evaluative semantics of argumentation in the
course of my Ph.D. research. This paper will concentrate on a narrower ﬁeld that of perceptive evaluations, giving though some insight of the latter’s interrelation with other kinds of evaluations.
There are many deﬁnitions of argumentation used in various ﬁelds of knowledge.
A number of theories in various disciplines are involved; these theories will be
diﬀerent according to their object of analysis, their aims, and their methods.
Viewed from a rhetorical point of view argumentation can be deﬁned as a process
of proving the validity of some thesis by presenting arguments and counterarguments, evaluating them, and creating in the hearers’ minds a belief in the truth
and acceptability of the thesis. A distinction has been drawn between logical
proof and argumentation; for the former does not concern itself with gaining the
agreement of the listener (reader), unlike argumentation, which, for that matter, is a very personal aﬀair, oriented at the audience. An Armenian philosopher
and logician, G. Brutyan [3], enlarges the notion of argumentation with the idea
V.N. Alexandrov et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2001, LNCS 2073, pp. 979–988, 2001.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2001
�

980

S.V. Gavenko

that apart from the abovesaid, in argumentation “there are given reasons for
accepting the thesis with an aim to work out an active social position and carry
out certain programs and actions that follow from it”.
The same perspective is employed in the deﬁnition by Encyclopedia Britannica:
“Argumentation, whether it be called rhetorical or dialectical, always aims at
persuading or convincing the audience to whom it is addressed of the value of the
theses for which it seeks assent”. But there is more to argumentation than the
usual logical and rhetoric views, observed for hundreds of years. But it stands
to reason that argumentative impact and the success of an act of argumentation depend both on the correctness of the discourse as seen from the point of
view of rhetoric laws (the order in which the thesis, arguments and examples
are introduced), as well as on the semantics of the linguistic units used in the
thesis and arguments. A relatively new approach deals with the question of what
argumentation, like all human verbal interaction, is built on, i.e. the language
and the laws governing its functioning.
From this point of view, argumentation is a complex of linguistic means used
for inﬂuencing humans’ behavior (i.e. as a factor causing to accept this or that
decision) as well as a special type of discourse (alongside description, narration,
teaching, analysis, etc.). Such a discourse may be characterized by special communicative and illocutionary aims.
From the point of view of semiotics argumentation may be viewed as a particular
sort of communication having a certain eﬀect on the addressee’s mind, which is
organized by the producer of the speech in accordance with the accepted norms
of argumentative discourse. Thus, from the point of view of linguistic structures
argumentation is seen as functioning of certain elements of the language; from
the point of view of the cognitive approach the linguistic study of argumentation is a part of the investigation into the mental models and communicational
models of humans.
A person hearing about an event or a thing in evaluative terms is bound to
produce his own attitude to the discussed thing - agreeing with the speaker’s
assessment or not. If a person accepts a given thesis, he evaluates the latter as
having a certain value to him. An opponent must be presented solid evidence in
support of the virtues of the discussed point both logically and linguistically, so
the person giving arguments may in his turn use some evaluative lexical units
to subtly lead the hearer towards the positive assessment in favour of the point
being proven. In other words, it is possible to suggest evaluative ideas in the
linguistic composition of an act of argumentation.

2

The Role of Evaluative Factor in Argumentation

An argumentative appeal to the evaluative factors is one of most powerful means
of argumentation in natural language. Evaluations possess an argumentative
charge themselves in the sense that to assess a thing is to make a decision
about it. Therefore, the main purpose of evaluation may be viewed as not to
report about facts, but to make an inﬂuence. An evaluative attitude is in itself a

Analysis of the Argumentative Eﬀect of Evaluative Semantics

981

pragmalinguistic category, which inﬂuences the semantic structure of the lexical
meaning of words used in argumentative discourse. ‘Recommendational’ power
of evaluation, especially addressing emotiveness, is an argument.
The main purpose of evaluative judgements is not to report about facts but
to inﬂuence people. In the light of the abovesaid my work argues that one of
the most inﬂuential means of persuading (and in this sense, persuading subconsciously) is the appeal to assessing things and events from the point of view
of evaluations based on notions of sense perception - the initial human way of
knowing the world. It should be interesting to analyse the work of evaluative
meanings of lexical units which ground their semantic bases in various perceptional sensations.
In other words, we are trying to prove the statement that linguistic evaluations
possess argumentative meanings. In the simplest terms this might be presented
in the following way: “by default” in most usual situations and pictures of the
world pairs like “bright - dark”, “warm - cold”, etc. represent in their ﬁrst elements more generally accepted positive notions. Thus, if ideas that possess a
positive charge in them are used in describing a point, they are likely to create
a positive aura in the attitude to this point in the mind of the recipient. In
any case, the subtler the evaluation is, the more likely it is to have an eﬀect of
agreement in the listener, proving to him the sound basis for the virtues of the
thing in question.
I am grounding my categories of evaluations on the classiﬁcation by a Russian linguist N.D.Arutyunova [1]. Evaluations - with the degree of subtlety (and
argumentative power) ascending - are: perceptive or hedonistic; psychological
(intellectual and emotive); aesthetic; ethical; utilitarian; normative; and ﬁnally teleological. Evaluations having a higher level of sublimity appeal to rational and
humanitarian standards in people creating thus a powerful means of inﬂuence,
making people agree with just and positive features of things as described by
the author.
My task here is to see how evaluations based on sense perception come to possess
features of higher levels - ethical and aesthetical values. In order to understand
the way this mechanism works it is necessary to take into consideration three
aspects: qualities of the basic meaning of the word; qualities of the new meaning,
i.e. various evaluative meanings; and the connection between the basic and the
ﬁnal meanings. In the latter we see the moment of transition from a descriptive
ﬁeld to evaluative one, reconstructing the semantic development which describes
the quality in focus at such a transition. In simple terms - why the idea of “coldness” in the assessment of somebody’s behavior is ethically less praised than
that of “warmness”.
According to a well-known theory of Ch. Stevenson [7], language is used by
humans descriptively and dynamically. In the realm of the ﬁrst usage people’s
knowledge and views are stored, processed, enriched, distributed among people
and passed on to other generations. In case of the dynamic usage people give
way to feelings, form beliefs and attitudes toward events, and, most importantly
for our case, accept motives for performing certain actions.

982

S.V. Gavenko

The same view is held by an English researcher, I.A. Richards [6], who names
the functions of the language as referential (a mere statement about an event,
when words are used for pointing at the referent) and emotive (used for expressing feelings and attitudes to things and events, as well as making others feel
and think the same way). In other schools of linguistics these two functions of
language are called illocutional and perlocutional respectively.
The pragmatic aim of argumentative acts belongs to the dynamic (emotive or
perloctive) function of the language. As was mentioned, it is understood as making a speciﬁc inﬂuence on the addressee’s mind with the help of linguistic means
built up according to the accepted in the given culture argumentative principles.
The result which the speaker tries to achieve while carrying out such speech
acts is to persuade his opponent by verbal means, inﬂuence his choice of picking
alternatives in the process of making decisions, and, as a result, conduct his
behavior in certain ways.
When speaking about axiological (evaluative) meanings of lexical units it is necessary to mention the fact that besides words carrying direct evaluative meanings, there exist such descriptive lexical units which are not characterized in
their dictionary deﬁnitions as possessing any kind of evaluation. Nevertheless,
despite the initial “descriptiveness” of their usage, the latter may be ﬁlled with
evaluative meanings depending on the context, which, in its turn, leads to their
pragmatic functioning, and in particular, to argumentative meanings.
As a tentative analysis based on such a perception of argumentative discourse I
would like to oﬀer the following. For the analysis I chose rather a speciﬁc text: it
is a piece of forensic discourse. Even though it naturally dictates a certain array
of rules governing this very type of speech communication, it still uses English with the general realia true to this language. My aim here is not to trace the peculiarities of forensic language within the English verbal communication; rather
it is to outline the features true to the language in general. In further research I
am intending to use materials from various speech styles. This will reveal what
similar features are employed by the language as a representation of a particular
culture. The analysis does not claim to be reﬂecting the state of things in the
language with total precision; this is the beginning of a search for patterns of
evaluative meanings in the mentality of a national culture.

3

A Sample Analysis

The analysis is based on the transcripts of edited and narrated oral court arguments in Roe v. Wade argued on December 13, 1971 in Texas, USA (Edited
Supreme Court Opinions Roe v. Wade in [4, pp. 23-45]). Arguments for and
against abortion on the territory of the United States of America represent
heated debates due to the fact that the subject itself raises highly subjective
feelings of both the supporters and antagonists on the issue of abortion, which
in its turn is reﬂected in the character of the speeches.
The aim of this analysis is to try to determine the connectives of evaluative
judgements with their perceptive basements in acts of argumentation, and the

Analysis of the Argumentative Eﬀect of Evaluative Semantics

983

role the latter play in inﬂuencing recipient’s process of decision-making.
A.N. Baranov in his work on the argumentative culture [2] notes that “lexical
meanings of many words that are not even oriented at argumentative dialog, at
the same time are not at all strange to argumentative meanings”. For example
Baranov shows that the most usual procedure for introducing a thesis is “employing an explicative modus with verbs of expressing opinion (in the ﬁrst person
singular, present indeﬁnite tense): suppose, think, consider, etc. Such words introduce proposition, the truth of which it is necessary to prove”. A rhetoric aim
here is to show one’s awareness of the problem and oﬀer the interlocutors to
discuss the truth of the claims. By these means it is also shown that the speaker
oﬀers a subjective opinion (i.e. anticipates a possible criticism of his point).
In the analysed text the theses are introduced by verbal constructions in the
ﬁrst person (sg. and pl.) as well as by inﬁnitive phrases with the semantic basis
on moduses of visual perception and tactile feelings, and of something which we
suggest calling “an inner feeling”. The latter is especially true in case of women,
which can be viewed as the tendency of women to appeal to intuition (a certain
“sixth sense”) with further use of emotionally colored evaluations in their acts
of argumentation.
When introducing a thesis, people more than often use words dealing with visual
perception. Almost all of them are synonymous to the moduses of explicative
opinion mentioned by Baranov: as I see it, as we see it. Descriptive in their
initial meaning, these lexical units introduce the proposition, with an implicit
idea that it is a subjective opinion, inviting the opponent to observe it from his
own point of view, and (hopefully) accept as true.
Next group of visual moduses concern themselves, on the other hand, with setting objective backgrounds for the oﬀered thesis, they try to point out the real
state of things in the world: in view of the fact that, in the light of:
In view of all this, we do not agree that, by adopting one theory of life, Texas may
override the rights of the pregnant woman that are at stake.
With respect to the State’s important and legitimate interest in the health of the mother,
the “compelling” point, in the light of present medical knowledge, is at approximately
the end of the ﬁrst trimester.

Therefore, an opponent is forced to make a conclusion based on a self-evident
thesis with which he initially is bound to agree, as provided by the speaker.
The word apparent has a rather strong argumentative appeal, and it prompts
the listener not to doubt the truth of the claim; thus, it is an objective-based
evaluation:
The detriment that the State would impose upon the pregnant woman by denying this
choice altogether is apparent. Speciﬁc and direct harm medically diagnosable even in
early pregnancy may be involved.

The word insight (for such insights as the history may aﬀord us), in the meaning
“example” (in-sights) tells us that the review of facts from the past will open
to us new perspectives for deciding on the main issue, therefore justifying the
necessity of a historical overview and making us pay a special attention to the
oﬀered facts:

984

S.V. Gavenko

Before addressing this claim, we feel it desirable to brieﬂy survey, in several aspects, the
history of abortion, for such insight as that history may aﬀord us, and then to examine
the state purposes and interests behind the criminal abortion laws.

The expression to color one’s thinking and conclusions has a clearly evaluative
motivation behind it, though a certain vagueness as to whether the expression
has a negative or positive connotation makes this evaluation ambivalent (the
immediate understanding of the phrase can vary from “inﬂuence = pressure” to
“make picturesque”):
One’s philosophy, one’s experiences, one’s exposure to the raw edges of human existence, one’s religious training, one’s attitudes towards life and family and their values,
and the moral standards one establishes and seeks to observe, are all likely to inﬂuence
and to color one’s thinking and conclusions about abortion.

An adequate understanding of this lexical unit is possible only in the context.
In this case the expression reﬂects the diﬃculty of the abortion problem and the
validity of the reasons given by the supporters on the both sides. Therefore, the
speaker calls on the participants to give the problem some serious attention. The
same is true of the phrase vigorous opposite views:
We forthwith acknowledge our awareness of the sensitive and emotional nature of the
abortion controversy, of the vigorous opposite views, even among physicians, and of the
deep and seemingly absolute convictions that the subject inspires.

In these two instances the modus of visual perception is a basis for intellectual
evaluation (according to the classiﬁcation by N.D. Arutyunova).
The following quotation may serve as an example of an unsuccessful argumentative act:
Mr. Chief Justice, and may it please the Court. It’s an old joke, but when a man argues
against two beautiful ladies like this, they are going to have the last word.
(Narrator: No one laughed. Chief Justice Burger looked annoyed. After an embarraced
silence, Jay Floyd argued that the case was moot because Jane Roe was no longer pregnant.)

Texas Assistant Attorney General Jay Floyd began his argumentation with a
joke that “when a man argues against two beautiful ladies like this, they are
going to have the last word”. The aesthetic evaluation based on visual perception which is used here is by itself a positive one, but it violated one of Grice’s
maxims (relevance of the information used), especially being incongruous when
used in the court room during important hearings. (This is also shown by the
narrator’s remarks.)
A.N.Baranov showed that in many cases an appeal to the listener is loaded with
some precursory qualities: epistemic (reﬂecting the speaker’s assessment of the
possibilities for the alternatives) and axiologic (showing the degree of desirability
of this or that answer of the opponent). From this perspective such examples as
as I see it and as we see it may be characterized as epistemic, for they just rep-

Analysis of the Argumentative Eﬀect of Evaluative Semantics

985

resent one of the points of view on this issue, giving the interlocutor freedom to
make his own judgements. Other observed examples have axiologic backgrounds
because they forward addressees’ evaluations on to certain routes.
Further use of evaluative judgements based on visual perception (arguments,
counterarguments, examples, conclusions) are grounded on the same principles.
For instance, while interpreting The Constitution as having certain rights, it was
mentioned that
...these decisions make it clear that not only personal rights that can be deemed “fundamental”... are included in this guarantee of personal privacy. They also make it clear
that the right has some extension to activities relating to marriage, ...procreation, ...
contraception, ...family relations, ...and child rearing and education.

The repetition of the phrase make it clear states an unarguable truth of such
information and is the basis for normative (rational) evaluation.
In the course of the pro-choice supporters’ arguments it was stated that the laws
of Texas are unconstitutionally vague, thus giving the basis for negative normative and utilitarian (rational) evaluations:
Roe alleged that she was unmarried and pregnant; that she wished to terminate her pregnancy by an abortion “performed by a competent, licensed physician, under safe, clinical
conditions”; that she was unable to get a “legal” abortion in Texas because her life did
not appear to be threatened by the continuation of her pregnancy; and that she could
not aﬀord to travel to another jurisdiction to in order to secure a legal abortion under
safe conditions. She claimed that the Texas statutes were unconstitutionally vague and
that they abridged her right of personal privacy, protected by the First, Fourth, Fifth,
Ninth, and Fourteenth Amendments.

Truly, a law cannot have such a characteristic, and this remark calls for attention
in order to clear things out and make the law understandable.
Same aims as the modus of visual perception are served by haptic (tactile) perception; it can be the basis for intellectual and normative evaluations. When
speaking about the diﬃculties of the discussed issue and about the variety of
the points of view, someone used an expression one’s exposure to the raw edges
of human existence, in which the metaphor for the hardships of life is based on
the emotionally-utilitarian evaluation expressed by the phrase raw edges:
One’s philosophy, one’s experiences, one’s exposure to the raw edges of human existence, one’s religious training, one’s attitudes towards life and family and their values,
and the moral standards one establishes and seeks to observe, are all likely to inﬂuence
and to color one’s thinking and conclusions about abortion.

It was found that in the analysed text emotional evaluations are very often built
on tactile perception. As other examples of emotionally colored evaluations the
following may serve: aesthetic evaluation in deformed or defective child, a repetition of the phrase she has no relief, which also carries negative hedonistic
evaluation:
If the pregnancy would result in the birth of a deformed or defective child, she has no
relief. Regardless of the circumstances of conception, whether it was because of rape,
incest, whether she is extremely immature, she has no relief.

986

S.V. Gavenko

and also the verb to disrupt as referred to life, body, education, family life and
work:
I think it’s without question that pregnancy to a woman can completely disrupt her life.
It disrupts her body; it disrupts her education; it disrupts her employment; and it often
disrupts her entire family life.

All of the examples mentioned above belong to women, and this supports the
idea that women have a tendency to inﬂuence interlocutors more with the help
of emotionally colored arguments rather than merely rational ones. Of course
such a conclusion should not follow solely from the presented here relatively insuﬃcient number of examples; but it does serve as proof for conclusions about
gender diﬀerences in verbal communication drawn by a number of linguists,
among whom is D. Tannen [8]. Therefore, the meanings of evaluative nouns also
possess a certain situational aspect, which is deﬁned as additional information
about conditions and participants of the communication process.
For the speech of males, at least in the analysed text, a very characteristic feature is the use of the so-called war metaphors. It concerns teleologic evaluations
based on tactile perception (important impact, thrust of an attack), when speaking about the eﬀectiveness of some actions:
The principal thrust of appellant’s attack on the Texas statutes is that they improperly
invade a right, said to be possessed by the pregnant woman, to chose to terminate her
pregnancy.

The original bases for these metaphors (along with the word “invade”) are completely obscure now, and for the most part they are widely used without referring
to “struggle” or “ﬁght”, though the choice of these very phrases has an argumentative aim to make a special impact on the ones who make decisions in this
situation.
We called the “inner sense” mentioned above as the basis for a number of evaluations that for the most part (but not always!) characterize the speech of women.
Here we include purely emotional evaluations (i.e. emotional by themselves, without context inﬂuencing), psychological evaluations and those, based on intuition
(“sixth sense”). In the latter category we may include the normative evaluations
“emotional response”, “feel that”, “feel it desirable”:
a.

• Obviously, I have a much more diﬃcult time saying that the state has no
interest in late pregnancy.
• Why? Why is that?
• I think it is more the emotional response to late pregnancy, rather than any
constitutional...
• Emotional response by whom?
• I guess by persons considering the issue outside the legal context. The Constitution, as I see it, gives protection to people after birth.
b. Before addressing this claim, we feel it desirable to brieﬂy survey, in several aspects,
the history of abortion, for such insight as that history may aﬀord us, and then to
examine the state purposes and interests behind the criminal abortion laws.

Analysis of the Argumentative Eﬀect of Evaluative Semantics

987

which provide ground for utilitarian evaluations from the point of view of subjective opinion (in this case these are the synonyms for the observed above
subjective evaluations based on visual perception as I/we see it).
Besides, such phrases as “troubling question, passionate argument, sensitive and
emotional nature, vigorous opposite views, unsettled and unsettling issue, novel
and shocking opinion, distress, distressful life and future” appeal to emotional
and hedonistic evaluations based on inner feelings of humans:
a. The Court’s opinion brings to the decision of this troubling question both extensive
and historical fact and a wealth of legal scholarship.
b. Since then, Americans have spent thousands of hours in passionate argument on
this issue.
c. We forthwith acknowledge our awareness of the sensitive and emotional nature of
the abortion controversy, of the vigorous opposite views, even among physicians,
and of the deep and seemingly absolute convictions that the subject inspires.
d. Chief Justice Warren Burger has called a case that raises an unsettled and unsettling issue in American society, abortion.
e. [The Constitution] is made for people of fundamentally diﬀering views, and the
accident of our ﬁnding certain opinions natural and familiar or novel and even
shocking ought not to conclude our judgment upon the question whether statutes
embodying them conﬂict with the Constitution of the United States.
f. Maternity, or additional oﬀspring, may force upon the woman a distressful life and
future. Psychological harm may be imminent. ...There is also the distress, for all
concerned, associated with the unwanted child, and there is the problem of bringing
a child into a family, already unable, psychologically and otherwise, to care for it.

Such evaluations are motivated by psychological experiences that do not depend on the man’s will or self-control; N.D. Arutyunova [1] called these “the
most individualized kind of evaluations”. Such evaluations orient a person to
accommodation in natural and social environments and to reaching comfort. In
argumentation all this produces a subjective inﬂuence on the listener, launching
his own mechanism of sense perception, and in its turn inﬂuencing his process
of making decisions (axiological condition in decision-making).
The last analysed example with sense perception and hedonistic evaluations
showed that such evaluations may house further semantic bases for sublimated
and rational evaluations.
The idea of sublimated evaluations is rather new and is described in a number of works of Russian linguists. Sublimated evaluations (from Latin sublimare
- elate, exalt, pinnacle) are also called humanised, for they are placed above
evaluations based on sense-perception, “humanising” them. [5]. According to
N.D. Arutyunova [1] “this type of evaluations is closely connected with the term
archetype, i.e. norm, example, potential requirements set towards the object”.
Rational evaluations, on the other hand, “are connected with practical activities, practical interests and everyday experiences of people. Their basic criteria is
physical and psychological good, oriented at reaching a certain goal, performing
a certain function, meeting certain standards” [5].
Thus, the above mentioned evaluations due to their argumentative inﬂuence,

988

S.V. Gavenko

besides the immediate impact on the interlocutors through their direct senseperception evaluative meanings, acquire additional meanings, which reveal in
the topics under consideration new ethical and humanistic values.
“We face re-orientation of sense-perception, psychological and rational evaluations towards spiritual values, so that in their turn these evaluations serve as
semantic bases for sublimated evaluations” [5]. Trying to prove to the opponents
the truth of their positions, speakers resort to these complicated evaluative constructions appealing to the listeners’ normative and ethical ideals.
Besides, among major conditions for choosing evaluative lexical units in arguments, there exist other factors such as social role-status of interlocutors, their
emotional state at the moment of speaking, and context.
In the court room role statuses are very well marked and the possible choice of
speech acts is narrowed to restrained and rather high-ﬂown style; evaluations in
their turn are restricted to barely emotional. Therefore in the text we did not
ﬁnd explicitly expressed emotional, ethical, aesthetical, teleological, normative
and utilitarian evaluations. Such types of evaluations are found only as based
on other (sense perception and hedonistic) evaluations. Emotional state of interlocutors and verbal context are deﬁned by a wider, extralinguistic context,
i.e. corresponding to the requirements of a court session. Emotiveness ﬁnds vent
through the use of moduses of visual, tentative and inner-sense perception. The
context circumscribes the use of the language by resorting to relevant information only, without unnecessary emotiveness and unrelated sophistic casistry.

References
1. Arutyunova N.D. ed. Logichesky analiz yazyka: yazyki dinamicheskogo mira (Logical Analysis of the Language: Language of the Dynamic World), Dubna, 1999.
2. Baranov A.N., Sergeev V.M. Estestvenno-yazykovaya argumentatsiya v logike
prakticheskogo rassuzhdeniya (Natural-Language Argumentation in the Logics of
Practical Reasoning). In: Myshlenie, kognitivnye nauki, intellekt (Thinking, Cognitive Sciences and Artiﬁcial Intelligence), Moskva, 1988. pp. 104-119.
3. Brutyan G.A., Argumentatsiya (Argumentation). Yerevan, 1984.
4. Gutton, Stephanie and Peter Irons, ed. May It Please the Court: Arguments on
Abortion. The New Press, NY, 1995.
5. Pisanova T.V. Natsional’no-kul’turnye aspekty otsenochnoi semantiki: eticheskie
i esteticheskie otsenki (National and Cultural Aspects of Evaluative Semantics:
Aesthetical and Ethical Evaluations). - Moskva, 1997.
6. Richards I.A. & Ogden C.K. The Meaning of Meaning: A Study of the Inﬂuence
of Language upon Thought and the Science of Symbolism. New York: Harcourt,
Brace, 1930.
7. Stevenson Ch.L. Facts and Values: Studies in Ethical Analysis. - New Haven London: Yale Univ. Press, 1964.
8. Tannen D. The Argument Culture. Stopping American War of Words. The Ballantine Publishing Group, NY, 1998.

