An Information Model for the Representation of
Multiple Biological Classiﬁcations
Neville Yoon and John Rose
University of South Carolina, Department of Computer Science and Engineering,
Columbia, South Carolina 29208 USA
Abstract. We present a model for representing competing classiﬁcations in biological databases. A key feature of our model is its ability to
support future classiﬁcations in addition to current and previous classiﬁcations without reorganizing the database. Data in biological databases
is typically organized around a taxonomic framework. Biological data
must be interpreted in the context of the taxonomy under which it was
collected and published. Since taxonomic opinion changes frequently, it
is necessary to support multiple taxonomic classiﬁcations. This is a requirement for providing comprehensive responses to queries in databases
that contain data reﬂecting incompatible taxonomic classiﬁcations.

1

Introduction

Biological taxonomy provides the organizational framework by which biological
information is stored, retrieved, and exchanged. Electronic databases represent a
relatively new medium for the storage of biological information, but the concepts
and labels that people use to interact with them are the same taxa and names
used in the taxonomic literature. It is therefore necessary for biological databases
to accurately represent these taxonomic constructs.
Unfortunately there is no single, correct classiﬁcation that categorizes all
organisms for all time. Because of the continuous nature of evolution, taxon
delimitation is largely arbitrary; there can be no “correct” classiﬁcations, only
more or less useful ones. Opinions as to what is more useful vary and frequently
change as new specimens are collected, new characters are examined, and new
analytical techniques are adopted. Consequently the classiﬁcations by which biological information is recorded are often replaced. Furthermore, at any one
point in time there may be several incompatible classiﬁcations competing for
acceptance. Biological databases should be capable of reﬂecting these competing
taxonomic hypotheses. Databases unable to do so risk obsolescence.
As a result of changing classiﬁcations, it is often the case that many diﬀerent
names have been applied at diﬀerent times to a particular group of organisms.
Conversely, a single name may have been applied to diﬀerent sets of organisms.
Consequently much biological information is associated in the literature with
names that are considered incorrect under current classiﬁcations. In order to
interpret this information in a modern context, one must know not only the
classiﬁcation assumed by the original publication, but also the nomenclatural
and taxonomic changes that relate that classiﬁcation to the current one.
V.N. Alexandrov et al. (Eds.): ICCS 2001, LNCS 2073, pp. 937–946, 2001.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2001
�

938

N. Yoon and J. Rose

Most biological database designs ignore this complexity by using only taxon
names to identify taxa [1,2,3,8,10,11,12]. With this approach incompatible classiﬁcations cannot be maintained simultaneously because there is no way to distinguish among diﬀerent taxon concepts with the same name [5,6]. With careful
editing by taxonomic experts, such a database can be made to conform to a
particular set of complimentary classiﬁcations. However, the information stored
within cannot easily be made to conform to any conﬂicting classiﬁcation, making the database inﬂexible with respect to changes in taxonomic opinion. Worse,
if information is widely compiled from the literature and stored uncritically
by name, incompatible taxon concepts will become confounded resulting in a
database that does not conform to any classiﬁcation. A more ﬂexible approach
to managing taxonomic information is required.
A system for managing multiple classiﬁcations will have to satisfy at least two
criteria: First, information must be indexed by speciﬁc taxonomic interpretations
of names (named taxon concepts) rather than by names alone. Second, there
must be a way to represent relationships of shared content among named taxon
concepts. This allows information to be aggregated both within classiﬁcations
through the taxonomic hierarchy and among classiﬁcations according to overlap
in taxon boundaries.
In the following sections we brieﬂy review four previously proposed designs
for the management of multiple classiﬁcations in biological databases. Each of
these meets the above criteria at least in part. However, none is completely
satisfactory for use in databases of descriptive, non-specimen-based biological
information intended for non-taxonomists. We derive from them an information
model that we believe to be more appropriate for these types of systems.

2

Prior Approaches to Modeling Multiple Classiﬁcations

To our knowledge, four information models designed to accommodate incompatible classiﬁcations have been published or otherwise made publicly available.
These are the Association of Systematics Collections (ASC) draft datamodel [4],
the HICLAS model [5,9,15], the International Organization of Plant Information (IOPI) model [6,7], and the Prometheus model [12]. We will discuss each of
these using an extended entity-relationship (ER) data modeling vocabulary and
notation (Fig. 1).
In the ASC model, both taxon names and taxon concepts are explicitly represented as entity types (Fig. 1). The taxon concept (TC) entity type represents
a taxonomic circumscription with no inherent name. The many-to-many relationship between names and taxon concepts is resolved through the use of an
associative entity type, taxon-name-use. This traditional ER approach satisﬁes
our ﬁrst criterion of representation of multiple taxon concepts for the same name.
The taxonomic placement of a taxon underneath a superior taxon in a classiﬁcation is represented by an entity of the recursively associative entity type, taxonomic relationship . This structure implements a network of TCs in which
each TC is the root of a taxonomic sub-tree, the leaves of which are species-level

An Information Model

939

TCs. The circumscription of a TC is the full set of terminal TCs in its sub-tree.
This model permits the comparison of TCs according to shared content and thus
allows aggregation of information both within and among classiﬁcations. However, separating out the complete set of TCs and associated taxon name uses
for a particular classiﬁcation requires additional constructs not presented in the
ASC draft datamodel.

Taxon

Taxon Name Use

Name

A

B

Each A may be associated with one or more Bs
Each B must be associated with exactly one A

A

B

Each A must be associated with one or more Bs
Each B may be associated with one and only one A

A

B

A is a kind of B

Fig. 1. A partial entity-relationship diagram of the many-to-many relationship between
taxa and names

The HICLAS and IOPI models represent circumscriptions implicitly by association with a publication rather than explicitly with an entity type. This
approach models taxon concepts as a relationship between a taxon name and a
publication and is analogous to the taxon-name-use entity type of the ASC
model without the associated TC. This is called a taxon view in the HICLAS
model and a potential taxon in the IOPI model. We will use the term name-use
to represent the generalized concept. A name can be used in diﬀerent contexts
in diﬀerent publications, but by linking information to the name-use, these different taxon concepts are not confused. However, since circumscriptions are not
directly represented, the synonymy of diﬀerent names applicable to the same
taxon must be recorded directly rather than by association with overlapping
circumscription. The two models take diﬀerent approaches to this problem.
In the HICLAS model both classiﬁcatory relationships and derivational relationships among taxon views are represented. Classiﬁcations are represented
by trees consisting of taxon views connected by classiﬁcation relationships. The
derivational history of a taxon concept is represented by a set of operation trees
that trace the previous taxon concepts that have been split, merged, moved, or
accepted to create the taxon view in question. Relationships of shared content
can be inferred from these operation trees.
The HICLAS model provides a simple mechanism for the simultaneous maintenance of multiple classiﬁcations, for the structural comparison of diﬀerent classiﬁcations, and for tracing the histories of taxon concepts. However, scientiﬁc
names themselves are treated in a simpliﬁed manner that does not allow a complete representation of purely nomenclatural relationships.
The IOPI approach uses an associative entity type called status assign-

940

N. Yoon and J. Rose

ment to represent the relationships among potential taxa. Diﬀerent types of
status assignments are used to indicate nomenclatural relationships and relationships of shared content.
The position of a potential taxon in a classiﬁcation is represented through a
simple recursive relationship on the potential taxon (PT) entity type. The restriction that a potential taxon can have only one taxonomic position results
in considerable proliferation of PTs.
A sub-tree composed of all of the descendents of a particular PT will often
contain PTs representing diﬀerent circumscriptions for the same taxon name.
Berendsohn [6] proposes a simple ranking of taxonomic reference works to resolve
these conﬂicts. When conﬂicts are found in the generation of a classiﬁcation
tree from the database, those established by the preferred reference works are
chosen for presentation. This seems to be a limited and unwieldy method for
reconstructing alternative classiﬁcations from the database.
The Prometheus model represents biological taxonomy more accurately than
any other model published to date. Aspects of biological nomenclature are carefully separated from those related to circumscriptions and classiﬁcations to reﬂect the way that taxa are actually created and named in taxonomic practice.
Taxonomic names are represented by the nomenclatural taxon (NT)
type. The NT is the combination of a taxon name, a rank, a superior NT for
names at species-level ranks, a publication, and a nomenclatural type, which may
be a specimen or another NT. Oﬃcial declarations of nomenclatural status that
may aﬀect the priority of a name may also be assigned to NTs. Taxon concepts
are represented by circumscribed taxon objects which are the combination
of either an NT or an informal name, a circumscription, a rank, an author, and
possibly a publication.
The Prometheus model is unique in that relationships of shared content are
not represented declaratively, but rather are derived from rigorous and detailed
representations of taxon content. Taxon content is represented by the circumscription type. A circumscription object speciﬁes a complete set of specimens included in a taxon. For published taxa, the circumscription consists of
all the specimens cited in the published description. For experimental taxa, the
specimens include all those deemed to belong by the practicing taxonomist. Relationships of synonymy by shared content are derived by directly comparing
circumscriptions among CTs. Furthermore, the nomenclatural principles of priority and typiﬁcation can be applied algorithmically to validate the assignments
of taxonomic names to CTs.
This strict, specimen-based approach to comparing taxa is very powerful
when complete sets of included specimens are available. In this case all objective relationships of shared content can be found. However, in many cases complete sets of specimens are unavailable or the eﬀort of compiling them exceeds
the abilities of a database team. Furthermore, the Prometheus model prohibits
the extrapolation of taxonomic inference beyond that directly supported by the
specimen content of circumscriptions. The result of these restrictions is that in
some information systems, large amounts of information stored within may not

An Information Model

941

be interpreted with respect to speciﬁc classiﬁcations and cannot be aggregated
according to suspected relationships of shared content. This is not a criticism
of the Prometheus approach, which is logically correct. Nonetheless we believe
these restrictions may be excessive for many information systems.

3

The PeroBase Model

Our motivation for developing a new information model is to provide the taxonomic framework for PeroBase, an encyclopedic database that manages information on the biology of peromyscine mice for users ranging from the interested
layperson to specialists in Peromyscus biology. Peromyscine taxonomy has undergone a few major revisions and is still in ﬂux, so we need a model that can
represent incompatible classiﬁcations. In studying the four information models discussed above, we concluded that the ASC and HICLAS models were not
suﬃciently complete to handle our nomenclatural information. We are most impressed by the Prometheus model, but do not have the resources to compile the
needed specimen lists. Furthermore, we desire the ability to organize information according to a fully-connected taxonomic hierarchy that integrates numerous lower level classiﬁcations. This is prohibited in the Prometheus model. We
therefore have derived a model that we believe to be more appropriate for our
purposes by relaxing the restrictions of the Prometheus model and incorporating
ideas from the other models.
3.1

Nomenclature

Scientiﬁc taxon names are represented by the nomenclatural taxon (NT) entity type of the Prometheus model with minor modiﬁcations primarily to accommodate diﬀerences between the International Code of Zoological Nomenclature
(ICZN) [13] and the International Code of Botanical Nomenclature [14](Fig.
2). As in Prometheus, an NT is the combination of a name element, a taxonomic rank, a taxonomic placement for species ranked NTs, a publication, and
a name-bearing type. Our NT diﬀers primarily in the way nomenclatural status
is assigned. These assignments are made through the nomenclatural status
assignment entity type analogous to the way nomenclatural status is assigned
to potential taxa in the IOPI model. nomenclatural status assignments
are used to record formal published acts that aﬀect the application of the principle of priority in determining valid names. This usually involves suppression of
senior synonyms or homonyms in favor of junior names in prevailing use. In these
cases, the preferred NT is also associated with the nomenclatural status assignment. The publications in which these assignments are made are recorded
as associations of nomenclatural status assignments with publications.
When status assignments aﬀect the priority of groups of secondary homonyms
or heterotypic synonyms, the suppression is only eﬀected while the types of the
NTs are considered to fall within the same circumscription. When this is not the

942

N. Yoon and J. Rose
Taxonomic
Hierarchy
Relationship

Nomenclatural
placement

Name Element
Name-Bearing
Type

Taxonomic
Rank

Nomenclatural Taxon
Type Taxon

Rank
Group

Publication

Nomenclatural
Status Assignment

Type Specimen

Nomenclatural
Status

Fig. 2. The nomenclatural taxon and associated entity types

case, these status assignments are to be ignored by the system for the purpose
of determining valid names.
Every NT has a taxonomic rank represented by an associated taxonomic
rank entity. The ICZN deﬁnes three groups of taxonomic ranks over which
it claims authority: the species-group, the genus-group, and the family-group.
Nomenclatural rules apply diﬀerently to nomenclatural taxa depending on the
group to which they belong. These taxonomic rank groups are represented in the
PeroBase model with taxonomic rank group entities. Taxonomic ranks are
ordered into taxonomic hierarchies to which classiﬁcations adhere. The names
and order of many ranks are considered obligatory by convention; however, most
ranks are optional and taxonomists are free to insert any number of additional
ones. This network of superior-subordinate relationships between taxonomic
ranks is represented through the taxonomic hierarchy relationship entity
type. The particular associations represented constrain the taxonomic hierarchies that are permissible in the database.
An NT is associated with a single name element, but is intended to represent a full scientiﬁc name. For taxa above the species rank, the two are the
same. However by the principle of binominal nomenclature, the name element
of taxa of species and subspecies ranks must be preﬁxed by the full name of
the taxon under which they are placed. A recursive relationship implements the
nomenclatural placement of species group NTs permitting the composition of
their full names.
Every nomenclatural taxon of family-group rank or below has an actual or
potential name-bearing type according to the ICZN. Correspondingly in PeroBase, every NT of family-group rank or below must be associated with a namebearing type (nb-type). A nb-type may represent either a type specimen
for species group taxa, a type species for genus group taxa, or a type genus
for family group taxa. To model this, two subtypes of nb-type are used: type
specimen and type taxon. A type specimen need not have any attributes
in the database, but a type taxon must have an additional relationship with

An Information Model

943

an NT that speciﬁes the taxon that is the type species or type genus. Note
that nb-type represents only the real or potential existence of a type. While
information about real type specimens could be attached to nb-types, this is
not necessary. This “virtual” type concept serves primarily as a reference tool
for the determination of synonym and homonym relationships among taxa. This
corresponds to the use of “dummy” types in the Prometheus model.
3.2

Classiﬁcation

The association of a name with a particular circumscription is represented by a
taxonomic taxon (TT) entity (Fig. 3). Both classiﬁcations and circumscriptions in the PeroBase model are implemented as trees of TTs whose edges are
taxonomic relationship entities. taxonomic relationships may represent
either the classiﬁcation of a TT under a TT of superior rank (placement), or the
inclusion of a monotypic species-level TT in the circumscription of a polytypic
species-level TT (inclusion).

Informal Name

Informal Name
Assignment
Nomenclatural
Taxon

Publication

TaxonomicTaxon

Classification
Taxonomic
Relationship

Fig. 3. The taxonomic taxon and related entity-types

Every TT and every taxonomic relationship is created in the context
of a particular classiﬁcation and must be associated with a classification
entity. The classification entity is merely a label for use in grouping TTs and
taxonomic relationships to form classiﬁcation systems. The classiﬁcation
system itself is represented by a tree of TTs whose edges are all placement
taxonomic relationships linked to the classification.
A circumscription is represented as a set of all nb-types included within the
boundaries of a TT. This set is obtained for a TT by ﬁnding the species-level
TTs that are leaves in any classiﬁcation tree rooted at that TT and adding for
each polytypic leaf TT all monotypic species-level TTs that are related through
inclusion type taxonomic relationships.

944

N. Yoon and J. Rose

A classiﬁcation may include TTs established in previous classiﬁcations as
long as neither their associated NTs nor their full set of included types are
changed. For example, a classiﬁcation that rearranges existing species into new
subgenera without changing the contents or generic placements of those species
can use existing TTs for those species. If an existing taxon is moved from its
current position to another, the contents of both its former and new parents
have changed, and new TTs are required to represent the new circumscriptions.
However, if the former and new parent taxa are themselves both placed under the
same TT, no new TT is required for that common parent since its circumscription
has not changed. A change in the rank of a taxon requires a new NT and therefore
a new TT. A change in the placement of a taxon of species level rank results in
a mandatory name change, requiring a new NT and therefore a new TT as well.
The TT representing a newly described species or subspecies may be placed
under a previously existing TT even though the circumscription of the parent has
expanded to include the new type. Without this exception, the addition of a new
type would require new TTs for all superior taxa on all paths to the roots of all
classiﬁcations that include the new taxon [4]. The diﬀerent circumscriptions for
the same TT are still separable since the original and new classiﬁcatory relationships are associated with diﬀerent classifications. The full circumscription for
a TT, including all subsequent additions, can be obtained for any point of view
by adding the relevant classiﬁcatory relationships of subsequent classiﬁcations
to those of the original deﬁnition.
3.3

Synonyms

Homotypic, heterotypic, and most pro-parte synonyms for a particular taxonomic taxon can all be found algorithmically as in the Prometheus model. Homotypic synonyms are simply diﬀerent nomenclatural taxa of the same rank with
the same name-bearing type. Heterotypic synonyms for a particular taxonomic
taxon are the names of all of the TYPE TAXON or TYPE SPECIMEN entities
included in the taxon’s circumscription. The correct name for a particular taxonomic taxon can be found from among its heterotypic synonyms by identifying
the one that was published ﬁrst after eliminating those speciﬁed as invalid in
associated nomenclatural status assignments.
Most pro-parte synonyms for a particular taxonomic taxon can be found by
ﬁnding all taxonomic taxa in the same rank group that contain any of that
taxon’s included type specimens. As Pullan, et. al. [12] point out, this will not
identify all pro-parte synonyms because some taxa may share specimens without
sharing any types. We suspect that this level of resolution will rarely be necessary
for taxon-based information systems; however, such instances of overlap could
be indicated with a new type of taxonomic relationship if so desired.
3.4

Determinations: Assigning Data to Taxa

Descriptive information can be applied to both NTs and TTs. Very often in the
biological literature descriptive information is attributed to a taxon identiﬁed

An Information Model

945

by name without speciﬁcation of the classiﬁcation assumed. This information
is therefore name-based only and can be assigned with full conﬁdence only to
NTs [12]. The name under which descriptive information is originally published is
recorded in the PeroBase model through an association with an NT via a nomenclatural taxon determination. We agree with Berendsohn [5] that in many
cases information not derived from identiﬁed specimens may still be attributable
to particular taxon concepts with reasonable conﬁdence. In the PeroBase model,
data is associated with a TT through a taxonomic taxon determination entity. The person responsible for the determination and the date on which it was
made are both recorded with the determination so that corrected assignments
can be made without erasing the history of previous assignments.

4

Conclusion

Accurate information models of biological taxonomy are diﬃcult to design due
to the inherent complexity of taxonomic data and nomenclature. As a result,
most biological databases have been developed from overly simplistic representations of taxonomy. This is unfortunate because over time the information in
these databases will no longer reﬂect current taxonomic opinion. Keeping these
databases up-to-date will require periodic large-scale overhauls, work that could
have been largely avoided through the use of a more ﬂexible taxonomic data
model. Databases intended to manage descriptive biological information for nontaxonomists tend to have the most simplistic models of taxonomy, yet they may
have the greatest need for taxonomic ﬂexibility.
Four models have previously been proposed to permit the simultaneous management of multiple biological classiﬁcations, a primary requisite for adaptable
biological databases. While sharing many similarities, each of the models has
taken a unique approach to solving the problem. These diﬀerences reﬂect slightly
diﬀerent priorities and intended uses and the models have succeeded to various
degrees. In our opinion, the most accurate and powerful representation of taxonomy to date is the Prometheus model [12], but large amounts of specimen-level
data must be compiled to realize the full strengths of that model. For many
kinds of biological information systems this may not be practical. A new model
is needed to approach that level of taxonomic ﬂexibility in databases that deal
with information above the specimen level of resolution. We have presented a
new model of taxonomy derived from the Prometheus model for this purpose.
We believe the new model oﬀers the best compromise so far proposed between
accuracy and ﬂexibility on one hand and practical applicability on the other.
Our model has been developed to serve as the taxonomic framework for
PeroBase, a multi-disciplinary descriptive database of information pertaining to
peromyscine mice. Current work involves the implementation of the model with
taxonomic information drawn from the literature for this group.
Acknowledgement
This work was funded by NSF grants DBI-9723223 and DBI-9807881.

946

N. Yoon and J. Rose

References
1. Allkin, R., Bisby, F.A. Databases in Systematics. Academic Press, New York (1984)
2. Allkin, R., White, R.J.: Data management models for biological classiﬁcation. In:
Bock, H.H. (ed.): Classiﬁcation and Related Methods of Data Analysis. Elsevier
Science Publishers B.V., North-Holland. (1988) 653–660
3. Allkin, R., White, R.J., Winﬁeld, P.J.: Handling the taxonomic structure of biological data. Mathematical and Computer Modelling 16:6/7 (1992) 1–9
4. Association of Systematics Collections: An Information Model for Biological Collections (Draft) March 1993 version: Report of the Biological Collections Data
Standards Workshop August 18–24, 1992. Association of Systematics Collections.
Available from: gopher://kaw.keil.ukans.edu/11/standards/asc (1993)
5. Beach, J.H., Pramanik, S., Beaman, J.H.: Hierarchic Taxonomic Databases. In:
Fortuner, R. (ed.): Advances in Computer Methods for Systematic Biology. Johns
Hopkins University Press, Baltimore (1993) 241–256
6. Berendsohn, W.G.: The concept of “potential taxa” in databases. Taxon 44 (1995)
207–212
7. Berendsohn, W.G.: A taxonomic information model for botanical databases: the
IOPI model. Taxon 46 (1997) 283–309
8. Blum, S.D. (ed.): Guidelines and Standards for Fossil Vertebrate Databases: Results of the Society of Vertebrate Paleontology Workshop on Computerization.
November 1–4, 1989; Austin, Texas (1991)
9. Jung, S., Perkins, S., Zhong, Y., Pramanik, S., Beaman, J.: A new data model for
biological classiﬁcation. CABIOS 11:3 (1995) 237–246
10. Krebs, J., Kaesler, R., Chang, Y-M, Miller, D., Brosius, E.: PaleoBank: a Relational
Database for Invertebrate Paleontology: Data Model. Paleontological Institute, U.
Kansas. http://history.cc.ukans.edu/˜paleo. (1996)
11. Pankhurst, R.J.: Taxonomic databases: the PANDORA system. In: Fortuner, R.
(ed.): Advances in Computer Methods for Systematic Biology. Johns Hopkins University Press, Baltimore (1993) 230–240
12. Pullan, M.R., Watson, M.F., Kennedy, J.B., Raguenaud, C., Hyam, R.: The
Prometheus taxonomic model: a practical approach to representing multiple classiﬁcations. Taxon 49 (2000) 55–75
13. International Commission on Zoological Nomenclature: International Code of Zoological Nomenclature (4th ed.). U.California Press, Berkeley (1985)
14. Greuter, W., Barrie, R.R., Burdet, H.M., Chaloner, W.G., Demoulin, V.,
Hawksworth, D.L., Jorgensen, P.M., Nicholson, D.H., Silva, P.C., Trehane, P.,
MacNeill, J. (eds.): International Code of Botanical Nomenclature (Tokyo Code).
Regnum Veg (1994) 1–389
15. Zhong, Y., Jung, S., Pramanik, S., Beaman, J.H.: Data model and comparison and
query methods for interacting classiﬁcations in a taxonomic database. Taxon 45
(1996) 223–241

